3

A Note about the Cover

Is everything really an argument? Seeing the images on the cover of
this book might make you wonder. The “Free Speech Zone” sign, for
example, instantly calls to mind the debates across the United States
about the limits of free expression, especially on college campuses.
The ominous-looking hand coming out of the laptop suggests the ease
with which hackers obtain personal data. Does the image of teens
playing on cell phones in the back seat of a car argue for or against the
ways that technology is shaping how we are communicating with one
another? The polar bear on a shrinking ice floe reminds us of the
scientific fact of climate change but also invites a discussion of how
powerful visuals can sway our opinions and beliefs. As for the “100%
vegan” sticker, what’s your impression? Is it a proud proclamation of

4

one’s identity or values? A straightforward fact about a food’s origins?
A sharp commentary on the influence of advertising on the food
industry? What’s your take?

5

6

7

8

Eighth Edition

Everything’s an Argument with Readings
Andrea A. Lunsford
STANFORD UNIVERSITY
John J. Ruszkiewicz
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
Keith Walters
PORTLAND STATE UNIVERSITY

9

For Bedford/St. Martin’s
Vice President, Editorial, Macmillan Learning Humanities: Edwin Hill
Executive Program Director for English: Leasa Burton
Senior Program Manager: John E. Sullivan III
Executive Marketing Manager: Joy Fisher Williams
Director of Content Development, Humanities: Jane Knetzger
Senior Developmental Editor: Rachel Goldberg
Associate Editor: Lexi DeConti
Editorial Assistant: William Hwang
Senior Content Project Manager: Ryan Sullivan
Senior Workflow Project Manager: Jennifer Wetzel
Production Coordinator: Brianna Lester
Media Project Manager: Jodi Isman
Media Editor: Julia Domenicucci
Editorial Services: Lumina Datamatics, Inc.
Composition: Lumina Datamatics, Inc.
Cartographer: Mapping Specialists, Ltd.
Text Permissions Manager: Kalina Ingham
Text Permissions Editor: Arthur Johnson, Lumina Datamatics, Inc.
Photo Permissions Editor: Angela Boehler
Photo Researcher: Krystyna Borgen, Lumina Datamatics, Inc.
Director of Design, Content Management: Diana Blume
Text Design: Claire Seng-Niemoeller, Anna Palchik, and Graphic
World, Inc.
Cover Design: William Boardman
Cover Images: (laptop) fStop Images/Epoxydude/Getty Images; (polar

10

bear) dagsjo/Getty Images; (vegan label) Good_Studio/Getty Images;
(free speech sign) Imfoto/Shutterstock; (kids with cell phones) Hero
Images/Getty Images
Copyright © 2019, 2016, 2013, 2010 by Bedford/St. Martin’s.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, except
as may be permitted by law or expressly permitted in writing by the
Publisher.
1 2 3 4 5 6

23 22 21 20 19 18

For information, write: Bedford/St. Martin’s, 75 Arlington Street,
Boston, MA 02116
ISBN-13: 978-1-319-21159-2(mobi)

Acknowledgments
Text acknowledgments and copyrights appear at the back of the book
on pages 793–94, which constitute an extension of the copyright page.
Art acknowledgments and copyrights appear on the same page as the
art selections they cover.

11

Preface
When we began work on this text in 1996 (the first edition came out in
1998), we couldn’t have anticipated all the events of the next two
tumultuous decades, or all the changes to public and private discourse,
or the current deeply divided state of our nation. But we have tried
hard, over these decades, to track such changes and the ways rhetoric
and argument have evolved and responded to them.
Certainly, we recognized the increasingly important role digital culture
plays in all our lives, and so with each new edition we have included
more on the technologies of communication, particularly those
associated with social media; and we early on recognized that, like
rhetoric itself, social media can be used for good or for ill, to bring
people together or to separate them.
We have also carefully tracked the forms that arguments take today,
from cartoons and graphic narratives to blogs and other postings to
multimodal projects of almost every conceivable kind. While argument
has always surrounded us, today it does so in an amazing array of
genres and forms, including aural and visual components that
strengthen and amplify arguments.
The sheer proliferation of information (not to mention misinformation,
disinformation, and outright lies) that bombards all writers led us to
reaffirm our commitment to studying and teaching style, since (as
Richard Lanham and others argue) in the age of information overload,
style is the tool writers possess to try to capture and keep the attention
of audiences. Attention to style reveals other changes, such as the
12

increasing use of informal registers and conversational styles even in
academic arguments.
Perhaps most important, though, a look back over the last twenty-two
years reaffirms the crucial role that rhetoric can and should play in
personal, work, and school lives. At its best, rhetoric is the art, theory,
and practice of ethical communication, needed more sorely today than
perhaps ever before. Everything’s an Argument with Readings presents
this view of rhetoric and illustrates it with a fair and wide range of
perspectives and views, which we hope will inspire student writers to
think of themselves as rhetors, as Quintilian’s “good person, speaking
well.”

Key Features
Two books in one, neatly linked. Up front is a brief guide to
Aristotelian, Toulmin, and Rogerian argument; common types of
arguments; presenting arguments; and researching arguments. In the
back is a thematically organized anthology of readings in a wide range
of genres. Handy cross-references in the margins allow students to
move easily from the argument chapters to specific examples in the
readings and from the readings to appropriate rhetorical instruction.
Short, relatable excerpts weave in the debates that rage around us.
From #metoo tweets and protest posters to essays and scholarly
writing, boldfaced examples illustrate the arguments happening in
politics, economics, journalism, and media, with brief student-friendly
analyses.
Five thematic readings chapters that encourage students to explore
13

complex arguments. Readings on “How Does Popular Culture
Stereotype You?,” “Has the Internet Destroyed Privacy?,” and “How
Free Should Campus Speech Be?” demand that students consider the
many sides of contemporary issues across the political spectrum, going
beyond a simple pro/con stance.
A real-world, full-color design that builds students’ understanding
of visual rhetoric. Presenting readings in the style of their original
publications helps students recognize and think about the effect that
design and visuals have on written and multimodal arguments.

New to This Edition
A new section on rhetorical listening in Chapter 1. The very first
chapter of the eighth edition now emphasizes the importance of
listening rhetorically and respectfully, encouraging readers to move
beyond “echo chambers” and build bridges among all viewpoints.
Eight new full-length models in the guide provide engaging, topical
arguments of fact, definition, evaluation, cause and effect, proposals,
and rhetorical analysis. Legal scholar Stephen L. Carter offers a
Toulmin analysis of whether racial epithets should be considered free
speech, while New York Times columnist Nicholas Kristof presents an
op-ed in defense of public wilderness.
Five new annotated student essays address topics students care about,
from millennials’ love of food to breaking a social media addiction.
Thirty-one engaging new readings on hot-button issues such as free
speech, food, language, privacy, and stereotypes. Selections
14

represent a range of genres and span the full gamut of social and
political views, including:
excerpts from a recent Gallup poll showing what college students
think about First Amendment issues
visual arguments and a scholarly essay supporting and critiquing
the concept of racial microaggressions
best-selling essayist Roxane Gay on the language we use to
describe sexual violence
an Economist blog post acknowledging that sport shooting can be,
well, fun
an argument against veganism . . . written by a vegan
A new introduction in the instructor’s notes. Focusing on the
teaching of argument, this new introduction gives experienced and
first-time instructors a strong pedagogical foundation. Sample syllabi
for both semester and quarter courses provide help for pacing all types
of courses.

We’re all in. As always.
Bedford/St. Martin’s is as passionately committed to the discipline of
English as ever, working hard to provide support and services that
make it easier for you to teach your course your way.
Find community support at the Bedford/St. Martin’s English
Community (community.macmillan.com), where you can follow our
Bits blog for new teaching ideas, download titles from our professional
resource series, and review projects in the pipeline.

15

Choose curriculum solutions that offer flexible custom options,
combining our carefully developed print and digital resources,
acclaimed works from Macmillan’s trade imprints, and your own
course or program materials to provide the exact resources your
students need. Our approach to customization makes it possible to
create a customized project uniquely suited for your students and,
based on your enrollment size, return money to your department and
raise your institutional profile with a high-impact author visit through
the Macmillan Author Program (“MAP”).
Rely on outstanding service from your Bedford/St. Martin’s sales
representative and editorial team. Contact us or visit
macmillanlearning.com to learn more about any of the options below.

LaunchPad for Everything’s an Argument with Readings:
Where Students Learn
LaunchPad provides engaging content and new ways to get the most
out of your book. Get an interactive e-book combined with assessment
tools in a fully customizable course space; then assign and mix our
resources with yours.
Reading comprehension quizzes, to help you quickly gauge your
students’ understanding of the assigned reading.
Interactive exercises and tutorials for reading, writing, and
research.
Diagnostics provide opportunities to assess areas for improvement
and assign additional exercises based on students’ needs. Visual
reports show performance by topic, class, and student as well as
improvement over time.
16

Pre-built units—including readings, videos, quizzes, and more—
are easy to adapt and assign by adding your own materials and
mixing them with our high-quality multimedia content and readymade assessment options, such as LearningCurve adaptive
quizzing and Exercise Central.
Use LaunchPad on its own or integrate it with your school’s
learning management system so that your class is always on the
same page.
LaunchPad for Everything’s an Argument with Readings can be
purchased on its own or packaged with the print book at a significant
discount. An activation code is required. To order LaunchPad for
Everything’s an Argument with Readings with the print book, use
ISBN 978-1-319-25363-9. For more information, go to
launchpadworks.com.

Choose from Alternative Formats of Everything’s an
Argument with Readings
Bedford/St. Martin’s offers a range of formats. Choose what works
best for you and your students:
Paperback brief edition To order the paperback edition of
Everything’s an Argument, use ISBN 978-1-319-05627-8.
Popular e-book formats For details of our e-book partners, visit
macmillanlearning.com/ebooks.

Select Value Packages
Add value to your text by packaging a Bedford/St. Martin’s resource,
such as Writer’s Help 2.0, with Everything’s an Argument with

17

Readings at a significant discount. Contact your sales representative for
more information.
Writer’s Help 2.0 is a powerful online writing resource that helps
students find answers, whether they are searching for writing advice on
their own or as part of an assignment.
Smart search. Built on research with more than 1,600 student
writers, the smart search in Writer’s Help 2.0 provides reliable
results even when students use novice terms, such as flow and
unstuck.
Trusted content from our best-selling handbooks. Andrea
Lunsford’s user-friendly tone ensures that students have clear
advice and examples for all of their writing questions.
Diagnostics that help establish a baseline for instruction.
Assign diagnostics to identify areas of strength and areas for
improvement and to help students plan a course of study. Use
visual reports to track performance by topic, class, and student as
well as improvement over time.
Adaptive exercises that engage students. Writer’s Help 2.0
includes LearningCurve, game-like online quizzing that adapts to
what students already know and helps them focus on what they
need to learn.
Student access is packaged with Everything’s an Argument with
Readings at a significant discount. Order ISBN 978-1-319-25623-4 for
Writer’s Help 2.0, Lunsford Version, to ensure your students have easy
access to online writing support. Students who rent or buy a used book
can purchase access and instructors may request free access at
macmillanlearning.com/writershelp2.
18

Instructor Resources
You have a lot to do in your course. We want to make it easy for you to
find the support you need—and to get it quickly.
Instructor’s Notes for Everything’s an Argument with Readings is
available as a PDF that can be downloaded from
macmillanlearning.com. Visit the instructor resources tab for
Everything’s an Argument with Readings. In addition to chapter
overviews and teaching tips, the instructor’s manual offers an
introduction about teaching the argument course, sample syllabi,
correlations to the Council of Writing Program Administrators’
Outcomes Statement, and potential answers to the “Respond” questions
in the book.

Acknowledgments
We owe a debt of gratitude to many people for making Everything’s an
Argument with Readings possible. Our first thanks must go to the
thousands of people we have taught in our writing courses over nearly
four decades, particularly students at the Ohio State University,
Stanford University, the University of Texas at Austin, and Portland
State University. Almost every chapter in this book has been informed
by a classroom encounter with a student whose shrewd observation or
perceptive question sent an ambitious lesson plan spiraling to the
ground. (Anyone who has tried to teach claims and warrants on the fly
to skeptical first-year writers will surely appreciate why we have
qualified our claims in the Toulmin chapter so carefully.) But students
have also provided the motive for writing this book. More than ever,
they need to know how to read and write arguments effectively if they
19

are to secure a place in a world growing ever smaller and more
rhetorically challenging.
We are deeply grateful to the editors at Bedford/St. Martin’s who have
contributed their formidable talents to this book. In particular, we want
to thank the ingenious and efficient Rachel Goldberg for guiding us so
patiently and confidently—helping us locate just the right items
whenever we needed fresh examples and images and gracefully
recasting passage after passage to satisfy permissions mandates. Senior
content project manager Ryan Sullivan was relentlessly upbeat and
kind in all his communications, making the ever-more-complex stages
of production almost a pleasure. We also appreciate the extensive
support and help of Lexi DeConti, who kept us attuned to examples
and readings that might appeal to students today. We are similarly
grateful to senior program manager John Sullivan, whose support was
unfailing; Kalina Ingham, Arthur Johnson, and Tom Wilcox, for text
permissions; Angela Boehler and Krystyna Borgen, for art
permissions; William Boardman, for our cover design; Bridget Leahy,
copyeditor; and William Hwang, editorial assistant. All of you made
editing the eighth edition feel fresh and creative.
We’d also like to thank the astute instructors who reviewed the seventh
edition: Brigitte Anderson, University of Pikeville; Samantha Battrick,
Truman State University; Kathryn Bennett, Old Dominion University;
Jeanne Bohannon, Kennesaw State University; Rebecca Cepek,
Duquesne University; Laura Dumin, University of Central Oklahoma;
Tim Engles, Eastern Illinois University; Karen Feldman, Seminole
State College of Florida; Africa Fine, Palm Beach State College;

20

Darius Frasure, Mountain View College; Erin Gallagher, Washington
State University; Ben Graydon, Daytona State College; Joseph
Hernandez, Mt. San Jacinto College; Julie Moore-Felux, Northwest
Vista College; Laurie Murray, Anderson University; Kolawole Olaiya,
Anderson University; Leslie Rapparlie, University of Colorado;
Thomas Reynolds, Northwestern State University; Loreen Smith,
Isothermal Community College; Benjamin Syn, University of
Colorado; Gina Szabady, Lane Community College; Amy Walton,
Iowa State University; and Miriam Young, Truman State University.
Thanks, too, to Sherrie Weller of Loyola Chicago University and
Valerie Duff-Stroutmann of Newbury College, who updated the
instructor’s notes for this eighth edition with a new introduction, new
model syllabi, new points for discussion, and new classroom activities.
We hope this resource will be useful as instructors build their courses.
Finally, we are grateful to the students whose fine argumentative
essays or materials appear in our chapters: Cameron Hauer, Kate
Beispel, Jenny Kim, Laura Tarrant, Natasha Rodriguez, Caleb Wong,
Juliana Chang, George Chidiac, and Charlotte Geaghan-Breiner. We
hope that Everything’s an Argument with Readings responds to what
students and instructors have said they want and need.
Andrea A. Lunsford
John J. Ruszkiewicz
Keith Walters

Correlation to Council of Writing Program
21

Administrators’ (WPA) Outcomes
Everything’s an Argument with Readings works with the Council of
Writing Program Administrators’ Outcomes Statement for first-year
composition courses (last updated 2014).
2014 WPA

Support in Everything’s an Argument with Readings, 8e

Outcomes
Rhetorical
Knowledge
Learn and use

Chapter 1, “Understanding Arguments and Reading

key rhetorical

Them Critically” (pp. 3–31), establishes the central

concepts

elements of the rhetorical situation and encourages

through

rhetorical listening.

analyzing and
composing a

Chapter 6, “Rhetorical Analysis” (pp. 97–132), further

variety of texts.

develops these concepts and teaches students how to
analyze a rhetorical analysis and compose their own.
Each chapter offers dozens of written, visual, and
multimodal texts to analyze, in both the guide portion
and the thematic reader.

Gain experience

Everything’s an Argument with Readings provides

reading and

engaging readings across genres, from academic essays

composing in

and newspaper editorials to tweets and infographics.

several genres to

“Respond” boxes throughout each chapter (e.g., pp.

understand how

56–57) invite students to think critically about the

genre

material. For more genre variety, Everything’s an

conventions

Argument with Readings also contains a five-chapter

shape and are

thematic reader with additional multimodal genres,

shaped by

including an art installation, Web articles, scholarly

readers’ and

essays, and political cartoons.

writers’

22

practices and

Each chapter on a specific type of argument features

purposes.

project ideas (e.g., p. 186), giving students detailed
prompts to write their own arguments of fact,
arguments of definition, evaluations, causal arguments,
and proposals.

Develop facility

Chapter 13, “Style in Arguments” (pp. 321–45),

in responding to

addresses word choice, tone, sentence structure,

a variety of

punctuation, and figurative language, with engaging

situations and

examples of each.

contexts, calling
for purposeful

The “Cultural Contexts for Argument” boxes

shifts in voice,

throughout the text (e.g., p. 163) address how people

tone, level of

from other cultures might respond to different styles or

formality,

structures of argument. This feature offers suggestions

design, medium,

on how to think about argument in an unfamiliar

and/or structure.

cultural context.

Understand and

Chapter 16, “Multimodal Arguments” (pp. 381–402),

use a variety of

addresses how new media has transformed the array of

technologies to

choices for making arguments and reaching audiences.

address a range

This chapter teaches how to analyze multimodal

of audiences.

arguments as well as how to create them through Web
sites, videos, wikis, blogs, social media, memes, posters,
and comics.

Match the

Chapter 14, “Visual Rhetoric” (pp. 346–62), discusses

capacities of

the power of visual rhetoric and how students can use

different

visuals in their own work.

environments
(e.g., print &

Chapter 15, “Presenting Arguments” (pp. 363–80),

electronic) to

includes material on incorporating various media into

varying

presentations and Webcasts.

rhetorical
situations.

Chapter 16, “Multimodal Arguments” (pp. 381–402),
analyzes the evolving landscape of argument across
media platforms.

23

Chapter 17, “Academic Arguments” (pp. 405–37),
covers the conventions of academic arguments.
Critical Thinking,
Reading, and
Composing
Use composing

Chapter 1, “Understanding Arguments and Reading

and reading for

Them Critically” (pp. 3–31), features a section called

inquiry, learning,

“Why Listen to Arguments Rhetorically and

thinking, and

Respectfully” (pp. 7–8). It teaches students to listen

communicating

openly and constructively and calls attention to the

in various

need to escape “echo chambers,” respectfully consider

rhetorical

all viewpoints, and find common ground.

contexts.
Throughout Everything’s an Argument with Readings,
students are invited to delve deeper into current issues
in the world around them, considering the various
arguments presented in tweets, newspapers, scholarly
papers, court rulings, and even bumper stickers.
Everything’s an Argument with Readings guides students
in asking critical questions about these contexts and
learning how to respond to and create their own
compositions. Chapters dedicated to central types of
argument explain how students might best approach
each writing situation. The chapters close with a guide
to writing arguments of that type:
Chapter 8, “Arguments of Fact” (pp. 164–96)
Chapter 9, “Arguments of Definition” (pp. 197–223)
Chapter 10, “Evaluations” (pp. 224–54)
Chapter 11, “Causal Arguments” (pp. 255–85)
Chapter 12, “Proposals” (pp. 286–318)

24

Chapter 16, “Multimodal Arguments” (pp. 381–402)
Read a diverse

Chapter 7, “Structuring Arguments” (pp. 135–63),

range of texts,

examines making claims and using evidence to support

attending

those claims. It delves into the structure of Rogerian and

especially to

Toulmin arguments, showing how different argument

relationships

types work for different writing situations.

between
assertion and

Each Guide to Writing features sections on

evidence, to

“Formulating a Claim” and “Thinking about

patterns of

Organization” (e.g., pp. 212 and 214), emphasizing the

organization, to

use of evidence and the structure of the argument.

interplay
between verbal
and nonverbal
elements, and
how these
features function
for different
audiences and
situations.
Locate and

Chapter 18, “Finding Evidence” (pp. 438–53), covers

evaluate primary

locating evidence from print, electronic, and field

and secondary

research sources.

research
materials,

Chapter 19, “Evaluating Sources” (pp. 454–63),

including journal

addresses how to assess those sources effectively.

articles, essays,
books,
databases, and
informal Internet
sources.
Use strategies —

Chapter 20, “Using Sources,” provides detailed

such as

explanations of summary, paraphrase, and quotation

interpretation,

and when to use each approach (pp. 467–73). The

25

synthesis,

chapter discusses framing with introductory phrases

response,

and signal verbs, and it presents multiple ways to

critique, and

connect source material to a student’s own ideas — by

design/redesign

establishing a context, introducing a term or concept,

— to compose

developing a claim, highlighting differences, and

texts that

avoiding “patchwriting” (pp. 480–82).

integrate the
writer’s ideas

Chapter 21, “Plagiarism and Academic Integrity” (pp.

with those from

484–93), highlights the importance of acknowledging

appropriate

another writer’s work.

sources.
Chapter 22, “Documenting Sources” (pp. 494–532),
concludes the research section of the book with a
discussion of MLA and APA documentation, including a
wide range of citation models in both formats.
Processes
Develop a

Chapter 17, “Academic Arguments” (pp. 405–37),

writing project

stresses the importance of working through multiple

through multiple

drafts of a project, using revision and peer feedback to

drafts.

improve the document.

Develop flexible

Writing is a fundamental focus of Everything’s an

strategies for

Argument with Readings, and students learn to critique

reading,

their own work and the work of others in almost every

drafting,

part of the book. Each Guide to Writing, focusing on a

reviewing,

specific type of argument in the Part 2 chapters,

collaboration,

contains step-by-step advice on drafting, researching,

revising,

and organizing, as well as peer review questions about

rewriting,

the claim being made, the evidence provided for the

rereading, and

claim, and the organization and style of the essay.

editing.
The Guide to Writing also asks students to review their
spelling, punctuation, mechanics, documentation, and
format.

26

Use composing

Chapter 7, “Structuring Arguments” (pp. 135–63),

processes and

provides a clear explanation for how to construct an

tools as a means

argument and support it effectively, and it includes a

to discover and

brief annotated model from a classic text.

reconsider ideas.
The “Developing an Academic Argument” section (pp.
411–18) in Chapter 17, “Academic Arguments” (pp.
405–37), guides students through the specific process of
developing a paper in an academic setting, from
selecting a topic and exploring it in depth to entering
into the conversation around the chosen topic. Two
annotated examples of academic arguments are
provided at the end of the chapter.
Experience the

Many “Respond” questions have students work in pairs

collaborative

or groups to analyze rhetorical situations, arguments, or

and social

appeals. See p. 36, for instance.

aspects of
writing

In Chapter 21, “Plagiarism and Academic Integrity”

processes.

(pp. 484–93), students learn the importance of giving
credit, getting permission to use the materials of others,
citing sources appropriately, and acknowledging
collaboration with their peers.

Learn to give and

Each Guide to Writing, focusing on a specific type of

act on

argument in the Part 2 chapters, contains a “Getting

productive

and Giving Response: Questions for Peer Review”

feedback to

section (e.g., pp. 183–85) tailored to that argument type.

works in

These questions address the claim being made, the

progress.

evidence provided for the claim, and the organization
and style of the essay.

Adapt composing

Awareness of technology runs throughout Everything’s

processes for a

an Argument with Readings, beginning in the first

variety of

chapter with an exploration of arguments made via

technologies and

Twitter. A particular focus on multimodal arguments is

modalities.

made in Chapter 14, “Visual Rhetoric” (pp. 346–62),

27

which covers how effective images can be and instructs
students on incorporating them to achieve specific
rhetorical purposes, and in Chapter 16, “Multimodal
Arguments” (pp. 381–402), which focuses on how
technology offers new platforms and opportunities for
composition, as well as some new pitfalls to avoid.
These chapters provide students with tools for creating
their own multimodal compositions.
Reflect on the

Everything’s an Argument with Readings presents

development of

students with an important foundation in the purpose

composing

and history of rhetoric (e.g., “Why We Make

practices and

Arguments,” pp. 8–9; “The Classical Oration,” pp.

how those

136–39) as well as thoughtful reflections on how

practices

composition and argument have changed in an

influence their

increasingly digital world (e.g., “Old Media

work.

Transformed by New Media,” pp. 382–83;
“Conventions in Academic Argument Are Not Static,”
p. 410).

Knowledge of
Conventions
Develop

Chapter 13, “Style in Arguments” (pp. 321–45), covers

knowledge of

sentence structure and punctuation.

linguistic
structures,

Chapter 17, “Academic Arguments” (pp. 405–37),

including

discusses drafting, revising, and editing.

grammar,
punctuation, and

The Guide to Writing in each Part 2 chapter asks

spelling, through

students to review their spelling, punctuation,

practice in

mechanics, documentation, and format.

composing and
revising.
Understand why

The argument chapters in Part 2 address genre

genre

conventions, discussing how the approach and structure

28

conventions for

of a document adapt to its genre. Each chapter also

structure,

includes a Guide to Writing and Sample Arguments,

paragraphing,

which highlight differing uses of sources and tone (e.g.,

tone, and

“Guide to Writing a Proposal,” pp. 300–305).

mechanics vary.
Gain experience

Each of the Part 2 chapters offers a section on

negotiating

characterizing that particular genre (e.g.,

variations in

“Characterizing Evaluation,” pp. 229–32) as well as a

genre

section to guide students to develop a paper in that

conventions.

particular genre (e.g., “Developing an Evaluative
Argument,” pp. 233–39). These chapters pay particular
attention to the nuances and variations of differing
purposes and approaches.
For more genre variety, Everything’s an Argument with
Readings also contains a five-chapter thematic reader
with additional multimodal genres, including
infographics, professional reports, scholarly journal
articles, and comic strips.

Learn common

Part 3, “Style and Presentation in Arguments,” offers

formats and/or

four chapters on how to design an argument, paying

design features

attention to how these choices will vary depending on

for different

the student’s rhetorical purpose (e.g., “Using Images

kinds of texts.

and Visual Design to Create Pathos,” pp. 350–52).
The “Considering Design and Visuals” section (e.g., pp.
238–39) in each Part 2 argument chapter acquaints
students with common design features and formats of
that type of document.
The Guide to Writing in each Part 2 chapter contains a
“Considering Genre and Media” section that invites
students to think about how to choose the appropriate
format and medium for a particular argument.

29

Explore the

Chapter 20, “Using Sources,” explores the topics of

concepts of

summary, paraphrase, and quotation and when each

intellectual

approach might be most appropriate (pp. 466–73). The

property (such

chapter discusses framing with introductory phrases

as fair use and

and signal verbs, and it presents multiple ways to

copyright) that

connect source material to a student’s own ideas by

motivate

establishing a context, introducing a term or concept,

documentation

developing a claim, highlighting differences, and

conventions.

avoiding “patchwriting” (pp. 474–82).
Chapter 21, “Plagiarism and Academic Integrity” (pp.
484–93), shines a light on the importance of
acknowledging the work of another.
The section on MLA style in Chapter 22, “Documenting
Sources” (pp. 496–515), provides guidance on how to
get permission for copyrighted material (including
Internet sources) and how to navigate Creative
Commons and fair use. It also offers an in-depth
examination of in-text citations and Works Cited entries,
with more than fifty examples of citation types and
sample pages from a student essay.

Practice

Chapter 22, “Documenting Sources” (pp. 494–532),

applying citation

examines in-text citations and Works Cited entries for

conventions

both MLA and APA style, with more than fifty examples

systematically in

of citation types and sample pages from a student essay.

their own work.

30

Brief Contents
Preface
Part 1 Reading and Understanding Arguments
1. Understanding Arguments and Reading Them Critically
2. Arguments Based on Emotion: Pathos
3. Arguments Based on Character: Ethos
4. Arguments Based on Facts and Reason: Logos
5. Fallacies of Argument
6. Rhetorical Analysis
Part 2 Writing Arguments
7. Structuring Arguments
8. Arguments of Fact
9. Arguments of Definition
10. Evaluations
11. Causal Arguments
12. Proposals
Part 3 Style and Presentation in Arguments
13. Style in Arguments
14. Visual Rhetoric
15. Presenting Arguments
16. Multimodal Arguments
Part 4 Research and Arguments
17. Academic Arguments
18. Finding Evidence

31

19. Evaluating Sources
20. Using Sources
21. Plagiarism and Academic Integrity
22. Documenting Sources
Part 5 Arguments
23. How Does Popular Culture Stereotype You?
24. How Does What We Eat Define Who We Are?
25. How Does Language Influence Our World?
26. Has the Internet Destroyed Privacy?
27. How Free Should Campus Speech Be?
Glossary
Index
Readings by Type of Argument

32

Contents
Preface
Part 1 Reading and Understanding Arguments
1. Understanding Arguments and Reading Them Critically
Everything Is an Argument
Why Read Arguments Critically and Rhetorically?
Why Listen to Arguments Rhetorically and Respectfully?
Why We Make Arguments
Arguments to Convince and Inform
Arguments to Persuade
Arguments to Make Decisions
Arguments to Understand and Explore
Occasions for Argument
Arguments about the Past
Arguments about the Future
Arguments about the Present
Kinds of Argument
Did Something Happen? Arguments of Fact
What Is the Nature of the Thing? Arguments of
Definition
What Is the Quality or Cause of the Thing? Arguments
of Evaluation
What Actions Should Be Taken? Proposal Arguments
STASIS QUESTIONS AT WORK

33

Appealing to Audiences
Emotional Appeals: Pathos
Ethical Appeals: Ethos
Logical Appeals: Logos
Bringing It Home: Kairos and the Rhetorical Situation
CULTURAL CONTEXTS FOR ARGUMENT
2. Arguments Based on Emotion: Pathos
Reading Critically for Pathos
Using Emotions to Build Bridges
Using Emotions to Sustain an Argument
Using Humor
Using Arguments Based on Emotion
3. Arguments Based on Character: Ethos
Thinking Critically about Arguments Based on Character
Establishing Trustworthiness and Credibility
Claiming Authority
Coming Clean about Motives
CULTURAL CONTEXTS FOR ARGUMENT
4. Arguments Based on Facts and Reason: Logos
Thinking Critically about Hard Evidence
Facts
Statistics
Surveys and Polls
Testimonies and Narratives

34

Using Reason and Common Sense
CULTURAL CONTEXTS FOR ARGUMENT
Providing Logical Structures for Argument
Degree
Analogies
Precedent
5. Fallacies of Argument
Fallacies of Emotional Argument
Scare Tactics
Either/Or Choices
Slippery Slope
Overly Sentimental Appeals
Bandwagon Appeals
Fallacies of Ethical Argument
Appeals to False Authority
Dogmatism
Ad Hominem Arguments
Stacking the Deck
Fallacies of Logical Argument
Hasty Generalization
Faulty Causality
Begging the Question
Equivocation
Non Sequitur

35

Straw Man
Red Herring
Faulty Analogy
Paralipsis
6. Rhetorical Analysis
Composing a Rhetorical Analysis: Reading and Viewing
Critically
Understanding the Purpose of Arguments You Are
Analyzing
Understanding Who Makes an Argument
Identifying and Appealing to Audiences
Examining Arguments Based on Emotion: Pathos
Examining Arguments Based on Character: Ethos
Examining Arguments Based on Facts and Reason: Logos
Examining the Arrangement and Media of Arguments
Looking at Style
Examining a Rhetorical Analysis
Nicholas Kristof, Fleeing to the Mountains
“When public lands are lost — or mined in ways
that scar the landscape — something has been lost
forever on our watch. A public good has been
privatized, and our descendants have been robbed.”
Cameron Hauer, Appeal, Audience, and Narrative in
Kristof’s Wilderness [STUDENT ESSAY]

36

“To a liberal readership still reeling from the shock
of the 2016 election, the invocation of Trump is an
invitation for the audience to adopt Kristof’s prowilderness platform as a plank of a broader antiTrump agenda.”
GUIDE TO WRITING A RHETORICAL
ANALYSIS
Part 2 Writing Arguments
7. Structuring Arguments
The Classical Oration
Rogerian and Invitational Arguments
Toulmin Argument
Making Claims
Offering Evidence and Good Reasons
Determining Warrants
Offering Evidence: Backing
Using Qualifiers
Understanding Conditions of Rebuttal
Outline of a Toulmin Argument
A Toulmin Analysis
Stephen L. Carter, Offensive Speech Is Free Speech.
If Only We’d Listen
“The First Amendment protects not admirable
speech or good speech or likeable speech. It
protects speech.”
37

What Toulmin Teaches
CULTURAL CONTEXTS FOR ARGUMENT
8. Arguments of Fact
Understanding Arguments of Fact
Characterizing Factual Arguments
Developing a Factual Argument
Identifying an Issue
Researching Your Hypothesis
Refining Your Claim
Deciding Which Evidence to Use
Presenting Your Evidence
Considering Design and Visuals
GUIDE TO WRITING AN ARGUMENT OF
FACT
Projects
Two Sample Factual Arguments
Kate Beispel, The Snacktivities and Musings of a
Millennial Foodie [STUDENT ESSAY]
“Where there’s a food line, there’s a Millennial
waiting: foodie culture is accessible to anyone
who wants to be a part of it.”
Michael Hiltzik, Don’t Believe Facebook: The
Demise of the Written Word Is Very Far Off

38

“Video is a linear medium: You have to allow it
to unspool frame by frame to glean what it’s
saying. Text can be absorbed in blocks; the eye
searches for keywords or names or other
pointers such as quotation marks.”
9. Arguments of Definition
Understanding Arguments of Definition
Kinds of Definition
Formal Definitions
Operational Definitions
Definitions by Example
Negative Definitions
Developing a Definitional Argument
Formulating Claims
Crafting Definitions
Matching Claims to Definitions
Considering Design and Visuals
GUIDE TO WRITING AN ARGUMENT OF
DEFINITION
Projects
Two Sample Definitional Arguments
Natasha Rodriguez, Who Are You Calling
Underprivileged? [STUDENT ESSAY]
“The word made me question how I saw myself

39

in the world.”
Rob Jenkins, Defining the Relationship
“I used to think the boundaries and expectations
were clear on both sides, but that no longer
seems to be the case.”
10. Evaluations
Understanding Evaluations
Criteria of Evaluation
Characterizing Evaluation
Quantitative Evaluations
Qualitative Evaluations
Developing an Evaluative Argument
Formulating Criteria
Making Claims
Presenting Evidence
Considering Design and Visuals
GUIDE TO WRITING AN EVALUATION
Projects
Two Sample Evaluations
Jenny Kim, The Toxicity in Learning [STUDENT
ESSAY]
“Across all disciplines, there is an unhealthy
infatuation with a 4.0 GPA that detracts from
40

true learning.”
Becca Stanek, I took vitamins every day for a decade.
Then I found out they’re useless
“At my appointment last Wednesday, my doctor
bluntly informed me that my multivitamins
weren’t doing a darn thing for me.”
11. Causal Arguments
Understanding Causal Arguments
Arguments That State a Cause and Then Examine Its
Effects
Arguments That State an Effect and Then Trace the
Effect Back to Its Causes
Arguments That Move through a Series of Links: A
Causes B, Which Leads to C and Perhaps to D
Characterizing Causal Arguments
They Are Often Part of Other Arguments
They Are Almost Always Complex
They Are Often Definition Based
They Usually Yield Probable Rather Than Absolute
Conclusions
Developing Causal Arguments
Exploring Possible Claims
Defining the Causal Relationships
Supporting Your Point
41

Considering Design and Visuals
GUIDE TO WRITING A CAUSAL ARGUMENT
Projects
Two Sample Causal Arguments
Laura Tarrant, Forever Alone (and Perfectly Fine)
[STUDENT ESSAY]
“Singleness doesn’t have to be a steppingstone
on the way to a relationship, nor does it have to
result from some emotional deficiency. Rather,
singleness is its own alternative lifestyle.”
Pascal-Emmanuel Gobry, America’s Birthrate Is
Now a National Emergency
“People’s willingness to have children is not
only a sign of confidence in the future, but a
sign of cultural health.”
12. Proposals
Understanding and Categorizing Proposals
Characterizing Proposals
Developing Proposals
Defining a Need or Problem
Making a Strong and Clear Claim
Showing That the Proposal Addresses the Need or
Problem
Showing That the Proposal Is Feasible
42

Considering Design and Visuals
GUIDE TO WRITING A PROPOSAL
Projects
Two Sample Proposals
Caleb Wong, Addiction to Social Media: How to
Overcome It [STUDENT ESSAY]
“Like tooth-brushing and nail-biting, using
social media regularly is a habit.”
Lenore Skenazy, My Free-Range Parenting
Manifesto
“We are crippling kids by convincing them they
can’t solve any issues on their own.”
Part 3 Style and Presentation in Arguments
13. Style in Arguments
Style and Word Choice
CULTURAL CONTEXTS FOR ARGUMENT
Sentence Structure and Argument
Punctuation and Argument
Special Effects: Figurative Language
Tropes
Schemes
CULTURAL CONTEXTS FOR ARGUMENT
14. Visual Rhetoric
43

The Power of Visual Arguments
Using Visuals in Your Own Arguments
Using Images and Visual Design to Create Pathos
Using Images to Establish Ethos
Using Visual Images to Support Logos
15. Presenting Arguments
Class and Public Discussions
CULTURAL CONTEXTS FOR ARGUMENT
Preparing a Presentation
Assess the Rhetorical Situation
Nail Down the Specific Details
Fashion a Script Designed to Be Heard by an
Audience
Choose Media to Fit Your Subject
Deliver a Good Show
A Note about Webcasts: Live Presentations over the
Web
16. Multimodal Arguments
Old Media Transformed by New Media
New Content in New Media
New Audiences in New Media
Analyzing Multimodal Arguments
Making Multimodal Arguments
Web Sites
Videos and Video Essays
44

Wikis
Blogs
Social Media
Posters
Comics
A Final Note on Time
Part 4 Research and Arguments
17. Academic Arguments
Understanding What Academic Argument Is
Conventions in Academic Argument Are Not Static
Developing an Academic Argument
Two Sample Academic Arguments
Charlotte Geaghan-Breiner, Where the Wild Things
Should Be: Healing Nature Deficit Disorder through
the Schoolyard [STUDENT ESSAY]
“The most practical solution to this staggering
rift between children and nature involves the
schoolyard.”
Sidra Montgomery, The Emotion Work of “Thank
You for Your Service”
“The well-meaning intent behind TYFYS isn’t
always received by post-9/11 veterans in the
same way.”

45

18. Finding Evidence
Considering the Rhetorical Situation
CULTURAL CONTEXTS FOR ARGUMENT
Searching Effectively
SEARCHING ONLINE OR IN DATABASES
Collecting Data on Your Own
19. Evaluating Sources
Assessing Print Sources
Assessing Electronic Sources
Practicing Crap Detection
Assessing Field Research
20. Using Sources
Practicing Infotention
Building a Critical Mass
Synthesizing Information
Paraphrasing Sources You Will Use Extensively
Summarizing Sources
Using Quotations Selectively and Strategically
Framing Materials You Borrow with Signal Words
and Introductions
Using Sources to Clarify and Support Your Own
Argument
Avoiding “Patchwriting”
21. Plagiarism and Academic Integrity
Giving Credit
46

Getting Permission for and Using Copyrighted Internet
Sources
Acknowledging Your Sources Accurately and
Appropriately
Acknowledging Collaboration
22. Documenting Sources
MLA Style
In-Text Citations
Explanatory and Bibliographic Notes
List of Works Cited
Sample First Page for an Essay in MLA Style
Sample List of Works Cited for an Essay in MLA
Style
APA Style
In-Text Citations
Content Notes
List of References
Sample Title Page for an Essay in APA Style
Sample First Text Page for an Essay in APA Style
Sample References List for an Essay in APA Style
Part 5 Arguments
23. How Does Popular Culture Stereotype You?
Alli Joseph, With Disney’s Moana, Hollywood Almost
Gets It Right: Indigenous People Weigh In [WEB
ARTICLE]

47

“But the film’s achievements are not enough for
some to cite progress toward more accurate, lessstereotypical portrayal of other cultures in film.”
D.K., Shooting Guns: It’s Rather Fun, Actually
[MAGAZINE ARTICLE]
“For the majority of gun owners, being told that
their harmless hobby is somehow responsible for
the deaths of other people must be deeply
unpleasant.”
Nicole Pasulka, How a Bible-Belt Evangelical Church
Embraced Gay Rights [WEB ARTICLE]
“Despite some opposition from within the
congregation, this Bible Belt church is now making
a religious argument for gay rights.”
C. Richard King, Redskins: Insult and Brand [BOOK
EXCERPT]
“As much a weapon as a word, then, it injures and
excludes, denying history and humanity.”
Melinda C. R. Burgess, et al., Playing with Prejudice:
The Prevalence and Consequences of Racial Stereotypes
in Video Games [JOURNAL ARTICLE]
“[I]magery that associates African American men

48

with the negative stereotypes of aggression,
hostility, and criminality conditions viewers to
associate this constellation of negativity with
African American men in general.”
MAKING A VISUAL ARGUMENT: Sonny Assu,
Breakfast Series [ARTWORK]
Sara Morrison, Covering the Transgender Community:
How Newsrooms Are Moving Beyond the “Coming Out”
Story to Report Crucial Transgender Issues [REPORT]
“How do journalists cover a community, which has
been for so long maligned and voiceless, in ways
that are considerate of that community’s needs as
well as those of readers, some of whom need basic
concepts explained?”
24. How Does What We Eat Define Who We Are?
Sophie Egan, The American Food Psyche [BOOK
EXCERPT]
“Korean tacos and naan pizza and California rolls.
Some might consider these horrors. Sullied versions
of the true cultural entities. But not us. In America,
collisions are commendable.”
MAKING A VISUAL ARGUMENT: United States
Department of Agriculture, How Do Your Eating Habits
Differ from Your Grandparents’? [GRAPH]

49

Rob Greenfield, An Argument against Veganism . . .
from a Vegan [BLOG POST]
“There are cultures of people who eat meat and
animal products in a manner that causes less harm
to earth and animals than some vegan diets do.”
Jess Kapadia, I Still Don’t Understand the Cultural
Appropriation of Food [WEB ARTICLE]
“I’d venture to say that this many years into the age
of pop food media and recipe sharing, no food
belongs to anyone anymore.”
Briahna Joy Gray, The Question of Cultural
Appropriation [MAGAZINE ARTICLE]
“I think when we talk about appropriation, we’re
really talking about two separate issues: first, an
issue of cultural exploitation, and second, an issue
of cultural disrespect.”
James Dubick, Brandon Mathews, and Clare Cady,
Hunger on Campus: The Challenge of Food Insecurity
for College Students [REPORT]
“One in five students surveyed had the very lowest
levels of food security. Thirteen percent were
homeless.”

50

25. How Does Language Influence Our World?
Ernie Smith, They Should Stop: In Defense of the
Singular They [BLOG POST]
“It may be the most controversial word use in the
English language — because it highlights a hole in
the language where a better-fitting word should go.”
John McWhorter, Thick of Tongue [WEB ARTICLE]
“I am not referring to black slang. Plenty of black
people use little street slang and yet still have a
black sound. The question is why you could tell
most black people were black if they read you a
shopping list over the phone.”
Japanese American Citizens League, from The Power of
Words [HANDBOOK]
“During WWII, the U.S. government used
euphemistic language to control public perceptions
about the forced removal of Japanese American
citizens from their West Coast homes to desolate
American concentration camps further inland.”
MAKING A VISUAL ARGUMENT: Census Data,
English and Languages other Than English in the United
States [MAPS AND CHART]
Roxane Gay, The Careless Language of Sexual Violence
[BOOK EXCERPT]
51

“It was an eleven-year-old girl whose body was
ripped apart, not a town. It was an eleven-year-old
girl whose life was ripped apart, not the lives of the
men who raped her.”
Jorge Encinas, How Latino Players Are Helping Major
League Baseball Learn Spanish [BLOG POST]
“Spanish-speaking fans, millions of whom watch
Spanish-language broadcasts of baseball games,
will have little idea of the lingering challenge some
Latino players in the States have long faced.”
26. Has the Internet Destroyed Privacy?
Lindsay McKenzie, Getting Personal about
Cybersecurity [WEB ARTICLE]
“Today’s students may be digital natives, but that
doesn’t mean institutions can count on them to
protect themselves from cyberattacks.”
MAKING A VISUAL ARGUMENT: The Issue of
Privacy [CARTOONS]
Brian Crane, Oh, My Gosh! When Did Facebook
Start with Mind Infiltration?
Chris Slane, Window on the Internet
Chris Wildt, Impressive Résumé …
Mike Smith, I Agree with Apple . . .
J. D. Crowe, Congress Kills Internet Privacy
52

Lauren Salm, 70 Percent of Employers Are Snooping
Candidates’ Social Media Profiles [WEB ARTICLE]
“The bottom line? Think before you post, because
there’s always someone watching.”
Deanna Hartley, Creative Ways to Get Noticed by
Employers on Social Media [WEB ARTICLE]
“[S]ocial media could work in your favor if you’re
looking for a job—if you do it right.”
Lauren Carroll, Congress Let Internet Providers “Spy
On” Your Underwear Purchases, Advocacy Group Says
[WEB ARTICLE]
“Beyond shopping habits, ISPs and advertisers can
glean more significant personal information about
their customers from Internet browsing patterns.”
Franklin Foer, from World without Mind: The Existential
Threat of Big Tech [BOOK EXCERPT]
“Data provides an X-ray of the soul. Companies
turn that photograph of the inner self into a
commodity to be traded on a market, bought and
sold without our knowledge.”
Amanda Hess, How Privacy Became a Commodity for
the Rich and Powerful [WEB ARTICLE]

53

“We’ve come to understand that privacy is the
currency of our online lives, paying for petty
conveniences with bits of personal information.”
27. How Free Should Campus Speech Be?
John Palfrey, Safe Spaces, Brave Spaces [BOOK EXCERPT]
“While diversity and free expression are too often
pitted against one another as competing values, they are
more compatible than they are opposing.”
Gallup/Knight Foundation, Free Speech on Campus: What
Students Think about First Amendment Issues [REPORT]
“College students generally endorse First Amendment
ideals in the abstract. The vast majority say free speech
is important to democracy and favor an open learning
environment that promotes the airing of a wide variety
of ideas.”
Ben Schwartz, Shutting Up [WEB ARTICLE]
“Comedy isn’t supposed to be anything, except what
the comedian tries to make it—harmless, mean,
political, dirty, dumb.”
MAKING A VISUAL ARGUMENT: Racial
Microaggressions
Turner Consulting Group, Racial Microaggressions

54

[POSTER]
Alexandra Dal, Questions [CARTOON]
Scott O. Lilienfeld, Why a Moratorium on Microaggressions
Is Needed [SCHOLARLY ARTICLE]
“Distributing lists of ‘forbidden’ phrases to campus
administrators or faculty members or mandating
microaggression training for employees are unlikely to
be helpful.”
Sarah Brown, Activist Athletes [WEB ARTICLE]
“Since athletes are at the mercy of their coaches in
terms of playing time and scholarships, coaches and
team managers exercise a great deal of influence over
their players’ choices.”
Catherine Nolan-Ferrell, Balancing Classroom Civility and
Free Speech [MAGAZINE ARTICLE]
“I cannot claim complete neutrality about the subject
matter, but I do promise students that I will discuss
multiple perspectives and explain how and why I
reached my point of view.”
Glossary
Index
Readings by Type of Argument

55

PART 1 READING AND
UNDERSTANDING arguments

56

CHAPTER 1 Understanding Arguments and
Reading Them Critically

On October 15, 2017, actor and activist Alyssa Milano took to Twitter
to issue a call to action:

Milano was joining the conversation surrounding a spate of revelations
about very high-profile and powerful men accused of sexual

57

harassment: Bill Cosby, Roger Ailes, Bill O’Reilly, and Harvey
Weinstein. Milano’s tweet argues for standing up and speaking out—in
big numbers—and her message certainly hit a nerve: within 24 hours,
4.7 million people around the world had joined the “me too”
conversation, with over 12 million posts and comments. Some of these
comments pointed out that the “me too” movement is actually more
than ten years old: it began with activist Tarana Burke, who was
directing a Girls for Gender Equity program in Brooklyn, aimed at
giving voice to young women of color. As Burke told CNN after
Milano’s tweet went viral: “It’s not about a viral campaign for me. It’s
about a movement.”
Burke’s reaction to the 2017 meme makes an important point, one that
was echoed in some of the responses Milano received and further
elaborated by Jessi Hempel, the editorial director of Backchannel, in
“The Problem with #metoo and Viral Outrage.” Hempel says that “on
its surface,” #metoo has what looks to be the makings of an “earnest
and effective social movement.” But like Burke, Hempel wonders
whether #metoo will actually have the power and longevity of a true
social movement. She’s concerned that while millions of people are
weighing in, at last, on a long-ignored issue, the campaign may not
culminate in real change:
In truth, however, #MeToo is a too-perfect meme. It harnesses
social media’s mechanisms to drive users (that’s you and me)
into escalating states of outrage while exhausting us to the
point where we cannot meaningfully act.
Hempel cites extensive research by Yale professor Molly Crockett that
58

suggests that “digital technologies may be transforming the way we
experience outrage, and limiting how much we can actually change
social realities.” In other words, expressing outrage online lets us talk
the talk but not walk the walk of actual change.
In spite of these caveats, the work begun by Tarana Burke over a
decade ago and given new urgency by Alyssa Milano has led to a
series of high-profile firings, and some criminal convictions, in many
sectors of society, from the Hollywood film industry (Weinstein’s
company had to declare bankruptcy) to New York’s cultural scene (the
Metropolitan Opera fired its conductor, James Levine) to Congress
(Senator Al Franken was forced to resign his seat) to the world of
sports (Olympics team doctor Larry Nassar was sentenced to 40 to 175
years in prison for assaulting as many as 160 women athletes). In short,
it now looks as though #metoo does constitute a genuine movement
that will continue to lead to actual, concrete changes in cultural
attitudes and practices. Certainly, the argument over its effectiveness
and reach will continue, much of it playing out on social media
platforms.
As this example shows, arguments on social media occur on crowded,
two-way channels, with claims and counterclaims whizzing by, fast
and furious. Such tools reach audiences (like the 4.7 million who
initially responded to #metoo) and they also create them, offering an
innovative way to make and share arguments. Just as importantly,
anyone, anywhere, with access to a phone, tablet, or other electronic
device, can launch arguments that circle the globe in seconds. Social
networking and digital tools are increasingly available to all—for

59

better or for worse, as shown by the recent example of Facebook’s
allowing data from 50 million users to be used for political purposes.

60

Everything Is an Argument
As you know from your own experiences with social media, arguments
are all around us, in every medium, in every genre, in everything we
do. There may be an argument on the T-shirt you put on in the
morning, in the sports column you read on the bus, in the prayers you
utter before an exam, in the off-the-cuff political remarks of a teacher
lecturing, on the bumper sticker on the car in front of you, in the
assurances of a health center nurse that “This won’t hurt one bit.”
The clothes you wear, the foods you eat, and the groups you join make
nuanced, sometimes unspoken assertions about who you are and what
you value. So an argument can be any text—written, spoken, aural, or
visual—that expresses a point of view. In fact, some theorists claim
that language is inherently persuasive. When you say, “Hi, how’s it
going?” in one sense you’re arguing that your hello deserves a
response. Even humor makes an argument when it causes readers to
recognize—through bursts of laughter or just a faint smile—how things
are and how they might be different.
More obvious as arguments are those that make direct claims based on
or drawn from evidence. Such writing often moves readers to
recognize problems and to consider solutions. Persuasion of this kind is
usually easy to recognize:
The National Minimum Drinking Age Act, passed by
Congress [in 1984], is a gross violation of civil liberties and
must be repealed. It is absurd and unjust that young
Americans can vote, marry, enter contracts, and serve in the
61

military at 18 but cannot buy an alcoholic drink in a bar or
restaurant.
—Camille Paglia, “The Drinking Age Is Past Its Prime”
We will become a society of a million pictures without much
memory, a society that looks forward every second to an
immediate replication of what it has just done, but one that
does not sustain the difficult labor of transmitting culture
from one generation to the next.
—Christine Rosen, “The Image Culture”

RESPOND●
Can an argument really be any text that expresses a point of view?
What kinds of arguments—if any—might be made by the following
items?
a Golden State Warriors cap
Nike Air Zoom Pegasus 34
the “explicit lyrics” label on a best-selling rap CD
the health warnings on a package of cigarettes
a Tesla Model 3 electric car
a pair of Ray-Ban sunglasses

62

Why Read Arguments
Critically and
Rhetorically?
More than two millennia ago, Aristotle told students that they needed
to know and understand and use the arts of rhetoric for two major
reasons: to be able to get their ideas across effectively and persuasively
and to protect themselves from being manipulated by others. Today,
we need these abilities more than ever before: as we are inundated with
“alternative facts,” “fake news,” mis- and disinformation, and often
even outright lies, the ability to read between the lines, to become factcheckers, to practice what media critic Howard Rheingold calls “crap
detection” (see “Practicing Crap Detection” in Chapter 19), and to read
with careful attention are now survival skills.

This need is so acute that new courses are springing up on college

63

campuses, such as one at the University of Washington named
(provocatively) “Calling Bullshit,” which Professors Carl Bergstrom
and Jevin West define as “language, statistical figures, graphics, and
other forms of presentation intended to persuade by impressing and
overwhelming a reader or listener with a blatant disregard for truth and
logical coherence.” (Search for “The Fine Art of Sniffing Out Crappy
Science” on the Web.) These professors are particularly interested in
the use of statistics and visual representation of data to misinform or
confuse, and in showing how “big data” especially can often obscure
rather than reveal valid claims, although they acknowledge the power
of verbal misinformation as well.
You can practice self-defense against such misrepresentation by
following some sound advice:
Pay attention, close attention, to what you are reading or viewing.
While it’s tempting to skim, avoid the temptation, especially when
the stakes are high. Keep focused on the text at hand, with your
critical antenna up!
Keep an eye out for “click bait,” those subject lines or headings
that scream “read me, read me” but usually lead to little
information.
Be skeptical. Check the author, publisher, sources: how reliable
are they?
Look for unstated assumptions behind claims—and question them.
Distinguish between facts that have verifiable support and claims
and those which may or may not be completely empty.
Learn to triangulate: don’t take the word of a single source but
look for corroboration from other reliable sources.

64

Become a fact checker! Get familiar with nonpartisan factcheckers like Politifact, FactCheck.org, the Sunlight Foundation,
and Snopes.com.
You will find additional information about reading attentively and
critically throughout this book, especially in Chapters 6 and 19.

65

Why Listen to Arguments
Rhetorically and
Respectfully?
Rhetorician Krista Ratcliffe recommends that we all learn to listen
rhetorically, which she defines as “a stance of openness” you can take
in relation to any person, text, or culture. Taking such a stance is not
easy, especially when emotions and disagreements run high, but doing
so is a necessary step in understanding where other people are coming
from and in acknowledging that our own stances are deeply influenced
by forces we may not even be aware of. Even when we stand on the
shoulders of giants, our view is limited and partial, and it’s good to
remember that this maxim is true for everyone.
Amid the extreme divisions in the United States today, amid the
charges and countercharges, the ongoing attacks of one group on
another, it’s especially important to learn to listen to others, even
others with whom we drastically disagree. Scholars and pundits alike
have written about the “echo chambers” we often inhabit, especially
online, where we hear only from people who think as we do, act as we
act, believe as we believe. Such echo chambers are dangerous to a
democracy. As a result, some are advocating for rhetorical listening.
Oprah Winfrey, for example, brought together a group of women, half
of whom supported Trump and half of whom supported Clinton, over
“croissants and great jam.” At first no one wanted to participate, but
once Winfrey got them together and they started listening to one

66

another’s stories, the women began to find small patches of common
ground. Listening openly and respectfully was the key. So it is with the
website and app “Hi from the Other Side,” where people can sign up to
be paired with someone on another side of an issue, get guidance on
how to begin a conversation, and eventually meet to pursue common
ground and common interests (see
https://www.hifromtheotherside.com for more information).
You can begin to practice rhetorical listening as you get to know
people who differ from you on major issues, listening to their views
carefully and respectfully, asking them for that same respect, and
beginning to search for some common ground, no matter how small.
Arguments are never won by going nowhere except “Yes I can”/“No
you can’t” over and over again, yet that’s the way many arguments are
conducted today. Learning to listen rhetorically and beginning to find
some small commonality is usually a better way to argue constructively
than plunging right in with accusations or dramatic claims.

67

Why We Make Arguments
As this discussion suggests, in the politically divided and
entertainment-driven culture of the United States today, the word
argument may well call up negative images: the hostile scowl,
belligerent tweet, or shaking fist of a politician or news pundit who
wants to drown out other voices and prevail at all costs. This winnertake-all view has a long history, but it often turns people off to the
whole process of using reasoned conversation to identify, explore, and
solve problems. Hoping to avoid perpetual standoffs with people on
“the other side,” many people now sidestep opportunities to speak their
minds on issues shaping their lives and work. We want to counter this
attitude throughout this book: we urge you to examine your values and
beliefs, to understand where they come from, and to voice them clearly
and cogently in arguments you make, all the while respecting the
values and beliefs of others.
Some arguments, of course, are aimed at winning, especially those
related to politics, business, and law. Two candidates for office, for
example, vie for a majority of votes; the makers of one smartphone try
to outsell their competitors by offering more features at a lower price;
and two lawyers try to outwit each other in pleading to a judge and
jury. In your college writing, you may also be called on to make
arguments that appeal to a “judge” and “jury” (perhaps your instructor
and classmates). You might, for instance, argue that students in every
field should be required to engage in service learning projects. In doing
so, you will need to offer better arguments or more convincing
evidence than those with other perspectives—such as those who might
68

regard service learning as a politicized or coercive form of education.
You can do so reasonably and responsibly, no name-calling required.
There are many reasons to argue and principled ways to do so. We
explore some of them in this section.

Arguments to Convince and
Inform
We’re stepping into an argument ourselves in drawing what we hope is
a useful distinction between convincing and—in the next section
—persuading. (Feel free to disagree with us!) Arguments to convince
lead audiences to accept a claim as true or reasonable—based on
information or evidence that seems factual and reliable; arguments to
persuade then seek to move people beyond conviction to action.
Academic arguments often combine both elements.
Many news reports and analyses, white papers, and academic articles
aim to convince audiences by broadening what they know about a
subject. Such fact-based arguments might have no motives beyond
laying out what the facts are. Here’s an opening paragraph from a 2014
news story by Anahad O’Connor in the New York Times that itself
launched a thousand arguments (and lots of huzzahs) simply by
reporting the results of a recent scientific study:
Many of us have long been told that saturated fat, the type
found in meat, butter and cheese, causes heart disease. But a
large and exhaustive new analysis by a team of international
scientists found no evidence that eating saturated fat
69

increased heart attacks and other cardiac events.
—Anahad O’Connor, “Study Questions Fat and Heart
Disease Link”
Wow. You can imagine how carefully the reporter walked through the
scientific data, knowing how this new information might be understood
and repurposed by his readers.
Similarly, in a college paper on the viability of nuclear power as an
alternative source of energy, you might compare the health and safety
record of a nuclear plant to that of other forms of energy. Depending
upon your findings and your interpretation of the data, the result of
your fact-based presentation might be to raise or alleviate concerns
readers have about nuclear energy. Of course, your decision to write
the argument might be driven by your conviction that nuclear power is
much safer than most people believe.
Today, images offer especially powerful arguments designed both to
inform and to convince. For example, David Plunkert’s cover art for
the August 28, 2017, issue of the New Yorker is simple yet very
striking. Plunkert, who doesn’t often involve himself with political
subjects, said he was prompted to do so in response to what he saw as
President Trump’s “weak pushback” against the hateful violence on
exhibit in Charlottesville, Virginia, on August 11, 2017: “A picture
does a better job showing my thoughts than words do; it can have a
light touch on a subject that’s extremely scary.”

70

Arguments to Persuade
In the excerpt from his scholarly journal article, Scott O. Lilienfeld
aims to persuade psychologists and other academics to put aside
the term “microaggressions” because—though they may be
offensive—these slights and insults aimed at minorities have not
been proven to be psychologically harmful.
LINK TO Lilienfeld, “Why a Moratorium on Microaggressions Is
Needed,” in Chapter 27

Today, climate change may be the public issue that best illustrates the
chasm that sometimes separates conviction from persuasion. Although
the weight of scientific research attests to the fact that the earth is

71

warming and that humans are responsible for a good bit of that
warming, convincing people to accept this evidence and persuading
them to act on it still doesn’t follow easily. How then does change
occur? Some theorists suggest that persuasion—understood as moving
people to do more than nod in agreement—is best achieved via appeals
to emotions such as fear, anger, envy, pride, sympathy, or hope. We
think that’s an oversimplification. The fact is that persuasive
arguments, whether in advertisements, political blogs, YouTube
videos, tweets, or newspaper editorials, draw upon all the appeals of
rhetoric (see Appealing to Audiences in Chapter 10) to motivate people
to act—whether it be to buy a product, pull a lever for a candidate, or
volunteer for a civic organization. Here, once again, is Camille Paglia
driving home her argument that the 1984 federal law raising the
drinking age in the United States to 21 was a catastrophic decision in
need of reversal:
What this cruel 1984 law did is deprive young people of safe
spaces where they could happily drink cheap beer, socialize,
chat, and flirt in a free but controlled public environment.
Hence in the 1980s we immediately got the scourge of crude
binge drinking at campus fraternity keg parties, cut off from
the adult world. Women in that boorish free-for-all were
suddenly fighting off date rape. Club drugs—Ecstasy,
methamphetamine, ketamine (a veterinary tranquilizer)—
surged at raves for teenagers and on the gay male circuit
scene.
Paglia chooses to dramatize her argument by sharply contrasting a

72

safer, more supportive past with a vastly more dangerous present when
drinking was forced underground and young people turned to highly
risky behaviors. She doesn’t hesitate to name them either: binge
drinking, club drugs, raves, and, most seriously, date rape. This highly
rhetorical, one might say emotional, argument pushes readers hard to
endorse a call for serious action—the repeal of the current drinking age
law.

Admit it, Duchess of Cornwall. You knew abandoned dogs need homes, but it
was heartrending photos on the Battersea Dogs & Cats Home Web site that
persuaded you to visit the shelter.

RESPOND●

Apply the distinction made here between convincing and
persuading to the way people respond to two or three current
political or social issues. Is there a useful distinction between being
convinced and being persuaded? Explain your position.

73

Arguments to Make Decisions
Closely allied to arguments to convince and persuade are arguments to
examine the options in important matters, both civil and personal—
from managing out-of-control deficits to choosing careers. Arguments
to make decisions occur all the time in the public arena, where they are
often slow to evolve, caught up in electoral or legal squabbles, and yet
driven by a genuine desire to find consensus. In recent years, for
instance, Americans have argued hard to make decisions about health
care, the civil rights of same-sex couples, and the status of more than
11 million undocumented immigrants in the country. Subjects so
complex aren’t debated in straight lines. They get haggled over in
every imaginable medium by thousands of writers, politicians, and
ordinary citizens working alone or via political organizations to have
their ideas considered.
For college students, choosing a major can be an especially momentous
personal decision, and one way to go about making that decision is to
argue your way through several alternatives. By the time you’ve
explored the pros and cons of each alternative, you should be a little
closer to a reasonable and defensible decision.
Sometimes decisions, however, are not so easy to make.

74

Arguments to Understand and
Explore
In the excerpt from her professional report “Covering the
Transgender Community,” Sara Morrison explores how journalists
are working to incorporate correct terminology, respect the
preferred gender pronouns and identities of their transgender
subjects, and address the issues that matter to transgender
individuals.
LINK TO Morrison, “Covering the Transgender Community,” in
Chapter 23

Arguments to make decisions often begin as choices between opposing
positions already set in stone. But is it possible to examine important
75

issues in more open-ended ways? Many situations, again in civil or
personal arenas, seem to call for arguments that genuinely explore
possibilities without constraints or prejudices. If there’s an “opponent”
in such situations at all (often there is not), it’s likely to be the status
quo or a current trend which, for one reason or another, puzzles just
about everyone. For example, in trying to sort through the
extraordinary complexities of the 2011 budget debate, philosophy
professor Gary Gutting was able to show how two distinguished
economists—John Taylor and Paul Krugman—drew completely
different conclusions from the exact same sets of facts. Exploring how
such a thing could occur led Gutting to conclude that the two
economists were arguing from the same facts, all right, but that they
did not have all the facts possible. Those missing or unknown facts
allowed them to fill in the blanks as they could, thus leading them to
different conclusions. By discovering the source of a paradox, Gutting
potentially opened new avenues for understanding.
Exploratory arguments can also be personal, such as Zora Neale
Hurston’s ironic exploration of racism and of her own identity in the
essay “How It Feels to Be Colored Me.” If you keep a journal or blog,
you have no doubt found yourself making arguments to explore issues
near and dear to you. Perhaps the essential argument in any such piece
is the writer’s realization that a problem exists—and that the writer or
reader needs to understand it and respond constructively to it if
possible.
Explorations of ideas that begin by trying to understand another’s
perspective have been described as invitational arguments by

76

researchers Sonja Foss, Cindy Griffin, and Josina Makau. Such
arguments are interested in inviting others to join in mutual
explorations of ideas based on discovery and respect. Another kind of
argument, called Rogerian argument (after psychotherapist Carl
Rogers), approaches audiences in similarly nonthreatening ways,
finding common ground and establishing trust among those who
disagree about issues. Writers who take a Rogerian approach try to see
where the other person is coming from, looking for “both/and” or
“win/win” solutions whenever possible. (For more on Rogerian
strategies, see Chapter 7.)

The risks of Rogerian argument

77

RESPOND●
What are your reasons for making arguments? Keep notes for two
days about every single argument you make, using our broad
definition to guide you. Then identify your reasons: How many times
did you aim to convince? To inform? To persuade? To explore? To
understand?

78

Occasions for Argument
In a fifth-century BCE textbook of rhetoric (the art of persuasion), the
philosopher Aristotle provides an ingenious strategy for classifying
arguments based on their perspective on time—past, future, and
present. His ideas still help us to appreciate the role arguments play in
society in the twenty-first century. As you consider Aristotle’s
occasions for argument, remember that all such classifications overlap
(to a certain extent) and that we live in a world much different than his.

Arguments about the Past
Debates about what has happened in the past, what Aristotle called
forensic arguments, are the red meat of government, courts,
businesses, and academia. People want to know who did what in the
past, for what reasons, and with what liability. When you argue a
speeding ticket in court, you are making a forensic argument, claiming
perhaps that you weren’t over the limit or that the officer’s radar was
faulty. A judge will have to decide what exactly happened in the past in
the unlikely case you push the issue that far.

In the aftermath of the 2016 election, many researchers both in and
79

outside the government devoted themselves to trying to understand the
effects of hacking on the election and, more specifically, the extent to
which Russia was involved in such activities. Cybersecurity experts
from agencies such as the CIA, FBI, and Homeland Security argued
that they had extensive evidence to show that Russia had conducted a
number of hacking expeditions and had manipulated messages on
social media to try to disrupt the American elections. Others inside the
Trump administration argued that the evidence wasn’t convincing; the
president even declared that it had been “made up.” As this book goes
to press, the argument over what happened is still raging. What hacks
actually occurred in the run-up to the election? Which state voting
procedures, if any, were violated? What part did the Russian
government play? These are all forensic questions to be carefully
investigated, argued, and answered by agencies and special counsels
currently at work.
Some forensic arguments go on . . . and on and on. Consider, for
example, the lingering arguments over Christopher Columbus’s
“discovery” of America. Are his expeditions cause for celebration or
notably unhappy chapters in human history? Or some of both? Such
arguments about past actions—heated enough to spill over into the
public realm—are common in disciplines such as history, philosophy,
and ethics.

80

James B. Comey, former director of the FBI who was fired by President Trump,
testifies before the Senate Intelligence Committee on June 8, 2017.

Arguments about the Future
In his 2016 blog post at Tedium, Ernie Smith argues that the plural
pronoun they will and should continue to be used to represent a
subject in a gender-neutral way, even though it defies
conventional grammar.
LINK TO Smith, “They Should Stop: In Defense of the Singular
They,” in Chapter 25

Debates about what will or should happen in the future— deliberative
arguments—often influence policies or legislation for the future.
Should local or state governments allow or even encourage the use of
self-driving cars on public roads? Should colleges and universities
81

lend support to more dual-credit programs so that students can earn
college credits while still in high school? Should coal-fired power
plants be phased out of our energy grid? These are the sorts of
deliberative questions that legislatures, committees, or school boards
routinely address when making laws or establishing policies.
But arguments about the future can also be speculative, advancing by
means of projections and reasoned guesses, as shown in the following
passage from an essay by media analyst Marc Prensky. He argues that
while professors and colleges will always be responsible for teaching
students to learn from the knowledge provided by print texts, it’s about
time for some college or university to be the first to ban physical, that
is to say paper, books on its campus, a controversial proposal to say
the least:
So, as counterintuitive as it may sound, eliminating physical
books from college campuses would be a positive step for our
21st-century students, and, I believe, for 21st-century
scholarship as well. Academics, researchers, and particularly
teachers need to move to the tools of the future. Artifacts
belong in museums, not in our institutions of higher learning.
—Marc Prensky, “In the 21st-Century University, Let’s Ban
Books”

Arguments about the Present
Arguments about the present—what Aristotle terms epideictic or
ceremonial arguments—explore the current values of a society,

82

affirming or challenging its widely shared beliefs and core
assumptions. Epideictic arguments are often made at public and formal
events such as inaugural addresses, sermons, eulogies, memorials, and
graduation speeches. Members of the audience listen carefully as
credible speakers share their wisdom. For example, as the selection of
college commencement speakers has grown increasingly contentious,
Ruth J. Simmons, the first African American woman to head an Ivy
League college, used the opportunity of such an address (herself
standing in for a rejected speaker) to offer a timely and ringing
endorsement of free speech. Her words perfectly illustrate epideictic
rhetoric:
Universities have a special obligation to protect free speech,
open discourse and the value of protest. The collision of views
and ideologies is in the DNA of the academic enterprise. No
collision avoidance technology is needed here. The noise from
this discord may cause others to criticize the legitimacy of the
academic enterprise, but how can knowledge advance without
the questions that overturn misconceptions, push further into
previously impenetrable areas of inquiry and assure us
stunning breakthroughs in human knowledge? If there is
anything that colleges must encourage and protect it is the
persistent questioning of the status quo. Our health as a
nation, our health as women, our health as an industry
requires it.
—Ruth J. Simmons, Smith College, 2014
Perhaps more common than Smith’s impassioned address are values
83

arguments that examine contemporary culture, praising what’s
admirable and blaming what’s not. In the following argument, student
Latisha Chisholm looks at the state of rap music after Tupac Shakur:
With the death of Tupac, not only did one of the most
intriguing rap rivalries of all time die, but the motivation for
rapping seems to have changed. Where money had always
been a plus, now it is obviously more important than wanting
to express the hardships of Black communities. With current
rappers, the positive power that came from the desire to
represent Black people is lost. One of the biggest rappers now
got his big break while talking about sneakers. Others
announce retirement without really having done much for the
soul or for Black people’s morale. I equate new rappers to
NFL players that don’t love the game anymore. They’re only
in it for the money. . . . It looks like the voice of a people has
lost its heart.
—Latisha Chisholm, “Has Rap Lost Its Soul?”
As in many ceremonial arguments, Chisholm here reinforces common
values such as representing one’s community honorably and fairly.

84

Are rappers since Tupac—like Jay Z—only in it for the money? Many epideictic
arguments either praise or blame contemporary culture in this way.

RESPOND●

In a recent magazine, newspaper, or blog, find three editorials—one
that makes a forensic argument, one a deliberative argument, and
one a ceremonial argument. Analyze the arguments by asking these
questions: Who is arguing? What purposes are the writers trying to

85

achieve? To whom are they directing their arguments? Then decide
whether the arguments’ purposes have been achieved and how you
know.

Occasions for Argument
Past

Future

Present

What is it
called?

Forensic

Deliberative

Epideictic

What are
its
concerns?

What happened in the past?

What should be
done in the
future?

Who or what
deserves praise or
blame?

What
does it
look like?

Court decisions, legal briefs,
legislative hearings,
investigative reports,
academic studies

White papers,
proposals, bills,
regulations,
mandates

Eulogies,
graduation
speeches,
inaugural
addresses, roasts

86

Kinds of Argument
Yet another way of categorizing arguments is to consider their status or
stasis—that is, the specific kinds of issues they address. This approach,
called stasis theory, was used in ancient Greek and Roman
civilizations to provide questions designed to help citizens and lawyers
work their way through legal cases. The status questions were posed in
sequence because each depended on answers from the preceding ones.
Together, the queries helped determine the point of contention in an
argument—where the parties disagreed or what exactly had to be
proven. A modern version of those questions might look like the
following:
Did something happen?
What is its nature?
What is its quality or cause?
What actions should be taken?
Each stasis question explores a different aspect of a problem and uses
different evidence or techniques to reach conclusions. You can use
these questions to explore the aspects of any topic you’re considering.
You’ll discover that we use the stasis issues to define key types of
argument in Part 2.

Did Something Happen?
Arguments of Fact
There’s no point in arguing a case until its basic facts are established.
So an argument of fact usually involves a statement that can be
87

proved or disproved with specific evidence or testimony. For example,
the question of pollution of the oceans—is it really occurring?—might
seem relatively easy to settle. Either scientific data prove that the
oceans are being dirtied as a result of human activity, or they don’t.
But to settle the matter, writers and readers need to ask a number of
other questions about the “facts”:
Where did the facts come from?
Are they reliable?
Is there a problem with the facts?
Where did the problem begin and what caused it?
For more on arguments based on facts, see Chapters 4 and 8.

What Is the Nature of the Thing?
Arguments of Definition
Some of the most hotly debated issues in American life today involve
questions of definition: we argue over the nature of the human fetus,
the meaning of “amnesty” for immigrants, the boundaries of sexual
assault. As you might guess, issues of definition have mighty
consequences, and decades of debate may nonetheless leave the matter
unresolved. Here, for example, is how one type of sexual assault is
defined in an important 2007 report submitted to the U.S. Department
of Justice by the National Institute of Justice:
We consider as incapacitated sexual assault any unwanted
sexual contact occurring when a victim is unable to provide
consent or stop what is happening because she is passed out,

88

drugged, drunk, incapacitated, or asleep, regardless of
whether the perpetrator was responsible for her substance use
or whether substances were administered without her
knowledge. We break down incapacitated sexual assault into
four subtypes. . . .
—“The Campus Sexual Assault (CSA) Study: Final Report”
The specifications of the definition go on for another two hundred
words, each of consequence in determining how sexual assault on
college campuses might be understood, measured, and addressed.
Of course many arguments of definition are less weighty than this,
though still hotly contested: Is playing video games a sport? Can
Batman be a tragic figure? Is LeBron James a hero for our age? (For
more about arguments of definition, see Chapter 9.)

What Is the Quality or Cause of
the Thing? Arguments of
Evaluation
Arguments of evaluation present criteria and then measure individual
people, ideas, or things against those standards. For instance, a 2017
article in the Atlantic examined “How Pixar Lost Its Way,” arguing
that “The golden age of Pixar is over.” Chronicling the company’s
success from the first Toy Story (1995), the writer identifies what Pixar
accomplished so well:

89

The theme that the studio mined with greatest success during
its first decade and a half was parenthood, whether real
(Finding Nemo, The Incredibles) or implicit (Monsters, Inc.,
Up). Pixar’s distinctive insight into parent-child relations
stood out from the start, in Toy Story, and lost none of its
power in two innovative and unified sequels.
—Christopher Orr, “How Pixar Lost Its Way”
As we read this article, we are bound to ask what happened: why and
how did Pixar lose its way? And Christopher Orr probes further,
suggesting that the sale of Pixar to Disney and the dependence on
sequel after sequel led to the downturn. As he concludes his analysis of
Pixar’s evolution, Orr distressingly notes the announcement of plans
for Toy Story 4, which unravels the trilogy’s neat arc.

Although evaluations differ from causal analyses, in practice the
boundaries between stasis questions are often porous: particular
arguments have a way of defining their own issues.

90

For much more about arguments of evaluation, see Chapter 10; for
causal arguments, see Chapter 11.

What Actions Should Be Taken?
Proposal Arguments
After facts in a controversy have been confirmed, definitions agreed
on, evaluations made, and causes traced, it may be time for a proposal
argument answering the question Now, what do we do about all this?
For example, in developing an argument about out-of-control student
fees at your college, you might use all the prior stasis questions to
study the issue and determine exactly how much and for what reasons
these costs are escalating. Only then will you be prepared to offer
knowledgeable suggestions for action. In examining a nationwide
move to eliminate remedial education in four-year colleges, John
Cloud offers a notably moderate proposal to address the problem:
Students age twenty-two and over account for 43 percent of
those in remedial classrooms, according to the National
Center for Developmental Education. . . . [But] 55 percent of
those needing remediation must take just one course. Is it too
much to ask them to pay extra for that class or take it at a
community college?
—John Cloud, “Who’s Ready for College?”
For more about proposal arguments, see Chapter 12.

91

The No Child Left Behind Act was signed in 2002 with great hopes and bipartisan
support, but it did not lead to the successes those proposing it had hoped for.

STATIS QUESTIONS AT WORK

Suppose you have an opportunity to speak at a student conference on
the impact of climate change. You are tentatively in favor of
strengthening industrial pollution standards aimed at reducing global
warming trends. But to learn more about the issue, you use the stasis
questions to get started.
Did something happen? Does global warming exist? Maybe not,
say many in the oil and gas industry; at best, evidence for global
warming is inconclusive. Yes, say most scientists and
governments; climate change is real and even seems to be
accelerating. To come to your conclusion, you’ll weigh the facts
carefully and identify problems with opposing arguments.
What is the nature of the thing? Skeptics define climate change

92

as a naturally occurring event; most scientists base their
definitions on change due to human causes. You look at each
definition carefully: How do the definitions foster the goals of each
group? What’s at stake for each group in defining it that way?
What is the quality or cause of the thing? Exploring the differing
assessments of damage done by climate change leads you to ask
who will gain from such analysis: Do oil executives want to protect
their investments? Do scientists want government money for
grants? Where does evidence for the dangers of global warming
come from? Who benefits if the dangers are accepted as real and
present, and who loses?
What actions should be taken? If climate change is occurring
naturally or causing little harm, then arguably nothing needs to be
or can be done. But if it is caused mainly by human activity and
dangers, action is definitely called for (although not everyone may
agree on what such action should be). As you investigate the
proposals being made and the reasons behind them, you come
closer to developing your own argument.

93

Appealing to Audiences
Exploring all the occasions and kinds of arguments available will lead
you to think about the audience(s) you are addressing and the specific
ways you can appeal to them. Audiences for arguments today are
amazingly diverse, from the flesh-and-blood person sitting across a
desk when you negotiate a student loan to your “friends” on social
media, to the “ideal” reader you imagine for whatever you are writing,
to the unknown people around the world who may read a blog you
have posted. The figure below suggests just how many dimensions an
audience can have as writers and readers negotiate their relationships
with a text, whether it be oral, written, or digital.
As you see there, texts usually have intended readers, the people
writers hope and expect to address—let’s say, routine browsers of a
newspaper’s op-ed page. But writers also shape the responses of these
actual readers in ways they imagine as appropriate or desirable—for
example, maneuvering readers of editorials into making focused and
knowledgeable judgments about politics and culture. Such audiences,
as imagined and fashioned by writers within their texts, are called
invoked readers.

94

Readers and writers in context

Making matters even more complicated, readers can respond to
writers’ maneuvers by choosing to join the invoked audiences, to resist
them, or maybe even to ignore them. Arguments may also attract “real”
readers from groups not among those that writers originally imagined
or expected to reach. You may post something on the Web, for
instance, and discover that people you did not intend to address are
commenting on it. (For them, the experience may be like reading
private email intended for someone else: they find themselves drawn to
and fascinated by your ideas!) As authors of this book, we think about
students like you whenever we write: you are our intended readers. But
notice how in dozens of ways, from the images we choose to the tone
of our language, we also invoke an audience of people who take
writing arguments seriously. We want you to become that kind of
reader.
So audiences are very complicated and subtle and challenging, and yet
you somehow have to attract and even persuade them. As always,
Aristotle offers an answer. He identified three time-tested appeals that
95

speakers and writers can use to reach almost any audience, labeling
them pathos, ethos, and logos—strategies as effective today as they
were in ancient times, though we usually think of them in slightly
different terms. Used in the right way and deployed at the right
moment, emotional, ethical, and logical appeals have enormous power,
as we’ll see in subsequent chapters.

RESPOND●
You can probably provide concise descriptions of the intended
audience for most textbooks you have encountered. But can you
detect their invoked audiences—that is, the way their authors are
imagining (and perhaps shaping) the readers they would like to
have? Carefully review this entire first chapter, looking for signals
and strategies that might identify the audience and readers invoked
by the authors of Everything’s an Argument.

Emotional Appeals: Pathos
Emotional appeals, or pathos, generate emotions (fear, pity, love,
anger, jealousy) that the writer hopes will lead the audience to accept a
claim. Here is an alarming sentence from a book by Barry B. LePatner
arguing that Americans need to make hard decisions about repairing
the country’s failing infrastructure:
When the I-35W Bridge in Minneapolis shuddered, buckled,
and collapsed during the evening rush hour on Wednesday,
August 1, 2007, plunging 111 vehicles into the Mississippi
River and sending thirteen people to their deaths, the sudden,

96

apparently inexplicable nature of the event at first gave the
appearance of an act of God.
—Too Big to Fall: America’s Failing Infrastructure and the
Way Forward
If you ever drive across a bridge, LePatner has probably gotten your
attention. His sober and yet descriptive language helps readers imagine
the dire consequence of neglected road maintenance and bad design
decisions. Making an emotional appeal like this can dramatize an issue
and sometimes even create a bond between writer and readers. (For
more about emotional appeals, see Chapter 2.)

Ethical Appeals: Ethos
When writers or speakers come across as trustworthy, audiences are
likely to listen to and accept their arguments. That trustworthiness
(along with fairness and respect) is a mark of ethos, or credibility.
Showing that you know what you are talking about exerts an ethical
appeal, as does emphasizing that you share values with and respect
your audience. Once again, here’s Barry LePatner from Too Big to
Fall, shoring up his authority for writing about problems with
America’s roads and bridges by invoking the ethos of people even
more credible:
For those who would seek to dismiss the facts that support the
thesis of this book, I ask them to consult the many
professional engineers in state transportation departments
who face these problems on a daily basis. These professionals

97

understand the physics of bridge and road design, and the real
problems of ignoring what happens to steel and concrete when
they are exposed to the elements without a strict regimen of
ongoing maintenance.
It’s a sound rhetorical move to enhance credibility this way. For more
about ethical appeals, see Chapter 3.

Logical Appeals: Logos
Appeals to logic, or logos, are often given prominence and authority in
U.S. culture: “Just the facts, ma’am,” a famous early TV detective on
Dragnet used to say. Indeed, audiences respond well to the use of
reasons and evidence—to the presentation of facts, statistics, credible
testimony, cogent examples, or even a narrative or story that embodies
a sound reason in support of an argument. Following almost two
hundred pages of facts, statistics, case studies, and arguments about the
sad state of American bridges, LePatner can offer this sober, logical,
and inevitable conclusion:
We can no longer afford to ignore the fact that we are in the
midst of a transportation funding crisis, which has been
exacerbated by an even larger and longer-term problem: how
we choose to invest in our infrastructure. It is not difficult to
imagine the serious consequences that will unfold if we fail to
address the deplorable conditions of our bridges and roads,
including the increasingly higher costs we will pay for goods
and services that rely on that transportation network, and a
concomitant reduction in our standard of living.
98

For more about logical appeals, see Chapter 4.

Bringing It Home: Kairos and the
Rhetorical Situation
In Greek mythology, Kairos—the youngest son of Zeus—was the god
of opportunity. He is most often depicted as running, and his most
unusual characteristic is a shock of hair on his forehead. As Kairos
dashes by, you have a chance to seize that lock of hair, thereby seizing
the opportune moment; once he passes you by, however, you’ve
missed your chance.

Time as Occasion (Kairos) by Italian Renaissance painter Francesco de’ Rossi

Kairos is also a term used to describe the most suitable time and place
for making an argument and the most opportune ways of expressing it.
It is easy to point to rhetorical moments, when speakers find exactly
the right words to stir—and stir up—an audience: Franklin Roosevelt’s
99

“We have nothing to fear but fear itself,” Ronald Reagan’s “Mr.
Gorbachev, tear down this wall,” and of course Martin Luther King
Jr.’s majestic “I have a dream. . . .” But kairos matters just as much in
less dramatic situations, whenever speakers or writers must size up the
core elements of a rhetorical situation to decide how best to make their
expertise and ethos work for a particular message aimed at a specific
audience. The diagram below hints at the dynamic complexity of the
rhetorical situation.
But rhetorical situations are embedded in contexts of enormous social
complexity. The moment you find a subject, you inherit all the
knowledge, history, culture, and technological significations that
surround it. To lesser and greater degrees (depending on the subject),
you also bring personal circumstances into the field—perhaps your
gender, your race, your religion, your economic class, your habits of
language. And all those issues weigh also upon the people you write to
and for.

100

The rhetorical situation

So considering your rhetorical situation calls on you to think hard
about the notion of kairos. Being aware of your rhetorical moment
means being able to understand and take advantage of dynamic,
shifting circumstances and to choose the best (most timely) proofs and
evidence for a particular place, situation, and audience. It means
seizing moments and enjoying opportunities, not being overwhelmed
by them. Doing so might even lead you to challenge the title of this
text: is everything an argument?
That’s what makes writing arguments exciting.
RESPOND●

Take a look at the bumper sticker below, and then analyze it. What
is its purpose? What kind of argument is it? Which of the stasis
questions does it most appropriately respond to? To what

101

audiences does it appeal? What appeals does it make and how?

CULTURAL CONTEXTS FOR ARGUMENT

Considering What’s “Normal”
If you want to communicate effectively with people across cultures,
then learn about the traditions in those cultures and examine the
norms guiding your own behavior:
Explore your assumptions! Most of us regard our ways of thinking
as “normal” or “right.” Such assumptions guide our judgments
about what works in persuasive situations. But just because it
may seem natural to speak bluntly in arguments, consider that
others may find such aggression startling or even alarming.
Remember: ways of arguing differ widely across cultures. Pay
attention to how people from groups or cultures other than your
own argue, and be sensitive to different paths of thinking you’ll

102

encounter as well as to differences in language.
Don’t assume that all people share your cultural values, ethical
principles, or political assumptions. People across the world have
different ways of defining family, work, or happiness. As you
present arguments to them, consider that they may be content
with their different ways of organizing their lives and societies.
Respect the differences among individuals within a given group.
Don’t expect that every member of a community behaves—or
argues—in the same way or shares the same beliefs. Avoid
thinking, for instance, that there is a single Asian, African, or
Hispanic culture or that Europeans are any less diverse or more
predictable than Americans or Canadians in their thinking. In
other words, be skeptical of stereotypes.

103

CHAPTER 2 Arguments Based on Emotion:
Pathos

Emotional appeals (appeals to pathos) are powerful tools for
influencing what people think and believe. We all make decisions—
even including the most important ones—based on our feelings. That’s
what many environmental advocates are counting on when they use
images like those above to warn of the catastrophic effects of global
warming on the earth and its peoples. The first image shows a boy and
his boat on what used to be a lake but is now cracked dry earth; the
second, a polar bear stranded on a small ice floe as the oceans rise
around it; and the third, a graphic design of a melting earth.
Of course, some people don’t believe the warnings about climate
change, arguing instead that they represent a hoax and that even if the
climate is changing, it is not a result of human activities. And, as we
would expect, this opposite side of the argument also uses emotionally
persuasive images, like the following one from American Patriot, a
news commentary YouTube channel.

104

The arguments packed into these four images all appeal to emotion,
and research has shown us that we often make decisions based on just
such appeals. So when you hear that formal or academic arguments
should rely solely on facts to convince us, remember that facts alone
often won’t carry the day, even for a worthy cause. The largely
successful case made for same-sex marriage provides a notable
example of a movement that persuaded people equally by virtue of the
reasonableness and the passion of its claims. Like many political and
social debates, though, the issue provoked powerful emotions on every
side—feelings that sometimes led to extreme words and tactics.
Recent research also shows that images that evoke fear are less
effective than those that arouse interest, worry, or hope. When the Yale
Center for Climate Change Communication asked both supporters and
deniers of climate change what they felt when they thought about this
topic, they got the following results:
105

In spite of the findings from such research, we don’t have to look hard
for arguments that appeal to fear, hatred, envy, and greed, or for
campaigns intended to drive wedges between economic or social
groups, making them fearful or resentful. For that reason alone, writers
should not use emotional appeals rashly or casually. But used carefully
and ethically, appeals to emotions—especially ones like worry or hope
—can be very helpful in moving an audience to action. (For more
about emotional fallacies, see “Fallacies of Emotional Argument” in
Chapter 5.)

106

Reading Critically for
Pathos
On February 24, 2014, Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, fresh from two
fact-finding trips to Cuba, described his experiences on the Senate
floor in a speech praising that island nation’s accomplishments in
health care and education and urging a normalization of Cuban–
American relationships, a recommendation taken up by then-President
Obama and Cuban President Raul Castro, who announced on
December 17, 2014, that such normalization would begin. Many in the
United States applauded this move, but others, including many Cuban
Americans in the Miami area, objected strenuously. Florida senator
Marco Rubio was one of those speaking most passionately against
normalization of relationships. Shortly after Senator Harkin’s talk
about the “fascinating” socialist experiment ninety miles from the coast
of the United States, Rubio delivered a fifteen-minute rejoinder to
Harkin without a script or teleprompter. After a sarcastic taunt
(“Sounded like he had a wonderful trip visiting what he described as a
real paradise”), Rubio quickly turned serious, even angry, as he offered
his take on the country Harkin had toured:
I heard him also talk about these great doctors that they have
in Cuba. I have no doubt they’re very talented. I’ve met a
bunch of them. You know where I met them? In the United
States because they defected. Because in Cuba, doctors would
rather drive a taxi cab or work in a hotel than be a doctor. I
wonder if they spoke to him about the outbreak of cholera

107

that they’ve been unable to control, or about the three-tiered
system of health care that exists where foreigners and
government officials get health care much better than that
that’s available to the general population.
Language this heated and pointed has risks, especially when a young
legislator is taking on a far more experienced colleague. But Rubio, the
son of Cuban immigrants, isn’t shy about allowing his feelings to
show: in the following passage, he uses the kind of emotion-stirring
verbal repetition common in oratory to drive home his major concern
about Cuba, its influence on other nations:
Let me tell you what the Cubans are really good at, because
they don’t know how to run their economy, they don’t know
how to build, they don’t know how to govern a people. What
they are really good at is repression. What they are really
good at is shutting off information to the Internet and to radio
and television and social media. That’s what they’re really
good at. And they’re not just good at it domestically, they’re
good exporters of these things.
When the Obama administration indeed loosened restrictions on travel
to Cuba and began establishing diplomatic relations, Rubio stuck to his
guns, consistently and emotionally arguing against this move. And
while he was a bitter primary campaign rival of Donald Trump, who
ridiculed Rubio during the campaign as “little Marco” who was always
sweating (“It looked like he had just jumped into a swimming pool
with his clothes on”), once Trump was elected president Rubio
continued his impassioned campaign to reverse policy on Cuba. So in
108

June 2017, when President Trump announced tightening of restrictions
on travel to Cuba and other changes to the Obama policy, Rubio spoke
glowingly of the president, saying that “A year and a half ago, an
American president landed in Havana and outstretched his hand to a
regime. Today, a new president lands in Miami to reach out his hand to
the people of Cuba.” It’s likely that we have not heard the end of this
debate, and that we will continue to hear emotion-filled arguments on
all sides of this contentious issue.

Senator Rubio with President Trump

RESPOND●
Working with a classmate, find a speech or a print editorial that you
think uses emotional appeals effectively but sparingly, in an
understated way. Make a list of those appeals and briefly explain
how each one appeals to an audience. What difference would it

109

have made if the emotional appeals had been presented more
forcefully and dramatically? Would doing so have been likely to
appeal more strongly to the audience—and why or why not? What is
at stake for the writer or speaker in such situations, in terms of
credibility and ethos? What are the advantages of evoking emotions
in support of your claims or ideas?

110

Using Emotions to Build
Bridges
You may sometimes want to use emotions to connect with readers to
assure them that you understand their experiences or “feel their pain,”
to borrow a sentiment popularized by President Bill Clinton. Such a
bridge is especially important when you’re writing about matters that
readers regard as sensitive. Before they’ll trust you, they’ll want
assurances that you understand the issues in depth. If you strike the
right emotional note, you’ll establish an important connection. That’s
what Apple founder Steve Jobs does in a much-admired 2005
commencement address in which he tells the audience that he doesn’t
have a fancy speech, just three stories from his life:
My second story is about love and loss. I was lucky. I found
what I loved to do early in life. Woz [Steve Wozniak] and I
started Apple in my parents’ garage when I was twenty. We
worked hard and in ten years, Apple had grown from just the
two of us in a garage into a $2 billion company with over four
thousand employees. We’d just released our finest creation,
the Macintosh, a year earlier, and I’d just turned thirty, and
then I got fired. How can you get fired from a company you
started? Well, as Apple grew, we hired someone who I
thought was very talented to run the company with me, and
for the first year or so, things went well. But then our visions
of the future began to diverge, and eventually we had a falling
out. When we did, our board of directors sided with him, and

111

so at thirty, I was out, and very publicly out. . . .
I didn’t see it then, but it turned out that getting fired from
Apple was the best thing that could have ever happened to me.
The heaviness of being successful was replaced by the
lightness of being a beginner again, less sure about everything.
It freed me to enter one of the most creative periods in my life.
During the next five years I started a company named NeXT,
another company named Pixar and fell in love with an
amazing woman who would become my wife. Pixar went on to
create the world’s first computer-animated feature film, Toy
Story, and is now the most successful animation studio in the
world.
—Steve Jobs, “You’ve Got to Find What You Love, Jobs
Says”
In no obvious way is Jobs’s recollection a formal argument. But it
prepares his audience to accept the advice he’ll give later in his speech,
at least partly because he’s speaking from meaningful personal
experiences.
A more obvious way to build an emotional tie is simply to help readers
identify with your experiences. If, like Georgina Kleege, you were
blind and wanted to argue for more sensible attitudes toward blind
people, you might ask readers in the first paragraph of your argument
to confront their prejudices. Here Kleege, a writer and college
instructor who in July 2017 was featured on PBS’s “Brief but
Spectacular” video series, makes an emotional point by telling a story:
112

Alexandra Dal’s cartoon “Questions” offers insight into what it
feels like to be on the receiving end of racial microaggressions on a
regular basis.
LINK TO Alexandra Dal, “Questions,” in Chapter 27

I tell the class, “I am legally blind.” There is a pause, a
collective intake of breath. I feel them look away uncertainly
and then look back. After all, I just said I couldn’t see. Or did
I? I had managed to get there on my own—no cane, no dog,
none of the usual trappings of blindness. Eyeing me askance
now, they might detect that my gaze is not quite focused. . . .
They watch me glance down, or towards the door where
someone’s coming in late. I’m just like anyone else.
—Georgina Kleege, “Call It Blindness”
Given the way she narrates the first day of class, readers are as likely to
identify with the students as with Kleege, imagining themselves sitting
in a classroom, facing a sightless instructor, confronting their own
prejudices about the blind. Kleege wants to put her audience on the
edge emotionally.
Let’s consider another rhetorical situation: how do you win over an
audience when the logical claims that you’re making are likely to go
against what many in the audience believe? Once again, a slightly risky
appeal to emotions on a personal level may work. That’s the tack that
Michael Pollan takes in bringing readers to consider that “the great
113

moral struggle of our time will be for the rights of animals.” In
introducing his lengthy exploratory argument, Pollan uses personal
experience to appeal to his audience:
The first time I opened Peter Singer’s Animal Liberation, I
was dining alone at the Palm, trying to enjoy a rib-eye steak
cooked medium-rare. If this sounds like a good recipe for
cognitive dissonance (if not indigestion), that was sort of the
idea. Preposterous as it might seem to supporters of animal
rights, what I was doing was tantamount to reading Uncle
Tom’s Cabin on a plantation in the Deep South in 1852.
—Michael Pollan, “An Animal’s Place”

A visual version of Michael Pollan’s rhetorical situation

114

In creating a vivid image of his first encounter with Singer’s book,
Pollan’s opening builds a bridge between himself as a person trying to
enter into the animal rights debate in a fair and open-minded, if still
skeptical, way and readers who might be passionate about either side of
this argument.

115

Using Emotions to Sustain
an Argument
You can also use emotional appeals to make logical claims stronger or
more memorable. In a TV political attack ad, a video clip of a
scowling, blustering candidate talking dismissively about an important
issue has the potential to damage that candidate considerably. In
contrast, a human face smiling or showing honest emotion can sell just
about any product—that’s why so many political figures now routinely
smile at any camera they see. Using emotion is tricky, however, and it
can sometimes backfire. Lay on too much feeling—especially
sentiments like outrage, pity, or shame, which make people
uncomfortable—and you may offend the very audiences you hoped to
convince.
Still, strong emotions can add energy to a passage or an entire
argument, as they do in Richard Lloyd Parry’s Ghosts of the Tsunami:
Death and Life in Japan’s Disaster Zone. In this passage, Parry
describes in vivid detail the scene that greeted one mother the day the
2011 earthquake hit:
On the near side was Hitomi’s home village of Magaki and
then an expanse of paddies stretching to the Fuji lake; the
polished blue and red roofs of other hamlets glittered at the
edges of the hills. It was an archetypal view of the Japanese
countryside: abundant nature, tamed and cultivated by man.
But now she struggled to make sense of what she saw.

116

Everything up to and in between the hills was water. There
was only water: buildings and fields had gone. The water was
black in the early light; floating on it were continents and
trailing archipelagos of dark scummy rubble, brown in color
and composed of tree trunks. Every patch of land that was not
elevated had been absorbed by the river, which had been
annexed in turn by the sea.
In this new geography, the Fuji lake was no longer a lake. . . .
The river was no longer a river. . . . Okawa Elementary
School was invisible, hidden from view by the great shoulder
of hills from which Hitomi looked down. But the road, the
houses, and Magaki, where Hitomi’s home and family had
been, were washed from the earth.

A wrecked car lies submerged in floodwaters after the earthquake and tsunami
in Fukushima prefecture, Japan.

117

As this example suggests, it can be difficult to gauge how much
emotion will work in a given argument. Some issues—such as racism,
immigration, abortion, and gun control—provoke strong feelings and,
as a result, are often argued on emotional terms. But even issues that
seem deadly dull—such as reform of federal student loan programs—
can be argued passionately when proposed changes in these programs
are set in human terms: reduce support for college loans and Kai,
Riley, and Jayden end up in dead-end, low-paying jobs; don’t reform
the program and we’re looking at another Wall Street–sized loan
bailout and subsequent recession. Both alternatives might scare people
into paying enough attention to take political action.

118

Using Humor
Humor has always played an important role in argument, sometimes as
the sugar that makes the medicine go down. You can slip humor into
an argument to put readers at ease, thereby making them more open to
a proposal you have to offer. It’s hard to say no when you’re laughing.
Humor also makes otherwise sober people suspend their judgment and
even their prejudices, perhaps because the surprise and naughtiness of
wit are combustive: they provoke laughter or smiles, not reflection.
Who can resist a no-holds-barred attack on a famous personality, such
as this assessment of model/actor Cara Delevingne in the 2017 sci-fi
flop Valerian:
As played by model Cara Delevingne with a smirk that just
won’t quit, Laureline is way ballsier than Valerian, who still
looks in need of a mother’s love. She can pose and preen like
an expert in her space gear—and those eyebrows!—but
there’s no there there.
—Peter Travers, in Rolling Stone
Humor deployed cleverly may be why TV shows like South Park and
Modern Family became popular with mainstream audiences, despite
their willingness to explore controversial themes. Similarly, it’s
possible to make a point through humor that might not work that well
in more academic writing. The subject of standardized testing, for
instance, has generated much heat and light, as researchers and
teachers and policy makers argue endlessly over whether it is helpful—
or not. TV talk show host and satirist John Oliver took a crack at the
119

subject in a segment of Last Week Tonight, arguing that the testing
business in America has gotten way out of hand and that it does not
help students but rather funnels money into the coffers of companies
such as Pearson, who dominate the testing market.

After introducing the subject, Oliver goes on one of his signature
humorous rampages, skewering the country’s obsession with testing:
Look, standardized tests are the fastest way to terrify any
child with five letters outside of just whispering the word
“clown.”
After showing a video clip of kids rapping about the joys of testing,
Oliver continues:
Standardized tests look like amazing fun. I wish I could take
one right now: bring me a pencil please—a number 2 pencil!
But it just gets better, because an elementary school in Texas
120

even held a test-themed pep rally featuring a monkey mascot.
Fade to a monkey cavorting around the auditorium stage, swooning
over testing fun and yelling “here comes the monkey.” Then after a
video clip showing teachers describing how many students get
physically sick while taking tests (“Something is wrong with our
system when we just assume that a certain number of kids will vomit”),
Oliver asks,
Is it any wonder that students are sick of tests? . . . If
standardized tests are bad for teachers and bad for kids, who
exactly are they good for? Well, it turns out, they’re operated
by companies like Pearson, who control forty percent of the
testing market.
Pearson, Oliver says, is
the equivalent of Time Warner Cable: either you never had
an interaction with them and don’t care, or they ruined your
[entire] life.
Viewers may not agree with Oliver’s claims about standardized testing,
but his use of humor and satire certainly gets him a large viewing
audience and keeps them listening to the end.
A writer or speaker can even use humor to deal with sensitive issues.
For example, sports commentator Bob Costas, given the honor of
eulogizing the great baseball player Mickey Mantle, couldn’t ignore
problems in Mantle’s life. So he argues for Mantle’s greatness by

121

admitting the man’s weaknesses indirectly through humor:
It brings to mind a story Mickey liked to tell on himself and
maybe some of you have heard it. He pictured himself at the
pearly gates, met by St. Peter, who shook his head and said,
“Mick, we checked the record. We know some of what went
on. Sorry, we can’t let you in. But before you go, God wants to
know if you’d sign these six dozen baseballs.”
—Bob Costas, “Eulogy for Mickey Mantle”
Similarly, politicians may use humor to deal with issues they couldn’t
acknowledge in any other way. Here, for example, is former president
George W. Bush at the 2004 Radio and TV Correspondents’ Dinner
discussing his much-mocked intellect:
Those stories about my intellectual capacity do get under my
skin. You know, for a while I even thought my staff believed
it. There on my schedule first thing every morning it said,
“Intelligence briefing.”
—George W. Bush
Not all humor is well-intentioned or barb-free. In fact, among the most
powerful forms of emotional argument is ridicule—humor aimed at a
particular target. Eighteenth-century poet and critic Samuel Johnson
was known for his stinging and humorous put-downs, such as this
comment to an aspiring writer: “Your manuscript is both good and
original, but the part that is good is not original and the part that is

122

original is not good.” (Expect your own writing teachers to be kinder.)
In our own time, the Onion has earned a reputation for its mastery of
both ridicule and satire, the art of using over-the-top humor to make a
serious point.
But because ridicule is a double-edged sword, it requires a deft hand to
wield it. Humor that reflects bad taste discredits a writer completely, as
does satire that misses its mark. Unless your target deserves riposte and
you can be very funny, it’s usually better to steer clear of such humor.

123

Using Arguments Based
on Emotion
You don’t want to play puppet master with people’s emotions when
you write arguments, but it’s a good idea to spend some time early in
your work thinking about how you want readers to feel as they
consider your persuasive claims. For example, would readers of your
editorial about campus traffic policies be more inclined to agree with
you if you made them envy faculty privileges, or would arousing their
sense of fairness work better? What emotional appeals might persuade
meat eaters to consider a vegan diet—or vice versa? Would sketches of
stage props on a Web site persuade people to buy a season ticket to the
theater, or would you spark more interest by featuring pictures of
costumed performers?
Consider, too, the effect that a story can have on readers. Writers and
journalists routinely use what are called human-interest stories to give
presence to issues or arguments. You can do the same, using a
particular incident to evoke sympathy, understanding, outrage, or
amusement. Take care, though, to tell an honest story.

RESPOND●
1. To what specific emotions do the following slogans, sales
pitches, and maxims appeal?
“Make America Great Again” (Donald Trump rallying cry)
“Just do it.” (ad for Nike)

124

“Think different.” (ad for Apple computers)
“Reach out and touch someone.” (ad for AT&T)
“There are some things money can’t buy. For everything else,
there’s MasterCard.” (slogan for MasterCard)
“Have it your way.” (slogan for Burger King)
“The ultimate driving machine.” (slogan for BMW)
“It’s everywhere you want to be.” (slogan for Visa)
“Don’t mess with Texas!” (anti-litter campaign slogan)
“American by Birth. Rebel by Choice.” (slogan for HarleyDavidson)
2. Bring a magazine to class, and analyze the emotional appeals
in as many full-page ads as you can. Then practice your critical
reading skills by classifying those ads by types of emotional
appeal, and see whether you can connect the appeals to the
subject or target audience of the magazine. Compare your
results with those of your classmates, and discuss your
findings. For instance, how exactly are the ads in publications
such as Cosmopolitan, Wired, Sports Illustrated, Motor Trend,
and Smithsonian adapted to their specific audiences?
3. How do arguments based on emotion work in different media?
Are such arguments more or less effective in books, articles,
television (both news and entertainment shows), films,
brochures, magazines, email, Web sites, the theater, street
protests, and so on? You might explore how a single medium
handles emotional appeals or compare different media. For
example, why do the comments sections of blogs seem to

125

encourage angry outbursts? Are newspapers an emotionally
colder source of information than television news programs? If
so, why?
4. Spend some time looking for arguments that use ridicule or
humor to make their point: check out your favorite Twitter
feeds or blogs; watch for bumper stickers, posters, or
advertisements; and listen to popular song lyrics. Bring one or
two examples to class, and be ready to explain how the humor
makes an emotional appeal and whether it’s effective.

126

CHAPTER 3 Arguments Based on Character:
Ethos

Whenever you read anything—whether it’s a news article, an
advertisement, a speech, or a tweet—you no doubt subconsciously
analyze the message for a sense of the character and credibility of the
sender: Is this someone I know and trust? Does the Fox News reporter
—or the Doctors Without Borders Web site—seem biased, and if so,
how? Why should I believe an advertisement for a car? Is this scholar
really an authority on the subject? Our culture teaches us to be
skeptical of most messages, especially those that bombard us with
slogans, and such reasonable doubt is a crucial skill in reading and
evaluating arguments.
For that reason, people and institutions that hope to influence us do
everything they can to establish their character and credibility, what
ancient rhetors referred to as ethos. And sometimes slogans such as
“All the News That’s Fit to Print,” “The Most Trusted Name in News,”
or “Lean In” can be effective. At the very least, if a phrase is repeated
often enough, it begins to sound plausible. Maybe Fox News really IS
the most watched and most trusted news source!

127

But establishing character usually takes more than repetition, as
marketers of all kinds know. It arises from credentials actually earned
in some way. In the auto industry, for instance, Subaru builds on its
customer loyalty by telling buyers that love makes a Subaru, and
companies such as Toyota, General Motors, and Nissan are hustling to
present themselves as environmentally responsible producers of fuelefficient, low-emission cars—the Prius, Bolt, and Leaf. BMW, maker
of “the ultimate driving machine,” points to its fuel-sipping i3 and i8
cars as evidence of its commitment to “sustainable mobility.” And
Elon Musk (who builds rockets as well as Tesla cars) polishes his
good-citizenship bona fides by releasing an affordable mass market
electric car and by sharing his electric vehicle patents with other
manufacturers. All of these companies realize that their future success
is linked to an ability to project a convincing ethos for themselves and
their products.
If corporations and institutions can establish an ethos, consider how
much character matters when we think about people in the public
arena. Perhaps no individual managed a more exceptional assertion of
personal ethos than Jorge Mario Bergoglio did after he became Pope
Francis on March 13, 2013, following the abdication of Benedict XVI
—a man many found scholarly, cold, and out of touch with the modern
world. James Carroll, writing for the New Yorker, identifies the precise
moment when the world realized that it was dealing with a new sort of
pope:
“Who am I to judge?” With those five words, spoken in late
July [2013] in reply to a reporter’s question about the status

128

of gay priests in the Church, Pope Francis stepped away from
the disapproving tone, the explicit moralizing typical of popes
and bishops.
—James Carroll, “Who Am I to Judge?”
Carroll goes on to explain that Francis quickly established his ethos
with a series of specific actions, decisions, and moments of
identification with ordinary people, marking him as someone even
nonbelievers might listen to and respect:
As pope, Francis has simplified the Renaissance regalia of the
papacy by abandoning fur-trimmed velvet capes, choosing to
live in a two-room apartment instead of the Apostolic Palace,
and replacing the papal Mercedes with a Ford Focus. Instead
of the traditional red slip-ons, Francis wears ordinary black
shoes. . . . Yet Francis didn’t criticize the choices of other
prelates. “He makes changes without attacking people,” a
Jesuit official told me. In his interview with La Civiltà
Cattolica, Francis said, “My choices, including those related to
the day-to-day aspects of life, like the use of a modest car, are
related to a spiritual discernment that responds to a need that
arises from looking at things, at people, and from reading the
signs of the times.”

129

In that last sentence, Francis acknowledges that ethos is gained, in part,
through identification with one’s audience and era. And this man,
movingly photographed embracing the sick and disfigured, also posed
for selfies!
You can see, then, why Aristotle treats ethos as a powerful
argumentative appeal. Ethos creates quick and sometimes almost
irresistible connections between readers and arguments. We observe
people, groups, or institutions making and defending claims all the
time and inevitably ask ourselves, Should we pay attention to them?
Can we rely on them? Do we dare to trust them? Consider, though, that
the same questions will be asked about you and your work, especially
in academic settings.

130

Thinking Critically about
Arguments Based on
Character
Put simply, arguments based on character (ethos) depend on trust. We
tend to accept arguments from those we trust, and we trust them
(whether individuals, groups, or institutions) in good part because of
their reputations. Three main elements—credibility, authority, and
unselfish or clear motives—add up to ethos.
To answer serious and important questions, we often turn to
professionals (doctors, lawyers, engineers, teachers, pastors) or to
experts (those with knowledge and experience) for good advice. Based
on their backgrounds, such people come with their ethos already
established. Thus, appeals or arguments about character often turn on
claims like these:
A person (or group or institution) is or is not trustworthy or
credible on this issue.
A person (or group or institution) does or does not have the
authority to speak to this issue.
A person (or group or institution) does or does not have unselfish
or clear motives for addressing this subject.

131

Establishing
Trustworthiness and
Credibility
Trustworthiness and credibility speak to a writer’s honesty, respect for
an audience and its values, and plain old likability. Sometimes a sense
of humor can play an important role in getting an audience to listen to
or “like” you. It’s no accident that all but the most serious speeches
begin with a joke or funny story: the humor puts listeners at ease and
helps them identify with the speaker. Writer J. K. Rowling, for
example, puts her audience (and herself) at ease early in the
commencement address she delivered at Harvard by getting real about
such speeches, recalling her own commencement:
The speaker that day was the distinguished British
philosopher Baroness Mary Warnock. Reflecting on her
speech has helped me enormously in writing this one, because
it turns out that I can’t remember a single word she said.
—J. K. Rowling, “The Fringe Benefits of Failure, and the
Importance of Imagination”

The UMass Amherst Information Security department uses humor
in its posters reminding students that their pets’ names are not
the best choice for a secure password.

132

LINK TO McKenzie, “Getting Personal about Cybersecurity,” in
Chapter 26

In just two sentences, Rowling pokes fun at herself and undercuts the
expectation that graduation addresses change people’s lives. For an
audience well disposed toward her already, Rowling has likely lived up
to expectations.
But using humor to enhance your credibility may be more common in
oratory than in the kind of writing you’ll do in school. Fortunately, you
have many options, one being simply to make plausible claims and
then back them up with evidence. Academic audiences appreciate a
reasonable disposition; we will discuss this approach at greater length
in the next chapter.
You can also establish trustworthiness by connecting your own beliefs
to core principles that are well established and widely respected. This
strategy is particularly effective when your position seems to be—at
first glance, at least—a threat to traditional values. For example, when
former Smith College president Ruth J. Simmons describes her
professional self to a commencement audience, she presents her
acquired reputation in terms that align perfectly with contemporary
values:
For my part, I was cast as a troublemaker in my early career
and accepted the disapproval that accompanies the expression
of unpopular views: unpopular views about disparate pay for
women and minorities; unpopular views about sexual
harassment; unpopular views about exclusionary practices in
133

our universities.
—Ruth J. Simmons
It’s fine to be a rebel when you are on the right side of history.
Writers who establish their credibility seem trustworthy. But
sometimes, to be credible, you have to admit limitations, too, as New
York Times columnist Frank Bruni does as he positions himself in
relation to issues of oppression and deep-seated bias in an editorial
titled “I’m a White Man: Hear Me Out.” First acknowledging his racial
and socioeconomic privilege as a white man from an upper-class
background (private school, backyard swimming pool), Bruni then
addresses another, less-privileged facet of his identity:
But wait. I’m gay. . . . Gay from a different, darker day, . . .
when gay stereotypes went unchallenged, gay jokes drew
hearty laughter and exponentially more Americans were
closeted than out. . . . Then AIDS spread, and . . . our rallying
cry, “silence = death,” defined marginalization as well as any
words could.
—Frank Bruni, “I’m a White Man: Hear Me Out”
Making such concessions to readers sends a strong signal that you’ve
looked critically at your own position and can therefore be trusted
when you turn to arguing its merits. Speaking to readers directly, using
I or you or us, can also help you connect with them, as can using
contractions and everyday or colloquial language—both strategies

134

employed by Bruni. In other situations, you may find that a more
formal tone gives your claims greater credibility. You’ll be making
such choices as you search for the ethos that represents you best.
In fact, whenever you write an essay or present an idea, you are
sending signals about your credibility, whether you intend to or not. If
your ideas are reasonable, your sources are reliable, and your language
is appropriate to the project, you suggest to academic readers that
you’re someone whose ideas might deserve attention. Details matter:
helpful graphs, tables, charts, or illustrations may carry weight with
readers, as will the visual attractiveness of your text, whether in print
or digital form. Obviously, correct spelling, grammar, and mechanics
are important too. And though you might not worry about it now, at
some point you may need letters of recommendation from instructors
or supervisors. How will they remember you? Often chiefly from the
ethos you have established in your work. Think about that.

135

Claiming Authority
Rob Greenfield establishes his ethos right in the title of his blog
post, “An Argument against Veganism . . . from a Vegan.”
LINK TO Greenfield, “An Argument against Veganism . . . from a
Vegan,” in Chapter 24

When you read or listen to an argument, you have every right to ask
about the writer’s authority: What does he know about the subject?
What experiences does she have that make her especially
knowledgeable? Why should I pay attention to this person? When you
offer an argument yourself, you have to anticipate and be prepared to
answer questions like these, either directly or indirectly.
How does someone construct an authoritative ethos? In an essay about
John McCain’s decision to vote against a Senate bill to repeal the
Affordable Care Act, AP reporter Laurie Kellman notes some of
McCain’s experiences that help build his credibility:
Longtime colleagues . . . say [McCain] developed his
fearlessness as a navy aviator held as a prisoner for more than
five years in Vietnam. Resilience, they say, has fueled his long
Senate career and helped him overcome two failed
presidential campaigns. For some, McCain has become the
moral voice of the Republican Party.
—Laurie Kellman, “Cancer Isn’t Silencing McCain”
136

Here Kellman stresses McCain’s length of service in the Senate as well
as his military service and prisoner of war status, and she refers to him
as a “standard bearer” and “moral voice” of the Republican Party. In
doing so, she indicates that McCain’s ethos is hard won and to be taken
seriously.

Senator John McCain

Of course, writers establish their authority in various ways. Sometimes
the assertion of ethos will be bold and personal, as it is when writer and
activist Terry Tempest Williams attacks those who poisoned the Utah
deserts with nuclear radiation. What gives her the right to speak on this
subject? Not scientific expertise, but gut-wrenching personal
experience:
I belong to the Clan of One-Breasted Women. My mother, my
grandmothers, and six aunts have all had mastectomies. Seven
are dead. The two who survive have just completed rounds of
137

chemotherapy and radiation.
I’ve had my own problems: two biopsies for breast cancer and
a small tumor between my ribs diagnosed as a “borderline
malignancy.”
—Terry Tempest Williams, “The Clan of One-Breasted
Women”
We are willing to listen to Williams because she has lived with the
nuclear peril she will deal with in the remainder of her essay.
Other means of claiming authority are less dramatic. By simply
attaching titles to their names, writers assert that they hold medical or
legal or engineering degrees, or some other important credentials. Or
they may mention the number of years they’ve worked in a given field
or the distinguished positions they have held. As a reader, you’ll pay
more attention to an argument about sustainability offered by a
professor of ecology and agriculture at the University of Minnesota
than one by your Uncle Sid, who sells tools. But you’ll prefer your
uncle to the professor when you need advice about a reliable rotary
saw.
In our current political climate, the ethos of experts—such as scientists
or other academics with deep knowledge about a subject—is being
questioned. Matt Grossmann and David A. Hopkins, professors of
public policy and political science, identify this trend particularly at the
right end of the political spectrum:

138

Data from the General Social Survey demonstrate that
declining public faith in science is concentrated among
conservatives. Compared to Democrats, Republicans are
significantly less likely to trust what scientists say, more
critical of political bias in academe and less confident in
colleges and universities. Negative attitudes toward science
and the media also intersect, with one-third of Republicans
reporting no trust in journalists to accurately report scientific
studies.
—Matt Grossmann and David A. Hopkins, “How
Information Became Ideological”
Like the attacks on “fake news,” here Grossmann and Hopkins identify
an assault on the ethos of scientists and other academic experts.
When readers might be skeptical of both you and your claims, you may
have to be even more specific about your credentials. That’s exactly
the strategy Richard Bernstein uses to establish his right to speak on
the subject of “Asian culture.” What gives a New York writer named
Bernstein the authority to write about Asian peoples? Bernstein tells us
in a sparkling example of an argument based on character:
The Asian culture, as it happens, is something I know a bit
about, having spent five years at Harvard striving for a Ph.D.
in a joint program called History and East Asian Languages
and, after that, living either as a student (for one year) or a
journalist (six years) in China and Southeast Asia. At least I
know enough to know there is no such thing as the “Asian
139

culture.”
—Richard Bernstein, Dictatorship of Virtue
When you write for readers who trust you and your work, you may not
have to make such an open claim to authority. But making this type of
appeal is always an option.

140

Coming Clean about
Motives
When people are trying to convince you of something, it’s important
(and natural) to ask: Whose interests are they serving? How will they
profit from their proposal? Such questions go to the heart of ethical
arguments.
In a hugely controversial 2014 essay published in the Princeton Tory,
Tal Fortgang, a first-year student at the Ivy League school, argues that
those on campus who used the phrase “Check your privilege” to berate
white male students like him for the advantages they enjoy are, in fact,
judging him according to gender and race, and not for “all the hard
work I have done in my life.” To challenge stereotypical assumptions
about the “racist patriarchy” that supposedly paved his way to
Princeton, Fortgang writes about the experiences of his ancestors,
opening the paragraphs with a striking parallel structure:
Perhaps it’s the privilege my grandfather and his brother had
to flee their home as teenagers when the Nazis invaded
Poland, leaving their mother and five younger siblings behind,
running and running. . . .
Or maybe it’s the privilege my grandmother had of spending
weeks upon weeks on a death march through Polish forests in
subzero temperatures, one of just a handful to survive. . . .
Perhaps my privilege is that those two resilient individuals
141

came to America with no money and no English, obtained
citizenship, learned the language and met each other. . . .
Perhaps it was my privilege that my own father worked hard
enough in City College to earn a spot at a top graduate school,
got a good job, and for 25 years got up well before the crack of
dawn, sacrificing precious time he wanted to spend with those
he valued most—his wife and kids—to earn that living.
—Tal Fortgang, “Checking My Privilege: Character as the
Basis of Privilege”
Fortgang thus attempts to establish his own ethos and win the argument
against those who make assumptions about his roots by dramatizing the
ethos of his ancestors:
That’s the problem with calling someone out for the
“privilege” which you assume has defined their narrative. You
don’t know what their struggles have been, what they may
have gone through to be where they are. Assuming they’ve
benefitted from “power systems” or other conspiratorial
imaginary institutions denies them credit for all they’ve done,
things of which you may not even conceive. You don’t know
whose father died defending your freedom. You don’t know
whose mother escaped oppression. You don’t know who
conquered their demons, or may still [be] conquering them
now.
As you might imagine, the pushback to “Checking My Privilege” was
142

enormous, some of the hundreds of comments posted to an online
version accusing Fortgang himself of assuming the very ethos of
victimhood against which he inveighs. Peter Finocchiaro, a reviewer
on Slate, is especially brutal: “Only a few short months ago he was
living at home with his parents. His life experience, one presumes, is
fairly limited. So in that sense, he doesn’t really know any better. . . .
He is an ignorant 19-year-old white guy from Westchester.” You can
see in this debate how ethos quickly raises issues of knowledge and
motives. Fortgang tries to resist the stereotype others would impose on
his character, but others regard the very ethos he fashions in his essay
as evidence of his naïveté about race, discrimination, and, yes,
privilege.
We all, of course, have connections and interests that bind us to other
human beings. It makes sense that a young man would explore his
social identity, that a woman might be concerned with women’s issues,
that members of minority groups might define social and cultural
conditions on their own terms—or even that investors might look out
for their investments. It’s simply good strategy, not to mention ethical,
to let your audiences know where your loyalties lie when such
information does, in fact, shape your work.

Using Ethos in Your Own Writing
Establish your credibility by listening carefully to and
acknowledging your audience’s values, showing respect for them,
and establishing common ground where (and if) possible. How
will you convince your audience you are trustworthy? What will
you admit about your own limitations?
143

Establish your authority by showing you have done your
homework and know your topic well. How will you show that you
know your topic well? What appropriate personal experience can
you draw on?
Examine your motives for writing. What, if anything, do you stand
to gain from your argument? How can you explain those
advantages to your audience?
CULTURAL CONTEXTS FOR ARGUMENT

Ethos
In the United States, students are often asked to establish authority by
drawing on personal experiences, by reporting on research they or
others have conducted, and by taking a position for which they can
offer strong evidence. But this expectation about student authority is
by no means universal.
Some cultures regard student writers as novices who can most
effectively make arguments by reflecting on what they’ve learned from
their teachers and elders—those who hold the most important
knowledge and, hence, authority. When you’re arguing a point with
people from cultures other than your own, ask questions like:
Whom are you addressing, and what is your relationship with that
person?
What knowledge are you expected to have? Is it appropriate or
expected for you to demonstrate that knowledge—and if so, how?
What tone is appropriate? And remember: politeness is rarely, if
ever, inappropriate.

144

RESPOND●

1. Consider the ethos of these public figures. Then describe one or
two products that might benefit from their endorsements as
well as several that would not.
Edward Snowden—whistleblower
Beyoncé—singer, dancer, actress
Denzel Washington—actor
Tom Brady—football player
Rachel Maddow—TV news commentator
Ariana Grande—singer
Seth Meyers—late-night TV host
Lin-Manuel Miranda—hip hop artist and playwright
Venus Williams—tennis player
2. Opponents of Richard Nixon, the thirty-seventh president of the
United States, once raised doubts about his integrity by asking
a single ruinous question: Would you buy a used car from this
man? Create your own version of the argument of character.
Begin by choosing an intriguing or controversial person or
group and finding an image online. Then download the image
into a word-processing file. Create a caption for the photo that
is modeled after the question asked about Nixon: Would you
give this woman your email password? Would you share a
campsite with this couple? Would you eat lasagna that this guy
fixed? Finally, write a serious 300-word argument that explores

145

the character flaws or strengths of your subject(s).
3. Practice reading rhetorically and critically by taking a close
look at your own Facebook page (or your page on any other
social media site). What are some aspects of your character,
true or not, that might be conveyed by the photos, videos, and
messages you have posted online? Analyze the ethos or
character you see projected there, using the advice in this
chapter to guide your analysis.

146

CHAPTER 4 Arguments Based on Facts and
Reason: Logos

In 2018, it feels like facts are under siege, as these three images
suggest. Cartoonists are having a field day with a “post-fact” world,
while serious scientists are hard at work trying to understand “why
facts don’t change our minds.” From Kellyanne Conway’s evocation of
“alternative facts” to Donald Trump’s tendency to label reports that do
not support his views as “fake news,” we are witnessing a world in
which the statement by Through the Looking-Glass’s White Queen that
“sometimes I’ve believed as many as six impossible things before
breakfast” seems, well, unremarkable. After the 2016 election, for
example, President Trump declared that there was “serious voter fraud”
in Virginia, in New Hampshire, in California, and elsewhere, although
researchers could find no evidence to back up his claim, and factcheckers across the board found the “fact” to be baseless. In June 2017,
three CNN employees resigned after the network retracted a story that
claimed Congress was investigating a “Russian investment fund with
ties to Trump officials”; the journalists had used only one unreliable
source to back up this supposedly factual claim. We could go on and

147

on with such examples from across the political spectrum, and no
doubt you could add your own to the list.
In “Why Facts Don’t Change Our Minds,” Elizabeth Kolbert surveys
cognitive science research that’s trying to understand why this is so,
pointing to a series of experiments at Stanford University that found
that “Even after the evidence for their beliefs had been totally refuted,
people fail to make appropriate revisions to those beliefs”:
Thousands of subsequent experiments have confirmed (and
elaborated on) this finding. As everyone who’s followed the
research—or even occasionally picked up a copy of
Psychology Today—knows, any graduate student with a
clipboard can demonstrate that reasonable-seeming people
are often totally irrational. Rarely has this insight seemed
more relevant than it does now.
Scientists working on this issue point to the “confirmation” or
“myside” bias, the strong tendency to accept information that supports
our beliefs and values and to reject information that opposes them, as
well as to our tendency to think we know a whole lot more than we
actually do. A study at Yale asked graduate students to rate their
knowledge of everyday items, including toilets, and to write up an
explanation of how such devices worked. While the graduate students
rated their knowledge/understanding as high before they wrote up the
explanations, that exercise showed them that they didn’t really know
how toilets worked, and their self-assessment dropped significantly.
The researchers, Steven Sloman and Philip Fernbach, call this effect
the “illusion of explanatory depth” and find that it is very widespread.
148

“Where it gets us into trouble,” they say, is in “the political domain.”
As Kolbert writes, “It’s one thing for me to flush a toilet without
knowing how it operates, and another for me to favor (or oppose) an
immigration ban without knowing what I’m talking about.” Sloman
and Fernbach explain: “As a rule, strong feelings about issues do not
emerge from deep understanding. . . . This is how a community of
knowledge can become dangerous.”
Such findings are important to all of us, and they suggest several steps
all writers, readers, and speakers should take as they deal with
arguments based on facts and reason. First, examine your own beliefs
in particular facts and pieces of information: do you really know what
you’re talking about or are you simply echoing what others you know
say or think? Second, you need to become a conscientious factchecker, digging deep to make sure claims are backed by evidence.
Doing so is especially important with information you get from social
media, where misinformation, disinformation, and even outright lies
may be presented as “facts” that you might retweet or post, thus
perpetuating false or questionable information.
Finally, don’t give up on facts. The researchers discussed above also
show that, when given a choice, most people still say they respect and
even prefer appeals to claims based on facts, evidence, and reason. Just
make sure that the logical appeals you are using are factually correct
and ethical as well.

149

Thinking Critically about
Hard Evidence
Aristotle helps us out in classifying arguments by distinguishing two
kinds:
Artistic

Arguments the

Constructed

Proofs

writer/speaker

arguments

Appeals to reason; common sense

creates
Inartistic

Arguments the

Hard

Facts, statistics, testimonies,

Proofs

writer/speaker is

evidence

witnesses, contracts, documents

given

We can see these different kinds of logical appeals at work in a passage
from a statement made on September 5, 2017, by Attorney General Jeff
Sessions:
Good morning. I am here today to announce that the program
known as DACA that was effectuated under the Obama
Administration is being rescinded. The DACA program was
implemented in 2012 and essentially provided a legal status
for recipients for a renewable two-year term, work
authorization and other benefits, including participation in
the social security program, to 800,000 mostly-adult illegal
aliens. This policy was implemented unilaterally to great
controversy and legal concern after Congress rejected
legislative proposals to extend similar benefits on numerous
occasions to this same group of illegal aliens.

150

In other words, the executive branch, through DACA,
deliberately sought to achieve what the legislative branch
specifically refused to authorize on multiple occasions. Such
an open-ended circumvention of immigration laws was an
unconstitutional exercise of authority by the Executive
Branch. The effect of this unilateral executive amnesty, among
other things, contributed to a surge of unaccompanied minors
on the southern border that yielded terrible humanitarian
consequences. It also denied jobs to hundreds of thousands of
Americans by allowing those same jobs to go to illegal aliens.

Jeff Sessions announcing that DACA would be rescinded by the Trump
administration

Sessions opens his statement with a simple “good morning” and a
direct announcement of his purpose: to rescind the Deferred Action for
Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program initiated by the Obama

151

administration in 2012. In the next sentence, he uses “inartistic”
evidence of what DACA provided (it was renewable and provided
work authorization and other benefits) for “800,000 mostly-adult
illegal aliens.” Noting that Congress had refused on several occasions
to extend benefits to the “same group of illegal aliens,” Sessions offers
the constructed argument that Obama’s “open-ended circumvention of
immigration laws was an unconstitutional exercise of authority.”
Presumably now drawing on hard evidence, Sessions argues that
DACA led to “a surge of unaccompanied minors,” that it denied jobs to
“hundreds of thousands” of Americans, and, by neglecting the “rule of
law,” it subjected the United States to “the risk of crime, violence, and
even terrorism.”
Sessions says early on in his statement that DACA was implemented
amidst “great controversy,” and indeed that fact checks out. Other
claims made in the statement, however, were quickly challenged. The
nonpartisan FactCheck.org, for example, calls out Sessions’s
description of DACA recipients as “mostly-adult illegal aliens” (a label
he uses several times), citing research by Professor Tom Wong of the
University of California, San Diego, whose national survey of 3,063
DACA holders in summer 2017 found that “on average they were six
and a half years old when they arrived in the U.S. Most of them—54
percent—were under the age of 7.” So while they are adults today, they
were not adults when they were brought to the United States. Likewise,
FactCheck.org points out that Sessions’s claim that DACA contributed
to a “surge of unaccompanied minors” is, at best, misleading and out of
context:

152

It is true that there was a surge of unaccompanied children
that caught the Obama administration off guard in fiscal
2012. The number of unaccompanied minors crossing the
border peaked in fiscal 2014 at 68,541, dropping 42 percent to
39,970 in fiscal 2015 before rising again in fiscal year 2016 to
59,692.
But the children who crossed the border illegally were not
eligible for DACA. As we said earlier, the criteria for DACA is
continuous residence in the United States since June 15, 2007.
If you were reading or listening to this statement and wanted to do
some fact-checking of your own, you might well begin by determining
whether DACA really led to the loss of hundreds of thousands of jobs.
In today’s political climate, in fact, it’s important that every one of us
read with a critical eye, refusing to accept claims without proof,
constructed arguments, or even “hard evidence” that we can’t factcheck for ourselves.

153

Two DACA “Dreamers” protesting near Trump Tower in New York the day after
Sessions’s statement rescinding the program

RESPOND●
Discuss whether the following statements are examples of hard
evidence or constructed arguments. Not all cases are clear-cut.
1. Drunk drivers are involved in more than 50 percent of traffic
deaths.
2. DNA tests of skin found under the victim’s fingernails suggest
that the defendant was responsible for the assault.
3. A psychologist testified that teenage violence could not be
blamed on video games.
4. The crowds at President Trump’s inauguration were the largest
on record.
5. “The only thing we have to fear is fear itself.”
6. Air bags ought to be removed from vehicles because they can
kill young children and small-framed adults.

154

Facts
Gathering factual information and transmitting it faithfully practically
define what we mean by professional journalism and scholarship.
Carole Cadwalladr, a reviewer for the British newspaper the Guardian,
praises the research underlying It’s Complicated: The Networked Lives
of Teens. Drawing on almost a decade of research by assistant
professor danah boyd of New York University,
the book is grounded in hard academic research: proper
interviews conducted with actual teenagers. What comes
across most strongly, more so than the various “myths” and
“panics” that the author describes, is just how narrow and
circumscribed many of these teenagers’ lives have become.
Here the “hard academic research” the reviewer mentions is the
ethnographic research that yields an accurate description of these
young people’s lives.
When your facts are compelling, they might stand on their own in a
low-stakes argument, supported by little more than saying where they
come from. Consider the power of phrases such as “reported by the
Wall Street Journal” or “according to FactCheck.org.” Such sources
gain credibility if they have reported facts accurately and reliably over
time. Using such credible sources in an argument can also reflect
positively on you.
In scholarly arguments, which have higher expectations for accuracy,
what counts is drawing sober conclusions from the evidence turned up

155

through detailed research or empirical studies. The language of such
material may seem dryly factual to you, even when the content is
inherently interesting. But presenting new knowledge dispassionately
is (ideally at least) the whole point of scholarly writing, marking a
contrast between it and the kind of intellectual warfare that occurs in
many media forums, especially news programs and blogs. Here for
example is a portion of a lengthy opening paragraph in the “Discussion
and Conclusions” section of a scholarly paper arguing that people who
spend a great deal of time on Facebook often frame their lives by what
they observe there:
As expected in the first hypothesis, the results show that the
longer people have used Facebook, the stronger was their
belief that others were happier than themselves, and the less
they agreed that life is fair. Furthermore, as predicted in the
second hypothesis, this research found that the more “friends”
people included on their Facebook whom they did not know
personally, the stronger they believed that others had better
lives than themselves. In other words, looking at happy
pictures of others on Facebook gives people an impression
that others are “always” happy and having good lives, as
evident from these pictures of happy moments.
—Hui-Tzu Grace Chou, PhD, and Nicholas Edge, BS, “‘They
Are Happier and Having Better Lives Than I Am’: The
Impact of Using Facebook on Perceptions of Others’ Lives”
There are no fireworks in this conclusion, no slanted or hot language,
no unfair or selective reporting of data, just a careful attention to the
156

facts and behaviors uncovered by the study. But one can easily imagine
these facts being subsequently used to support overdramatized claims
about the dangers of social networks. That’s often what happens to
scholarly studies when they are read and interpreted in the popular
media.
Of course, arguing with facts can involve challenging even the most
reputable sources if they lead to unfair or selective reporting or if the
stories are presented or “framed” unfairly.
In an ideal world, good information—no matter where it comes from—
would always drive out bad. But you already know that we don’t live
in an ideal world, so all too often bad information gets repeated in an
echo chamber that amplifies the errors.

Statistics
Lindsay McKenzie cites statistics in her Web article about how
secure students feel in protecting themselves from cyberattacks.
LINK TO McKenzie, “Getting Personal about Cybersecurity,” in
Chapter 26

You’ve probably heard the old saying “There are three kinds of lies:
lies, damned lies, and statistics,” and it is certainly possible to lie with
numbers, even those that are accurate, because numbers rarely speak
for themselves. They need to be interpreted by writers—and writers
almost always have agendas that shape the interpretations.

157

Of course, just because they are often misused doesn’t mean that
statistics are meaningless, but it does suggest that you need to use them
carefully and to remember that your careful reading of numbers is
essential. Consider the attention-grabbing map below that went viral in
June 2014. Created by Mark Gongloff of the Huffington Post in the
wake of a school shooting in Oregon, it plotted the location of all
seventy-four school shootings that had occurred in the United States
since the Sandy Hook tragedy in December 2012, when twenty
elementary school children and six adults were gunned down by a riflewielding killer. For the graphic, Gongloff drew on a list assembled by
the group Everytown for Gun Safety, an organization formed by
former New York City mayor and billionaire Michael Bloomberg to
counter the influence of the National Rifle Association (NRA). Both
the map and Everytown’s sobering list of shootings received wide
attention in the media, given the startling number of incidents it
recorded.

It didn’t take long before questions were raised about their accuracy.
158

Were American elementary and secondary school children under such
frequent assault as the map based on Everytown’s list suggested? Well,
yes and no. Guns were going off on and around school campuses, but
the firearms weren’t always aimed at children. The Washington Post,
CNN, and other news outlets soon found themselves pulling back on
their initial reporting, offering a more nuanced view of the
controversial number. To do that, the Washington Post began by
posing an important question:
What constitutes a school shooting?
That five-word question has no simple answer, a fact
underscored by the backlash to an advocacy group’s recent
list of school shootings. The list, maintained by Everytown, a
group that backs policies to limit gun violence, was updated
last week to reflect what it identified as the 74 school shootings
since the massacre in Newtown, Conn., a massacre that
sparked a national debate over gun control.
Multiple news outlets, including this one, reported on
Everytown’s data, prompting a backlash over the broad
methodology used. As we wrote in our original post, the group
considered any instance of a firearm discharging on school
property as a shooting—thus casting a broad net that includes
homicides, suicides, accidental discharges and, in a handful of
cases, shootings that had no relation to the schools themselves
and occurred with no students apparently present.
—Niraj Chokshi, “Fight over School Shooting List
159

Underscores Difficulty in Quantifying Gun Violence”
CNN followed the same path, re-evaluating its original reporting in
light of criticism from groups not on the same page as Everytown for
Gun Safety:
Without a doubt, that number is startling.
So . . . CNN took a closer look at the list, delving into the
circumstances of each incident Everytown included. . . .
CNN determined that 15 of the incidents Everytown included
were situations similar to the violence in Newtown or Oregon
—a minor or adult actively shooting inside or near a school.
That works out to about one such shooting every five weeks, a
startling figure in its own right.
Some of the other incidents on Everytown’s list included
personal arguments, accidents and alleged gang activities and
drug deals.
—Ashley Fantz, Lindsey Knight, and Kevin Wang, “A Closer
Look: How Many Newtown-like School Shootings since Sandy
Hook?”
Other news organizations came up with their own revised numbers, but
clearly the interpretation of a number can be as important as the
statistic itself. And what were Mark Gongloff’s Twitter reactions to
these reassessments? They made an argument as well:

160

Arguments over gun violence in schools reached a new peak in 2018
after seventeen students and staff members were killed at Marjory
Stoneman Douglas High School in Florida, leading to a nationwide
student walkout on March 14 and massive protests at eight hundred
sites around the world on March 24 (including over half a million in
Washington, D.C., alone), all organized and led by students. Articulate
and media savvy, the student leaders knew to rely on “hard evidence”
and solid, fact-checked statistics, and they conducted the research
necessary to do so. Students across the United States learned a lesson
well: when you rely on statistics in your arguments, make sure you
understand where they come from, what they mean, and what their
limitations might be. Check and double-check them or get help in
doing so: you don’t want to be accused of using fictitious data based on
questionable assumptions.
RESPOND●

Statistical evidence becomes useful only when interpreted fairly and
reasonably. Go to the Business Insider Australia Web site and look
for one or more charts of the day

161

(www.businessinsider.com/au/category/chart-of-the-day). Choose
one, and use the information in it to support three different claims,
at least two of which make very different points. Share your claims
with classmates. (The point is not to learn to use data dishonestly
but to see firsthand how the same statistics can serve a variety of
arguments.)

Surveys and Polls
When they verify the popularity of an idea or a proposal, surveys and
polls provide strong persuasive appeals because they come as close to
expressing the will of the people as anything short of an election—the
most decisive poll of all. However, surveys and polls can do much
more than help politicians make decisions. They can be important
elements in scientific research, documenting the complexities of
human behavior. They can also provide persuasive reasons for action
or intervention. When surveys show, for example, that most American
sixth-graders can’t locate France or Wyoming on a map—not to
mention Ukraine or Afghanistan—that’s an appeal for better
instruction in geography. It always makes sense, however, to question
poll numbers, especially when they support our own point of view. Ask
who commissioned the poll, who is publishing its outcome, who was
surveyed (and in what proportions), and what stakes these parties
might have in its outcome.
Are we being too suspicious? Not at all, and especially not today. In
fact, this sort of scrutiny is exactly what you might anticipate from
your readers whenever you use (or create) surveys to explore an issue.

162

You should be confident that enough subjects have been surveyed to be
accurate, that the people chosen for the study were representative of the
selected population as a whole, and that they were chosen randomly—
not selected because of what they were likely to say. In a splendid
article on how women can make research-based choices during
pregnancy, economist Emily Oster explores, for example, whether an
expectant mother might in fact be able to drink responsibly. She
researches not only the results of the data, but also who was surveyed,
and how their participation might have influenced the results. One
2001 study of pregnant women’s drinking habits and their children’s
behavior years later cautioned that even a single drink per day while
pregnant could cause behavioral issues. However, Oster uncovered a
serious flaw in the study, noting that
18% of the women who didn’t drink at all and 45% of the
women who had one drink a day reported using cocaine
during pregnancy. . . . [R]eally? Cocaine? Perhaps the
problem is that cocaine, not the occasional glass of
Chardonnay, makes your child more likely to have behavior
problems.
—Emily Oster, “Take Back Your Pregnancy”
Clearly, polls, surveys, and studies need to be examined critically. You
can’t take even academic research at face value until you have explored
its details.
The meaning of polls and surveys is also affected by the way that
questions are posed. In the past, research revealed, for example, that
163

polling about same-sex unions got differing responses according to
how questions were worded. When people were asked whether gay and
lesbian couples should be eligible for the same inheritance and partner
health benefits that heterosexual couples receive, a majority of those
polled said yes—unless the word marriage appeared in the question;
then the responses were primarily negative. If anything, the differences
here reveal how conflicted people may have been about the issue and
how quickly opinions might shift—as they have clearly done.
Remember, then, to be very careful in reviewing the wording of survey
or poll questions.
Finally, always keep in mind that the date of a poll may strongly affect
the results—and their usefulness in an argument. In 2014, for example,
a Reuters poll found that 20 percent of California residents said they
supported “CalExit,” a proposal for California to secede from the
United States and become a country in its own right. In 2017, however,
the same poll found that figure had jumped from 20 percent to 32
percent. The pollsters note, however, that the “margin of error for the
California answers was plus or minus 5 percentage points.” On public
and political issues, you need to be sure that you are using the most
timely information you can get.
RESPOND●

Choose an important issue and design a series of questions to evoke
a range of responses in a poll. Try to design a question that would
make people strongly inclined to agree, another question that
would lead them to oppose the same proposition, and a third that
tries to be more neutral. Then try out your questions on your

164

classmates and note what you learn about how to improve your
questions.

Testimonies and Narratives
In his article “Thick of Tongue,” linguist John McWhorter shares
his personal experience as a black man whom others insist
“sounds white.”
LINK TO McWhorter, “Thick of Tongue,” in Chapter 25

Writers often support arguments by presenting human experiences in
the form of narrative or testimony—particularly if those experiences
are their own. When Republican Senator Orrin Hatch condemned
KKK, neo-Nazi, and white nationalist protests in Charlottesville,
Virginia, in August 2017, he did so by calling on personal experience:

In courts, judges and juries often take into consideration detailed
descriptions and narratives of exactly what occurred. In the case of Doe
v. City of Belleville, the judges of the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals
decided, based on the testimony presented, that a man (known as H.)
165

had been sexually harassed by other men in his workplace. The
narrative, in this case, supplies the evidence, noting that one coworker
constantly referred to H. as “queer” and “fag” and urged H.
to “go back to San Francisco with the rest of the queers.” . . .
The verbal taunting of H. turned physical one day when [a
coworker] trapped [him] against a wall, proceeded to grab H.
by the testicles and, having done so, announced to the
assemblage of co-workers present, “Well, I guess he’s a guy.”
Personal perspectives can support a claim convincingly and logically,
especially if a writer has earned the trust of readers. In arguing that Tea
Party supporters of a government shutdown had no business being
offended when some opponents described them as “terrorists,” Froma
Harrop, one of the writers who used the term, argued logically and
from experience why the characterization was appropriate:
[T]he hurt the tea party writers most complained of was to
their feelings. I had engaged in name-calling, they kept saying.
One professing to want more civility in our national
conversation, as I do, should not be flinging around the
terrorist word.
May I presume to disagree? Civility is a subjective concept, to
be sure, but hurting people’s feelings in the course of making
solid arguments is fair and square. The decline in the quality
of our public discourse results not so much from an excess of
spleen, but a deficit of well-constructed arguments. Few things
upset partisans more than when the other side makes a case
166

that bats home.
“Most of us know that effectively scoring on a point of
argument opens us to the accusation of mean-spiritedness,”
writes Frank Partsch, who leads the National Conference of
Editorial Writers’ Civility Project. “It comes with the
territory, and a commitment to civility should not suggest that
punches will be pulled in order to avoid such accusations.”
—Froma Harrop, “Hurt Feelings Can Be a Consequence of
Strong Arguments”
This narrative introduction gives a rationale for supporting the claim
Harrop is making: we can expect consequences when we argue
ineffectively. (For more on establishing credibility with readers, see
Chapter 3.)
RESPOND●

Bring to class a full review of a recent film that you either enjoyed or
did not enjoy. Using testimony from that review, write a brief
argument to your classmates explaining why they should see that
movie (or why they should avoid it), being sure to use evidence from
the review fairly and reasonably. Then exchange arguments with a
classmate, and decide whether the evidence in your peer’s
argument helps to change your opinion about the movie. What’s
convincing about the evidence? If it doesn’t convince you, why
doesn’t it?

167

Using Reason and
Common Sense
If you don’t have “hard facts,” you can turn to those arguments
Aristotle describes as “constructed” from reason and common sense.
The formal study of such reasoning is called logic, and you probably
recognize a famous example of deductive reasoning, called a
syllogism:
All human beings are mortal.
Socrates is a human being.
Therefore, Socrates is mortal.

168

In valid syllogisms, the conclusion follows logically—and technically
—from the premises that lead up to it. Many have criticized syllogistic
reasoning for being limited, and others have poked fun at it, as in the
cartoon above.
But we routinely see something like syllogistic reasoning operating in
public arguments, particularly when writers take the time to explain
key principles. Consider the step-by-step reasoning Michael Gerson
uses to explain why exactly it was wrong for the Internal Revenue
Service in 2010–2011 to target specific political groups, making it
more difficult for them to organize politically:
Why does this matter deserve heightened scrutiny from the
169

rest of us? Because crimes against democracy are particularly
insidious. Representative government involves a type of trade.
As citizens, we cede power to public officials for important
purposes that require centralized power: defending the
country, imposing order, collecting taxes to promote the
common good. In exchange, we expect public institutions to be
evenhanded and disinterested. When the stewards of power—
biased judges or corrupt policemen or politically motivated
IRS officials—act unfairly, it undermines trust in the whole
system.
—Michael Gerson, “An Arrogant and Lawless IRS”
Gerson’s criticism of the IRS actions might be mapped out by the
following sequence of statements.
Crimes against democracy undermine trust in the system.
Treating taxpayers differently because of their political beliefs
is a crime against democracy.
Therefore, IRS actions that target political groups undermine
the American system.
Few writers, of course, think about formal deductive reasoning when
they support their claims. Even Aristotle recognized that most people
argue perfectly well using informal logic. To do so, they rely mostly on
habits of mind and assumptions that they share with their readers or
listeners—as Gerson essentially does in his paragraph.

170

In Chapter 7, we describe a system of informal logic that you may find
useful in shaping credible appeals to reason—Toulmin argument. Here,
we briefly examine some ways that people use informal logic in their
everyday lives. Once again, we begin with Aristotle, who used the term
enthymeme to describe an ordinary kind of sentence that includes both
a claim and a reason but depends on the audience’s agreement with an
assumption that is left implicit rather than spelled out. Enthymemes
can be very persuasive when most people agree with the assumptions
they rest on. The following sentences are all enthymemes:
We’d better cancel the picnic because it’s going to rain.
Flat taxes are fair because they treat everyone the same.
I’ll buy a PC instead of a Mac because it’s cheaper.
Sometimes enthymemes seem so obvious that readers don’t realize that
they’re drawing inferences when they agree with them. Consider the
first example:
We’d better cancel the picnic because it’s going to rain.
Let’s expand the enthymeme a bit to say more of what the speaker may
mean:
We’d better cancel the picnic this afternoon because the
weather bureau is predicting a 70 percent chance of rain for
the remainder of the day.
Embedded in this brief argument are all sorts of assumptions and
171

fragments of cultural information that are left implicit but that help to
make it persuasive:
Picnics are ordinarily held outdoors.
When the weather is bad, it’s best to cancel picnics.
Rain is bad weather for picnics.
A 70 percent chance of rain means that rain is more likely to
occur than not.
When rain is more likely to occur than not, it makes sense to
cancel picnics.
For most people, the original statement carries all this information on
its own; the enthymeme is a compressed argument, based on what
audiences know and will accept.
But sometimes enthymemes aren’t self-evident:
Be wary of environmentalism because it’s religion disguised as
science.
iPhones are undermining civil society by making us even more
focused on ourselves.
It’s time to make all public toilets unisex because to do
otherwise is discriminatory.
In these cases, you’ll have to work much harder to defend both the
172

claim and the implicit assumptions that it’s based on by drawing out
the inferences that seem self-evident in other enthymemes. And you’ll
likely also have to supply credible evidence; just calling something a
fact doesn’t make it one, so a simple declaration of fact won’t suffice.

CULTURAL CONTEXTS FOR ARGUMENT

Logos
In the United States, student writers are expected to draw on “hard
facts” and evidence as often as possible in supporting their claims:
while ethical and emotional appeals are increasingly important and
often used in making decisions, logical appeals still tend to hold sway
in academic writing. So statistics and facts speak volumes, as does
reasoning based on time-honored values such as fairness and equity. In
writing to global audiences, you need to remember that not all cultures
value the same kinds of appeals. If you want to write to audiences
across cultures, you need to know about the norms and values in those
cultures. Chinese culture, for example, values authority and often
indirect allusion over “facts” alone. Some African cultures value
cooperation and community over individualism, and still other cultures
value religious texts as providing compelling evidence. So think
carefully about what you consider strong evidence, and pay attention
to what counts as evidence to others. You can begin by asking yourself
questions like:
What evidence is most valued by your audience: Facts? Concrete
examples? Firsthand experience? Religious or philosophical texts?
Something else?
Will analogies count as support? How about precedents?
Will the testimony of experts count? If so, what kinds of experts

173

are valued most?

174

Providing Logical
Structures for Argument
Some arguments depend on particular logical structures to make their
points. In the following pages, we identify a few of these logical
structures.

Degree
Arguments based on degree are so common that people barely notice
them, nor do they pay much attention to how they work because they
seem self-evident. Most audiences will readily accept that more of a
good thing or less of a bad thing is good. In her novel The
Fountainhead, Ayn Rand asks: “If physical slavery is repulsive, how
much more repulsive is the concept of servility of the spirit?” Most
readers immediately comprehend the point Rand intends to make about
slavery of the spirit because they already know that physical slavery is
cruel and would reject any forms of slavery that were even crueler on
the principle that more of a bad thing is bad. Rand still needs to offer
evidence that “servility of the spirit” is, in fact, worse than bodily
servitude, but she has begun with a logical structure readers can grasp.
Here are other arguments that work similarly:
If I can get a ten-year warranty on an inexpensive Kia,
shouldn’t I get the same or better warranty from a more
expensive Lexus?
The health benefits from using stem cells in research will

175

surely outweigh the ethical risks.
Better a conventional war now than a nuclear confrontation
later.

A demonstrator at an immigrants’ rights rally in New York City in 2007.
Arguments based on values that are widely shared within a society—such as the
idea of equal rights in American culture—have a strong advantage with
audiences.

Analogies
Analogies, typically complex or extended comparisons, explain one

176

idea or concept by comparing it to something else.
Here, writer and founder of literacy project 826 Valencia, Dave Eggers,
uses an analogy in arguing that we do not value teachers as much as we
should:
When we don’t get the results we want in our military
endeavors, we don’t blame the soldiers. We don’t say, “It’s
these lazy soldiers and their bloated benefits plans! That’s
why we haven’t done better in Afghanistan!” No, if the results
aren’t there, we blame the planners. . . . No one contemplates
blaming the men and women fighting every day in the
trenches for little pay and scant recognition. And yet in
education we do just that. When we don’t like the way our
students score on international standardized tests, we blame
the teachers.
—Dave Eggers and Nínive Calegari, “The High Cost of Low
Teacher Salaries”

Precedent
Alli Joseph discusses the portrayal of Pacific Islanders in Disney’s
Moana and compares it to the studio’s previous depictions of
ethnic minorities.
LINK TO Joseph, “With Disney’s Moana, Hollywood Almost Gets It
Right,” in Chapter 23

177

Arguments from precedent and arguments of analogy both involve
comparisons. Consider an assertion like this one, which uses a
comparison as a precedent:
If motorists in most other states can pump their own gas
safely, surely the state of Oregon can trust its own drivers to
be as capable. It’s time for Oregon to permit self-service gas
stations.
You could tease out several inferences from this claim to explain its
reasonableness: people in Oregon are as capable as people in other
states; people with equivalent capabilities can do the same thing;
pumping gas is not hard; and so forth. But you don’t have to because
most readers get the argument simply because of the way it is put
together. In any case, that argument has begun to have traction: as of
January 2018, Oregon began permitting self-service pumps in fifteen
rural counties, though doing so called forth virulent pushback on social
media. So the debate goes on!
Here is an excerpt from an analytical argument by Kriston Capps that
examines attempts by the sculptor of Wall Street’s Charging Bull to
have a new, competing sculpture, Fearless Girl, removed on the basis
of legal precedents supporting the rights of visual artists. Sculptor
Arturo Di Modica’s assertion,
that Visbal’s work infringes on his own, is unlikely to hold
sway, under recent readings of the Visual Artists Rights Act. .
. . The argument that Fearless Girl modifies or destroys
Charging Bull by blocking its path would represent a leap that
178

courts have been reluctant to take even in clearer cases.
—Kriston Capps, “Why Wall Street’s Charging Bull
Sculptor Has No Real Case against Fearless Girl”

You’ll encounter additional kinds of logical structures as you create
your own arguments. You’ll find some of them in Chapter 5, “Fallacies
of Argument,” and still more in Chapter 7 on Toulmin argument.

179

CHAPTER 5 Fallacies of Argument

Do these cartoons ring a bell with you? The first panel skewers
slippery slope arguments, which aim to thwart action by predicting dire
consequences: “occupy” enough spaces and the Occupy movement
looks just like the Tea Party. In the second item, an example of a straw
man argument, the first author of an academic paper puts down his
coauthor by shifting the subject, saying that the coauthor is an egotist
who cares only for fame, not what the coauthor had said at all. And the
third image provides an example of a very common fallacy, the ad
hominem argument, in which a speaker impugns the character of an
opponent rather than addressing the arguments that person raises.
Rather than argue the point that human cloning is wrong, the bird says,
simply, “you’re an idiot.”
Candidate Donald Trump made something of a specialty of the ad
hominem argument. Rather than address their arguments directly, he
attacked the characters of his opponents: Marco Rubio was always
“little Marco,” Hillary Clinton was always “crooked,” Elizabeth
Warren was “goofy,” and Cruz was always “Lyin’ Ted.” Early on in
the campaign, when asked about rival candidate Carly Fiorina’s plans,
180

he said, “Can you imagine that, the face of our next president? I mean,
she’s a woman and I’m not supposed to say bad things, but really,
folks, come on.” Classic ad hominem, and oftentimes such tactics work
all too well!
Fallacies are argumentative moves flawed by their nature or structure.
Because such tactics can make principled argument more difficult, they
potentially hurt everyone involved, including the people responsible
for them. The worst sorts of fallacies muck up the frank but civil
conversations that people should be able to have, regardless of their
differences.
Yet it’s hard to deny the power in offering audiences a compelling
either/or choice or a vulnerable straw man in an argument: these
fallacies can have great persuasive power. For exactly that reason, it’s
important that you can recognize and point out fallacies in the work of
others—and avoid them in your own writing. This chapter aims to help
you meet these goals: here we’ll introduce you to fallacies of argument
classified according to the emotional, ethical, and logical appeals
we’ve discussed earlier (see Chapters 2, 3, and 4).

181

Fallacies of Emotional
Argument
Emotional arguments can be powerful and suitable in many
circumstances, and most writers use them frequently. However, writers
who pull on their readers’ heartstrings or raise their blood pressure too
often—or who oversentimentalize—can violate the good faith on
which legitimate argument depends.

Scare Tactics
Politicians, advertisers, and public figures sometimes peddle their ideas
by frightening people and exaggerating possible dangers well beyond
their statistical likelihood. Such ploys work because it’s easier to
imagine something terrible happening than to appreciate its rarity.
Scare tactics can also be used to stampede legitimate fears into panic
or prejudice. Laborers who genuinely worry about losing their jobs can
be persuaded to fear immigrants who might work for less money.
Seniors living on fixed incomes can be convinced that minor changes
to entitlement programs represent dire threats to their well-being. Such
tactics have the effect of closing off thinking because people who are
scared often act irrationally. Even well-intended fear campaigns—like
those directed against smoking, unprotected sex, or the use of illegal
drugs—can misfire if their warnings prove too shrill or seem
hysterical. People just stop listening.

Either/Or Choices
182

Either/or choices can be well-intentioned strategies to get something
accomplished. Parents use them all the time (“Eat your broccoli, or you
won’t get dessert”). But they become fallacious arguments when they
reduce a complicated issue to excessively simple terms (e.g., “You’re
either for me or against me”) or when they’re designed to obscure
legitimate alternatives. Here, for example, is Riyad Mansour, the
Palestinian representative to the United Nations, offering the nation of
Israel just such a choice in an interview on PBS in January 2014:
It is up to them [the Israelis] to decide what kind of a state
they want to be. Do they want to be a democratic state where
Israel will be the state for all of its citizens? Or do they want
to be a state for the Jewish people, therefore excluding 1.6
million Palestinian Arabs who are Israelis from their society?
That debate is not our debate. That debate is their debate.
But Joel B. Pollak, writing for Breitbart News Network, describes
Mansour’s claim as a “false choice” since Israel already is a Jewish
state that nonetheless allows Muslims to be full citizens. The either/or
argument Mansour presents, according to Pollack, does not describe
the realities of this complex political situation.

183

A false choice?

Slippery Slope
The slippery slope fallacy portrays today’s tiny misstep as tomorrow’s
slide into disaster. Some arguments that aim at preventing dire
consequences do not take the slippery slope approach (for example, the
parent who corrects a child for misbehavior now is acting sensibly to
prevent more serious problems as the child grows older). A slippery
slope argument becomes wrongheaded when a writer exaggerates the
likely consequences of an action, usually to frighten readers. As such,
slippery slope arguments are also scare tactics. In recent years, the
issue of gun ownership in America has evoked many slippery slope
184

arguments. Here are two examples:
“Universal background checks will inevitably be followed by a
national registry of gun-owners which will inevitably be
followed by confiscation of all their guns.” Or, “A ban on
assault-style weapons and thirty+ round magazines will
inevitably be followed by a ban on hand guns with ten-round
magazines….”
—Michael Wolkowitz, “Slippery Slopes, Imagined and Real”
Social and political ideas and proposals do have consequences, but
they aren’t always as dire as writers fond of slippery slope tactics
would have you believe.

Overly Sentimental Appeals
Overly sentimental appeals use tender emotions excessively to
distract readers from facts. Often, such appeals are highly personal and
individual and focus attention on heartwarming or heartrending
situations that make readers feel guilty if they challenge an idea, a
policy, or a proposal. Emotions can become an impediment to civil
discourse when they keep people from thinking clearly.
Such sentimental appeals are a major vehicle of television news, where
tugging at viewers’ heartstrings can mean high ratings. For example,
when a camera documents the day-to-day sacrifices of a single parent
trying to meet mortgage payments and keep her kids in college, the
woman’s on-screen struggles can seem to represent the plight of an
entire class of people threatened by callous bankers and college
185

administrators. But while such human interest stories stir genuine
emotions, they seldom give a complete picture of complex social or
economic issues.

The first image, taken from a gun control protest, is designed to elicit sympathy
by causing the viewer to think about the dangers guns pose to innocent children
and, thus, support the cause. The second image supports the other side of the
debate.

Bandwagon Appeals
Bandwagon appeals urge people to follow the same path everyone
else is taking. Such arguments can be relatively benign and seem
harmless. But they do push people to take the easier path rather than
think independently about what choices to make or where to go.
Many American parents seem to have an innate ability to refute

186

bandwagon appeals. When their kids whine, Everyone else is going
camping without chaperones, the parents reply, And if everyone else
jumps off a cliff (or a railroad bridge or the Empire State Building),
you will too? The children groan—and then try a different line of
argument.
Advertisers use bandwagon appeals frequently, as this example of a
cellphone ad demonstrates:

Unfortunately, not all bandwagon approaches are so transparent. In
recent decades, bandwagon issues have included a war on drugs, the
nuclear freeze movement, campaigns against drunk driving—and for
freedom of speech, campaigns for immigration reform, bailouts for
banks and businesses, and many fads in education. All these issues are

187

too complex to permit the suspension of judgment that bandwagon
tactics require.

188

Fallacies of Ethical
Argument
Because readers give their closest attention to authors they respect or
trust, writers usually want to present themselves as honest, wellinformed, likable, or sympathetic. But not all the devices that writers
use to gain the attention and confidence of readers are admirable. (For
more on appeals based on character, see Chapter 3.)

Appeals to False Authority
Many academic research papers find and reflect on the work of
reputable authorities and introduce these authorities through direct
quotations or citations as credible evidence. (For more on assessing the
reliability of sources, see Chapter 19.) False authority, however,
occurs when writers offer themselves or other authorities as sufficient
warrant for believing a claim:
Claim

X is true because I say so.

Warrant

What I say must be true.

Claim

X is true because Y says so.

Warrant

What Y says must be true.

Though they are seldom stated so baldly, claims of authority drive
many political campaigns. American pundits and politicians are fond of
citing the U.S. Constitution and its Bill of Rights (Canadians have their
Charter of Rights and Freedoms, and Britain has had its Bill of Rights
since the seventeenth century) as ultimate authorities, a reasonable
189

practice when the documents are interpreted respectfully. However, the
rights claimed sometimes aren’t in the texts themselves or don’t mean
what the speakers think they do. And most constitutional matters are
debatable—as volumes of court records prove. Likewise, religious
believers often base arguments on books or traditions that wield great
authority in a particular religious community. But the power of such
texts is often limited to that group and less capable of persuading
others solely on the grounds of authority.
In short, you should pay serious attention to claims supported by
respected authorities, such as the Centers for Disease Control, the
National Science Foundation, or the Globe and Mail. But don’t accept
information simply because it is put forth by such offices and agencies.
To quote a Russian proverb made famous by Ronald Reagan, “Trust,
but verify.”

Dogmatism
A writer who asserts or assumes that a particular position is the only
one that is conceivably acceptable is expressing dogmatism, a fallacy
of character that undermines the trust that must exist between those
who make and listen to arguments. When people or organizations write
dogmatically, they imply that no arguments are necessary: the truth is
self-evident and needs no support. Here is an extreme example of such
an appeal, quoted in an Atlantic story by Tracy Brown Hamilton and
describing an anti-smoking appeal made by the Third Reich:
“Brother national socialist, do you know that your Fuhrer is
against smoking and thinks that every German is responsible
190

to the whole people for all his deeds and omissions, and does
not have the right to damage his body with drugs?”
—Tracy Brown Hamilton, “The Nazis’ Forgotten AntiSmoking Campaign”
Subjects or ideas that can be defended with facts, testimony, and good
reasons ought not to be off the table in a free society. In general,
whenever someone suggests that even raising an issue for debate is
totally unacceptable—whether on the grounds that it’s racist, sexist,
unpatriotic, blasphemous, insensitive, or offensive in some other way
—you should be suspicious.

Ad Hominem Arguments
Ad hominem (Latin for “to the man”) arguments attack the character
of a person rather than the claims he or she makes: when you destroy
the credibility of your opponents, you either destroy their ability to
present reasonable appeals or distract from the successful arguments
they may be offering. During the 2016 presidential primary, Marco
Rubio criticized rival candidate Ted Cruz for not speaking Spanish:
was that a valid argument for why Cruz would not make a good
president? Such attacks, of course, aren’t aimed at men only, as
columnist Jamie Stiehm proved when she criticized Supreme Court
Justice Sonia Sotomayor for delaying an Affordable Care Act mandate
objected to by the Little Sisters of the Poor, a Catholic religious order.
Stiehm directly targets Sotomayor’s religious beliefs:
Et tu, Justice Sonia Sotomayor? Really, we can’t trust you on

191

women’s health and human rights? The lady from the Bronx
just dropped the ball on American women and girls as surely
as she did the sparkling ball at midnight on New Year’s Eve in
Times Square. Or maybe she’s just a good Catholic girl.
—Jamie Stiehm, “The Catholic Supreme Court’s War on
Women”
Stiehm then widens her ad hominem assault to include Catholics in
general:
Sotomayor’s blow brings us to confront an uncomfortable
reality. More than WASPs, Methodists, Jews, Quakers or
Baptists, Catholics often try to impose their beliefs on you, me,
public discourse and institutions. Especially if “you” are
female.
Arguably, ad hominem tactics like this turn arguments into two-sided
affairs with good guys and bad guys (or gals), and that’s unfortunate,
since character often really does matter in argument. Even though the
norms of civic discourse were strained to the limit during and after the
2016 presidential election, most people still expect the proponent of
peace to be civil, a secretary of the treasury to pay his or her taxes, the
champion of family values to be a faithful spouse, and the head of the
Environmental Protection Agency to advocate for protecting the
environment. But it’s fallacious to attack any of these people for their
traits, backgrounds, looks, or other irrelevant information.

192

Stacking the Deck
Just as gamblers try to stack the deck by arranging cards so they are
sure to win, writers stack the deck when they show only one side of
the story—the one in their favor. In a 2016 New Yorker article, writer
Kathryn Schulz discusses the Netflix series Making a Murderer.
Schulz notes that the filmmakers have been accused of limiting their
evidence in order to convince viewers that the accused, Steven Avery,
had been framed for the crime:
Ricciardi and Demos have dismissed the idea, claiming that
they simply set out to investigate Avery’s case and didn’t have
a position on his guilt or innocence. Yet . . . the filmmakers
minimize or leave out many aspects of Avery’s less than
savory past, including multiple alleged incidents of physical
and sexual violence. They also omit important evidence
against him, . . . evidence that would be nearly impossible to
plant. . . . Ricciardi and Demos instead stack the deck to
support their case for Avery, and, as a result, wind up
mirroring the entity that they are trying to discredit.
—Kathryn Schulz, “Dead Certainty: How Making a
Murderer Goes Wrong”
In the same way, reviewers have been critical of documentaries by
Michael Moore and Dinesh D’Souza that resolutely show only one side
of a story or prove highly selective in their coverage. When you stack
the deck, you take a big chance that your readers will react like Schulz
and decide not to trust you: that’s one reason it’s so important to show
193

that you have considered alternatives in making any argument.

194

Fallacies of Logical
Argument
Look closely at Alexandra Dal’s and the Turner Consulting Group’s
visual arguments showing how damaging microaggressions can
be. Then compare them to Scott O. Lilienfeld’s argument against
the use of microaggressions. Do you see any fallacies in the trio of
selections?
LINK TO Turner Consulting Group, “Racial Microaggressions”; Dal,
“Questions”; and Lilienfeld, “Why a Moratorium on
Microaggressions Is Needed,” in Chapter 27

You’ll encounter a problem in any argument when the claims,
warrants, or proofs in it are invalid, insufficient, or disconnected. In
theory, such problems seem easy enough to spot, but in practice, they
can be camouflaged by a skillful use of words or images. Indeed,
logical fallacies pose a challenge to civil argument because they often
seem reasonable and natural, especially when they appeal to people’s
self-interests.

Hasty Generalization
A hasty generalization is an inference drawn from insufficient
evidence: because my Fiat broke down, then all Fiats must be junk. It
also forms the basis for most stereotypes about people or institutions:
because a few people in a large group are observed to act in a certain

195

way, all members of that group are inferred to behave similarly. The
resulting conclusions are usually sweeping claims of little merit:
women are bad drivers; men are slobs; English teachers are nitpicky;
computer jocks are . . . ; and on and on.
To draw valid inferences, you must always have sufficient evidence
(see Chapter 18) and you must qualify your claims appropriately. After
all, people do need generalizations to make reasonable decisions in life.
Such claims can be offered legitimately if placed in context and tagged
with sensible qualifiers—some, a few, many, most, occasionally,
rarely, possibly, in some cases, under certain circumstances, in my
limited experience.

Faulty Causality
In Latin, faulty causality is known as post hoc, ergo propter hoc,
which translates as “after this, therefore because of this”—the faulty
assumption that because one event or action follows another, the first
causes the second. Consider a lawsuit commented on in the Wall Street
Journal in which a writer sued Coors (unsuccessfully), claiming that
drinking copious amounts of the company’s beer had kept him from
writing a novel. This argument is sometimes referred to as the
“Twinkie defense,” referring to a claim that the person who shot and
killed San Francisco Supervisor Harvey Milk had eaten so many
Twinkies and other sugary foods that his reasoning had been impaired.
The phrase is now sometimes used to label the claims of criminals that
their acts were caused by something beyond their control.
Of course, some actions do produce reactions. Step on the brake pedal
196

in your car, and you move hydraulic fluid that pushes calipers against
disks to create friction that stops the vehicle. In other cases, however, a
supposed connection between cause and effect turns out to be
completely wrong. For example, doctors now believe that when an
elderly person falls and breaks a hip or leg, the injury usually caused
the fall rather than the other way around.
That’s why overly simple causal claims should always be subject to
scrutiny. In summer 2008, writer Nicholas Carr posed a simple causal
question in a cover story for the Atlantic: “Is Google Making Us
Stupid?” Carr essentially answered yes, arguing that “as we come to
rely on computers to mediate our understanding of the world, it is our
own intelligence that flattens” and that the more one is online the less
he or she is able to concentrate or read deeply.
But others, like Jamais Cascio (senior fellow at the Institute for Ethics
and Emerging Technologies), soon challenged that causal connection:
rather than making us stupid, Cascio argues, Internet tools like Google
will lead to the development of “‘fluid intelligence’—the ability to find
meaning in confusion and to solve new problems, independent of
acquired knowledge.” The final word on this contentious causal
relationship—the effects on the human brain caused by new
technology—has yet to be written, and will probably be available only
after decades of complicated research.

Begging the Question
Most teachers have heard some version of the following argument: You
can’t give me a C in this course; I’m an A student. A member of
197

Congress accused of taking kickbacks can make much the same
argument: I can’t be guilty of accepting such bribes; I’m an honest
person. In both cases, the claim is made on grounds that can’t be
accepted as true because those grounds themselves are in question.
How can the accused bribe-taker defend herself on grounds of honesty
when that honesty is in doubt? Looking at the arguments in Toulmin
terms helps to see the fallacy:
Claim

You can’t give me a C in this course . . .

Reason

. . . because I’m an A student.

Warrant

An A student is someone who can’t receive Cs.

Claim

Representative X can’t be guilty of accepting bribes . . .

Reason

. . . because she’s an honest person.

Warrant

An honest person cannot be guilty of accepting bribes.

With the warrants stated, you can see why begging the question—
assuming as true the very claim that’s disputed—is a form of circular
argument that goes nowhere. (For more on Toulmin argument, see
Chapter 7.)

198

Equivocation
Equivocations—half truths or arguments that give lies an honest
appearance—are usually based on tricks of language. Consider the
plagiarist who copies a paper word for word from a source and then
declares that “I wrote the entire paper myself”—meaning that she
physically copied the piece on her own. But the plagiarist is using
wrote equivocally and knows that most people understand the word to
mean composing and not merely copying words.
Parsing words carefully can sometimes look like equivocation or be the
thing itself. For example, during the 2016 presidential campaign,
Hillary Clinton was asked regularly (some would say she was
hounded) about her use of a private email server and about whether any
of the emails contained classified information. Here’s what she said on
February 1, 2016:
The emails that I was received were not marked classified.
Now, there are disagreements among agencies on what should
have been perhaps classified retroactively, but at the time that
doesn’t change the fact that they were not marked classified.
—NPR Morning Edition, February 1, 2016
Many commentators at the time felt that this statement was a clear
equivocation, and this controversy continued to haunt Clinton
throughout her campaign.

Non Sequitur
199

A non sequitur is an argument whose claims, reasons, or warrants
don’t connect logically. You’ve probably detected a non sequitur when
you react to an argument with a puzzled, “Wait, that doesn’t follow.”
Children are adept at framing non sequiturs like this one: You don’t
love me or you’d buy me a new bike. It doesn’t take a parental genius to
realize that love has little connection with buying children toys.
Non sequiturs often occur when writers omit steps in an otherwise
logical chain of reasoning. For example, it might be a non sequitur to
argue that since postsecondary education now costs so much, it’s time
to move colleges and university instruction online. Such a suggestion
may have merit, but a leap from brick-and-mortar schools to virtual
ones is extreme. Numerous issues and questions must be addressed
step-by-step before the proposal can be taken seriously.
Politicians sometimes resort to non sequiturs to evade thorny issues or
questions. Here, for example, is Donald Trump replying to questions in
a 2017 interview with Michael Scherer of Time Magazine:
Scherer: Mitch McConnell has said he’d rather you stop
tweeting, that he sees it as a distraction.
Trump: Mitch will speak for himself. Mitch is a wonderful
man. Mitch should speak for himself.
Here Trump does not respond to the claim the interviewer says Senate
Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has made, but instead abruptly
changes the subject, commenting instead on McConnell, saying he is a
“wonderful man.”
200

Straw Man
Those who resort to the straw man fallacy attack arguments that no
one is really making or portray opponents’ positions as more extreme
or far less coherent than they actually are. The speaker or writer thus
sets up an argument that is conveniently easy to knock down (like a
man of straw), proceeds to do so, and then claims victory over an
opponent who may not even exist.
Straw men are especially convenient devices for politicians who want
to characterize the positions of their opponents as more extreme than
they actually are: consider obvious memes such as “war on women”
and “war on Christmas.” But straw man arguments are often more
subtle. For instance, Steven Novella of Yale University argues that
political commentator Charles Krauthammer slips into the fallacy when
he misconstrues the meaning of “settled science” in a column on
climate change. Novella rebuts Krauthammer’s assertion that “There is
nothing more anti-scientific than the very idea that science is settled,
static, impervious to challenge” by explaining why such a claim is
deceptive:
Calling something an established scientific fact means that it is
reasonable to proceed with that fact as a premise, for further
research or for policy. It does not mean “static, impervious to
challenge.” That is the straw man. Both evolution deniers and
climate change deniers use this tactic to misinterpret scientific
confidence as an anti-scientific resistance to new evidence or
arguments. It isn’t.

201

—Steven Novella, NeuroLogica Blog, February 25, 2014
In other words, Krauthammer’s definition of science is not one that
most scientists use.

Red Herring
This fallacy gets its name from the old British hunting practice of
dragging a dried herring across the path of the fox in order to throw the
hounds off the trail. A red herring fallacy does just that: it changes the
subject abruptly or introduces an irrelevant claim or fact to throw
readers or listeners off the trail. For example, people skeptical about
climate change will routinely note that weather is always changing and
point to the fact that Vikings settled in Greenland one thousand years
ago before harsher conditions drove them away. True, scientists will
say, but the point is irrelevant to arguments about worldwide global
warming caused by human activity.
The red herring is not only a device writers and speakers use in the
arguments they create, but it’s also a charge used frequently to
undermine someone else’s arguments. Couple the term “red herring” in
a Web search to just about any political or social cause and you’ll
come up with numerous articles complaining of someone’s use of the
device.
climate change + red herring
white supremacy + red herring
immigration reform + red herring
202

“Red herring” has become a convenient way of saying “I disagree with
your argument” or “your point is irrelevant.” And perhaps making a
too-easy rebuttal like that can itself be a fallacy?

Faulty Analogy
Comparisons can help to clarify one concept by measuring it against
another that is more familiar. Consider the power and humor of this
comparison attributed to Mark Twain, an implicit argument for term
limits in politics:
Politicians and diapers must be changed often, and for the
same reason.
When comparisons such as this one are extended, they become
analogies—ways of understanding unfamiliar ideas by comparing
them with something that’s better known (see Analogies in Chapter 4).
But useful as such comparisons are, they may prove false if either
taken on their own and pushed too far, or taken too seriously. At this
point, they turn into faulty analogies—inaccurate or inconsequential
comparisons between objects or concepts. Secretary of Education
Betsy DeVos found herself in a national controversy following a
statement she made after meeting with Historically Black Colleges and
Universities presidents in Washington, when she made an analogy
between HCBUs and her advocacy of “school choice” today:
They [African Americans] saw that the system wasn’t
working, that there was an absence of opportunity, so they
took it upon themselves to provide the solution. HBCUs are

203

real pioneers when it comes to school choice. They are living
proof that when more options are provided to students, they
are afforded greater access and greater quality. Their success
has shown that more options help students flourish.
What commentators immediately pointed out was that this statement
included a false analogy. HBCUs were not created to provide more
choice for African American students (and thus be analogous to
DeVos’s push for charter schools and school “choice”) but rather
because these students had little to no choice; after the Civil War,
African American students were barred from most white public
institutions.

Paralipsis
This fallacy (sometimes spelled paralepsis and often compared with
occultatio) has been so predominant in the last two years that we think
it’s worthy of inclusion here. Basically, this fallacy occurs when
speakers or writers say they will NOT talk about something, thus doing
the very thing they say they’re not going to do. It’s a way of getting a
point into an argument obliquely, of sneaking it in while saying that
you are not doing so. Although paralipsis is rampant today, it is not
new: Socrates famously used it in his trial when he said he would not
mention his grieving wife and children who would suffer so mightily at
his death. In the 2016 presidential campaign and in the first years of his
presidency, Donald Trump used paralipsis repeatedly. Here, for
instance, he is at a campaign rally in Fort Dodge, Iowa, speaking about
rival candidate Marco Rubio:

204

I will not call him a lightweight, because I think that’s a
derogatory term, so I will not call him a lightweight. Is that
OK with you people? I refuse to say that he’s a lightweight.

Although he is the most conspicuous user of paralipsis today, Trump is
by no means the only politician to use this fallacy. Here’s a
commentator reporting on presidential candidate Bernie Sanders at a
2016 town hall meeting in Iowa:
Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) on Friday called Bill Clinton’s
sexual scandals “totally disgraceful and unacceptable” but

205

said he would not use the former president’s infidelities
against Hillary Clinton. “Hillary Clinton is not Bill Clinton.
What Bill Clinton did, I think we can all acknowledge was
totally, totally, totally disgraceful and unacceptable.”
—Reporter Lisa Hagen, The Hill
In saying he would not use the former president’s scandalous behavior
against Hillary Clinton, he in fact does just the opposite.
Finally, you may run across the use of paralipsis anywhere, even at the
movies, as spoken here by Robert Downey Jr.’s character Tony Stark:
I’m not saying I’m responsible for this country’s longest run
of uninterrupted peace in 35 years! I’m not saying that from
the ashes of captivity, never has a phoenix metaphor been
more personified! I’m not saying Uncle Sam can kick back on
a lawn chair, sipping on an iced tea, because I haven’t come
across anyone man enough to go toe to toe with me on my best
day. It’s not about me!
—Robert Downey Jr., Iron Man 2 (2010)
You may be tempted to use this fallacy in your own writing, but
beware: it is pretty transparent and may well backfire on you. Better to
say what you believe to be the truth—and stick to it.
RESPOND●

1. Examine each of the following political slogans or phrases for

206

logical fallacies.
“Resistance is futile.” (Borg message on Star Trek: The Next
Generation)
“It’s the economy, stupid.” (sign on the wall at Bill Clinton’s
campaign headquarters)
“Make love, not war.” (antiwar slogan popularized during the
Vietnam War)
“Build bridges, not walls.” (attributed to Martin Luther King Jr.)
“Stronger Together” (campaign slogan)
“Guns don’t kill, people do.” (NRA slogan)
“Dog Fighters Are Cowardly Scum.” (PETA T-shirt)
“If you can’t stand the heat, get out of the kitchen.” (attributed
to Harry S Truman)
2. Hone your critical reading skills by choosing a paper you’ve
written for a college class and analyze it for signs of fallacious
reasoning. Then find an editorial, a syndicated column, and a
news report on the same topic and look for fallacies in them.
Which has the most fallacies—and what kind? What may be the
role of the audience in determining when a statement is
fallacious? How effective do you think the fallacies were in
speaking to their intended audience?
3. Find a Web site that is sponsored by an organization (the
Future of Music Coalition, perhaps), a business (Coca-Cola,
Pepsi), or another group (the Democratic or Republican
National Committee), and analyze the site for fallacious
reasoning. Among other considerations, look at the

207

relationship between text and graphics and between individual
pages and the pages that surround or are linked to them.
4. Political blogs such as Mother Jones and InstaPundit typically
provide quick responses to daily events and detailed critiques
of material in other media sites, including national
newspapers. Study one such blog for a few days to see whether
and how the site critiques the articles, political commentary, or
writers it links to. Does the blog ever point out fallacies of
argument? If so, does it explain the problems with such
reasoning or just assume readers will understand the fallacies?
Summarize your findings in a brief oral report to your class.

208

CHAPTER 6 Rhetorical Analysis

If you watched the 2016 Super Bowl between the Carolina Panthers
and the Denver Broncos, you may remember the commercial in which
the images above appeared. For a full 60 seconds, “Portraits” — which
celebrates the seventy-fifth birthday of Jeep — shows still photographs
of the faces of a wide range of people, all of whom have had some
connection with the iconic Jeep. B. B. King, one of the most influential
blues musicians of all time, recorded a cover of the famous Duke
Ellington song, “Jeep’s Blues,” and Marilyn Monroe rode in a Jeep
when she visited troops in 1954. One of the noncelebrities in the
commercial is a young woman holding her hands in front of her face;
who knows what her connection might be? This advertisement, which
won the Super Clio for the best ad of the 2016 Super Bowl, plays in
black and white, flashing from one memorable face to another, as a
voice speaks to viewers:
I’ve seen things no man should bear and those that every man
should dare, from the beaches of Normandy to the farthest
reaches of the earth. In my life, I’ve lived millions of lives. I’ve
outrun robots and danced with dinosaurs. I’ve faced the faces
209

of fear, and of fortitude, and witnessed great beauty in the
making. I’ve kept the company of kings — and queens. But
I’m no royalty or saint. I’ve traveled, trekked, wandered, and
roamed only to find myself right where I belong.
As the portraits are shown, they are occasionally joined by an image of
a Jeep, and the ad closes with these lines:

Within seconds of its showing, the ad had been viewed on YouTube
over 15,000 times. So how do we account for the power of such
advertisements? That would be the work of a rhetorical analysis, the
close, critical reading of a text or, in this case, a video commercial, to
figure out exactly how it functions. Certainly, Iris, the ad agency that
created “Portraits,” counted on the strong emotional appeal of the
photographs, assuming that the faces represented would stir strong
sentiments, along with the lyrical words of the voiceover.

210

The ad’s creators pushed the envelope of convention, too, by rejecting
the over-the-top, schmaltzy, or super-cute techniques of other
advertisements and by the muted product connection. As Super Clio
commissioner Rob Reilly put it, “I liked the restraint it showed for the
Super Bowl, to not use the typical tricks. Jeep could have easily shown
driving footage . . . but they chose to show very little product and tell a
great story.” Another Clio juror found that the ad “credits people with
intelligence and asks you to decode it.” (For more information on
analyzing images, see Chapter 14.)
Rhetorical analysis and critical reading also probe the contexts that
surround any argument or text — its impact on a society, its deeper
implications, or even what it lacks or whom it excludes. Predictably,
the widely admired Jeep commercial found its share of critics. In a
review of the ad for Wired, Jenna Garrett helps viewers understand
some of the choices made by the advertisers, such as the decision to
show the ad in portrait format (and thus using only a third of the TV
screen) in recognition that many would be watching on cell phones and
tablets (indeed, she reports, the ad looks very fine on those devices).
But she then turns to faults she finds with the ad:
Some of the photos are legitimately great, taken by the likes of
celebrity photographer Martin Schoeller. But others look like
vacation snapshots, and many of the Jeep images were “fan
photos” taken by people doing, well, whatever. Although the
photos make the point that Jeep has been everywhere and
loved by everyone, the ad doesn’t feel cohesive. The pictures of
Terminator and T-rex, for example, were jarring, particularly

211

the Terminator’s red eyes (the only splash of color in the
entire ad). And speaking from a strictly technical perspective,
the photos are all over the map in terms of contrast, and some
of the crops are entirely too tight.
— Jenna Garrett, “Why Jeep’s $10M Super Bowl Ad Only
Used a Third of the Screen”
Other reviewers found the advertisement over-sentimental, even
saccharine; still others noted some lack of diversity.
Whenever you undertake a rhetorical analysis, do what these reviewers
did: read (and view) critically, noting every detail and asking yourself
how those details affect the audience, how they build agreement or
adherence to the argument — or how they do not do so. And ask plenty
of questions: Why does an ad for a cell phone or breakfast sandwich
make people want one immediately? How does an op-ed piece in the
Washington Post suddenly change your long-held position on
immigration? Critical reading and rhetorical analysis can help you
understand and answer these questions. Dig as deep as you can into the
context of the item you are analyzing, especially when you encounter
puzzling, troubling, or unusually successful appeals — ethical,
emotional, or logical. Ask yourself what strategies a speech, editorial,
opinion column, film, or ad uses to move your heart, win your trust,
and change your mind — or why, maybe, it fails to do so.

212

Composing a Rhetorical
Analysis: Reading and
Viewing Critically
You perform a rhetorical analysis by analyzing how well the
components of an argument work together to persuade or move an
audience. You can study arguments of any kind — advertisements (as
we’ve seen), Web sites, editorials, political cartoons, and even songs,
movies, photographs, buildings, or shopping malls. In every case,
you’ll need to focus your rhetorical analysis on elements that stand out
or make the piece intriguing or problematic. You could begin by
exploring some of the following issues:
What is the purpose of this argument? What does it hope to
achieve?
Who is the audience for this argument? Who is ignored or
excluded?
What appeals or techniques does the argument use — emotional,
logical, ethical?
What type of argument is it, and how does the genre affect the
argument? (You might challenge the lack of evidence in editorials,
but you wouldn’t make the same complaint about bumper
stickers.)
Who is making the argument? What ethos does it create, and how
does it do so? What values does the ethos evoke? How does it
make the writer or creator seem trustworthy?
What authorities does the argument rely on or appeal to?

213

What facts, reasoning, and evidence are used in the argument?
How are they presented?
Can you detect the use of misinformation, disinformation, “fake”
news, or outright lies?
What claims does the argument make? What issues are raised —
or ignored or evaded?
What are the contexts — social, political, historical, cultural — for
this argument? Whose interests does it serve? Who gains or loses
by it?
Can you identify fallacies in the argument — emotional, ethical,
or logical? (See Chapter 5.)
How is the argument organized or arranged? What media does the
argument use and how effectively?
How does the language and style of the argument work to
persuade an audience?
In answering questions like these, try to show how the key devices in
an argument actually make it succeed or fail. Quote freely from a
written piece, or describe the elements in a visual argument.
(Annotating a visual text is one option.) Let readers know where and
why an argument makes sense and where it falls apart. If you believe
that an argument startles, challenges, insults, or lulls audiences, explain
why that is the case and provide evidence. Don’t be surprised when
your rhetorical analysis itself becomes an argument. That’s what it
should be.

214

Understanding the
Purpose of Arguments
You Are Analyzing
To understand how well any argument works, begin with its purpose:
Is it to sell running shoes? To advocate for limits to college tuition? To
push a political agenda? In many cases, that purpose may be obvious.
A conservative blog will likely advance right-wing causes; ads from a
baby food company will likely show happy infants delighted with
stewed prunes.
But some projects may hide their persuasive intentions. Perhaps you’ve
responded to a mail survey or telephone poll only to discover that the
questions are leading you to switch your cable service or buy
apartment insurance. Do such stealthy arguments succeed? Do
consumers resent the intrusion? Answering questions like these
provides material for useful rhetorical analyses that assess the
strengths, risks, and ethics of such strategies.

215

Understanding Who
Makes an Argument
Knowing who is claiming what is key to any rhetorical analysis. That’s
why persuasive appeals usually have a name attached to them.
Remember the statements included in TV ads during the last federal
election: “Hello, I’m X — and I approve this ad”? Federal law requires
such statements so we can tell the difference between ads a candidate
endorses and ones sponsored by groups not even affiliated with the
campaigns. Their interests and motives might be very different.

Senator Elizabeth Warren endorsing Kamala Harris, who won the 2016 race to
replace long-time California senator Barbara Boxer

But knowing a name is just a starting place for analysis. You need to
dig deeper, and you could do worse than to Google such people or
groups to discover more about them. What else have they produced?
Who publishes them: the Wall Street Journal, the blog The Daily Kos,
or even a Live-Journal celebrity gossip site such as Oh No They
Didn’t? Check out related Web sites for information about goals,
216

policies, contributors, and funding.

RESPOND●
Describe a persuasive moment that you can recall from a speech, an
editorial, an advertisement, a YouTube clip, or a blog posting. Or
research one of the following famous persuasive moments and
describe the circumstances—the historical situation, the issues at
stake, the purpose of the argument—that make it so memorable.
Abraham Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address (1863)
Elizabeth Cady Stanton’s Declaration of Sentiments at the
Seneca Falls Convention (1848)
Chief Tecumseh’s address to General William Henry Harrison
(1810)
Winston Churchill’s radio addresses to the British people during
World War II (1940)
Martin Luther King Jr.’s “Letter from Birmingham Jail” (1963)
Ronald Reagan’s tribute to the Challenger astronauts (1986)
Toni Morrison’s speech accepting the Nobel Prize (1993)
Former President Obama’s eulogy in memory of the
worshippers killed at the Emmanuel AME Church in Charleston
(2015)

217

Identifying and Appealing
to Audiences
Sara Morrison’s report “Covering the Transgender Community”
has a clear audience: journalists and others interested in how
transgender individuals are represented in the media.
LINK TO Morrison, “Covering the Transgender Community,” in
Chapter 23

Most arguments are composed with specific audiences in mind, and
their success depends, in part, on how well their strategies, content,
tone, and language meet the expectations of that audience. So your
rhetorical analysis of an argumentative piece should identify its target
readers or viewers (see Appealing to Audiences in Chapter 1) if
possible, or make an educated guess about the audience, since most
arguments suggest whom they intend to reach and in what ways.
Both a flyer stapled to a bulletin board in a college dorm (“Why you
shouldn’t drink and drive”) and a forty-foot billboard for Bud Light
might be aimed at the same general population — college students. But
each will adjust its appeals for the different moods of that group in
different moments. For starters, the flyer will appeal to students in a
serious vein, while the beer ad will probably be visually stunning and
virtually text-free.
You might also examine how a writer or an argument establishes
218

credibility with an audience. One effective means of building
credibility is to show respect for your readers or viewers, especially if
they may not agree with you. In introducing an article on problems
facing African American women in the workplace, editor-in-chief of
Essence Diane Weathers considers the problems that she faced with
respecting all her potential readers:
We spent more than a minute agonizing over the provocative
cover line for our feature “White Women at Work.” The
countless stories we had heard from women across the
country told us that this was a workplace issue we had to
address. From my own experience at several major
magazines, it was painfully obvious to me that Black and
White women are not on the same track. Sure, we might all
start out in the same place. But early in the game, most sisters
I know become stuck — and the reasons have little to do with
intelligence or drive. At some point we bump our heads
against that ceiling. And while White women may complain of
a glass ceiling, for us, the ceiling is concrete.
So how do we tell this story without sounding whiny and
paranoid, or turning off our White-female readers, staff
members, advertisers and girlfriends? Our solution: Bring
together real women (several of them highly successful senior
corporate executives), put them in a room, promise them
anonymity and let them speak their truth.
— Diane Weathers, “Speaking Our Truth”

219

Retailers like Walmart build their credibility by simple “straight talk” to
shoppers: we always have low prices. Here the use of red, white, and blue says
“we’re all-American,” while the simple layout and direct statement (a promise,
really) say they are talking the talk as well as walking the walk.

Both paragraphs affirm Weathers’s determination to treat audiences
fairly and to deal honestly with a difficult subject. The strategy would
merit attention in any rhetorical analysis.
Look, too, for signals that writers share values with readers or at least
understand an audience. In the following passage, writer Jack Solomon
is clear about one value that he hopes readers have in common — a
preference for “straight talk”:
There are some signs in the advertising world that Americans
are getting fed up with fantasy advertisements and want to
hear some straight talk. Weary of extravagant product claims
. . . , consumers trained by years of advertising to distrust
what they hear seem to be developing an immunity to
commercials.

220

— Jack Solomon, “Masters of Desire: The Culture of
American Advertising”
But straight talk still requires common sense. If ever a major television
ad seriously misread its audience, it may have been a spot that ran
during the 2014 Winter Olympics for Cadillac’s pricey new plug-in
hybrid, the ELR. The company seemed to go out of its way to offend a
great many people, foreign and domestic. As is typical strategy in
rhetorical analyses, Huffington Post’s Carolyn Gregoire takes care to
describe in detail the item she finds offensive — a shot of a man
overlooking the pool in his backyard and asking why we work so hard,
“For this? For stuff?”:
[I]t becomes clear that the answer to this rhetorical question is
actually a big fat YES. And it gets worse. “Other countries,
they work,” he says. “They stroll home. They stop by the cafe.
They take August off. Off.”
Then he reveals just what it is that makes Americans better
than all those lazy, espresso-sipping foreigners.
“Why aren’t you like that?” he says. “Why aren’t we like
that? Because we’re crazy, driven, hard-working believers,
that’s why.”
— Carolyn Gregoire, “Cadillac Made a Commercial about
the American Dream, and It’s a Nightmare”
Her conclusion then is blistering, showing how readily a rhetorical

221

analysis becomes an argument — and subject to criticism itself:
Cadillacs have long been a quintessentially American symbol
of wealth and status. But as this commercial proves, no
amount of wealth or status is a guarantee of good taste. Now,
the luxury car company is selling a vision of the American
Dream at its worst: Work yourself into the ground, take as
little time off as possible, and buy expensive sh*t (specifically,
a 2014 Cadillac ELR).

222

Examining Arguments
Based on Emotion: Pathos
Some emotional appeals are just ploys to win over readers with a pretty
face, figurative or real. You’ve seen ads promising an exciting life and
attractive friends if only you drink the right soda or wear a particular
brand of clothes. Are you fooled by such claims? Probably not, if you
pause to think about them. But that’s the strategy — to distract you
from thought just long enough to make a bad choice. It’s a move worth
commenting on in a rhetorical analysis.
Yet emotions can add real muscle to arguments, too, and that’s worth
noting. For example, persuading people not to drink and drive by
making them fear death, injury, or arrest seems like a fair use of an
emotional appeal. Public service announcements often use emotionladen images to remind drivers to think of the consequences.
In analyzing emotional appeals, judge whether the emotions raised —
anger, sympathy, fear, envy, joy, love, lust — advance the claims
offered. Look, for example, at these photographs of protests in
Charlottesville, Virginia, over the possible removal of a statue of
General Robert E. Lee.

223

This photo shows proud members of the Loyal White Knights of the Ku Klux
Klan, some carrying Confederate flags. What emotions do you think these
protesters wanted to appeal to? What emotions does the photo stir in you?

224

Or how about this photo, from the same rally, showing counterprotesters: again,
what emotions are being appealed to? How effective do you find either of these
photos in appealing to your emotions?

The August 2017 rally in Charlottesville stirred emotions across the
country, as ordinary people, commentators, and politicians weighed in
on issues of white supremacy, neo-Nazism, fascism, race-based hatred,
and bigotry. President Trump at first suggested that there was plenty of
blame on “all sides,” but later adjusted that statement when many
accused him of drawing a false equivalency between those advocating
for Nazism and those who were protesting against it.
But arguments that appeal to emotions don’t have to be as highly
charged — and dangerous — as the Charlottesville event was.
Consider, for example, how columnist Ron Rosenbaum makes the
reasonable argument he offers for fatty foods all the more attractive by
loading it with emotional language:
The foods that best hit that sweet spot and “overwhelm the
brain” with pleasure are high-quality fatty foods. They
discourage us from overeating. A modest serving of short ribs
or Peking duck will be both deeply pleasurable and selflimiting. As the brain swoons into insensate delight, you won’t
have to gorge a still-craving cortex with mediocre sensations.
“Sensory-specific satiety” makes a slam-dunk case (it’s
science!) for eating reasonable servings of superbly satisfying
fatty foods.
— Ron Rosenbaum, “Let Them Eat Fat”
225

Does the use of evocative language (“swoons,” “insensate delight,”
“superbly satisfying,” “slam-dunk”) convince you, or does it distract
from considering the scientific case for “sensory-specific satiety”?
Your task in a rhetorical analysis is to study an author’s words, the
emotions they evoke, and the claims they support and then to make this
kind of judgment.

Short ribs: health food? Who does this photo appeal to — and who might it turn
off?

RESPOND●
Browse YouTube or another Web site to find an example of a
powerful emotional argument that’s made visually, either alone or
using words as well. In a paragraph, defend a claim about how the
argument works. For example, does an image itself make a claim, or
does it draw you in to consider a verbal claim? What emotion does
the argument generate? How does that emotion work to persuade
you?

226

Examining Arguments
Based on Character: Ethos
It should come as no surprise: readers believe writers who seem honest,
wise, and trustworthy. So in analyzing the effectiveness of an
argument, look for evidence of these traits. Does the writer have the
experience or authority to write on this subject? Are all claims
qualified reasonably? Is evidence presented in full, not tailored to the
writer’s agenda? Are important objections to the author’s position
acknowledged and addressed? Are sources documented? Above all,
does the writer sound trustworthy?
When a Norwegian anti-immigration extremist killed seventy-six
innocent people in July 2011, Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg
addressed the citizens of Norway (and the world), and in doing so
evoked the character or ethos of the entire nation:
We will not let fear break us! The warmth of response from
people in Norway and from the whole world makes me sure of
this one thing: evil can kill a single person, but never defeat a
whole people. The strongest weapon in the world — that is
freedom of expression and democracy.
In analyzing this speech, you would do well to look at the way this
passage deploys the deepest values of Norway — freedom of
expression and democracy — to serve as a response to fear of
terrorism. In doing so, Stoltenberg evokes ethical ideals to hold onto in
a time of tragedy.
227

Or take a look at the following paragraph from a blog posting by
Timothy Burke, a teacher at Swarthmore College and parent of a
preschool child who is trying to think through the issue of homework
for elementary school kids:

In considering the role of ethos in rhetorical analyses, pay attention to
the details right down to the choice of words or, in an image, the
shapes and colors. The modest, tentative tone that Burke uses in his
228

blog is an example of the kind of choice that can shape an audience’s
perception of ethos. But these details need your interpretation.
Language that’s hot and extreme can mark a writer as either passionate
or loony. Work that’s sober and carefully organized can paint an
institution as competent or overly cautious. Technical terms and
abstract phrases can make a writer seem either knowledgeable or
pompous.

229

Examining Arguments
Based on Facts and
Reason: Logos
In analyzing most arguments, you’ll have to decide whether an
argument makes a plausible claim and offers good reasons for you to
believe it. Not all arguments will package such claims in a single neat
sentence, or thesis — nor should they. A writer may tell a story from
which you have to infer the claim. Visual arguments may work the
same way: viewers have to assemble the parts and draw inferences in
order to get the point. Take a look, for instance, at this advertisement
for GEICO insurance:

230

This ad draws attention with a snappy photo of a large silver watch and
a headline: “That watch won’t pay for itself.” The smaller text below
mentions other luxury items consumers may covet: designer aviators,
for example, that don’t “come cheap.” Then the logical shift: if you
want luxury things you would do well to save money. And how to save
money? “So switch to GEICO and save money for the things you
love.” There’s an implied syllogism here:
You need to save money so you can afford the things you love.
GEICO will help you save money.

231

GEICO will help you afford the things you love.
But a little critical thinking can lead you to question each of these
implied premises. Is the reason to save money really to buy luxury
items? Just exactly how will GEICO help you save money? How much
is your current insurance and how does that compare to the cost of
GEICO? Maybe GEICO does offer a very good deal on insurance, but
you’ll need to do some more research to assure yourself of that fact.
(For more on analyzing visual images, see Chapter 14.)
Some print arguments (like those on an editorial page) may be
perfectly obvious: writers stake out a claim and then present reasons
that you should consider, or they may first present reasons and lay out
a case that leads you to accept a claim in the conclusion. Consider the
following example. In a tough opinion piece in Time, political
commentator John McWhorter argues that filmmaker Spike Lee is
being racist when he rails against hipsters moving into Fort Greene, a
formerly all-black neighborhood in Brooklyn, New York. Lee fears
that the whites are raising housing prices, pushing out old-time
residents and diminishing the African American character of Fort
Greene. McWhorter, an African American like Lee, sees matters
differently:
Basically, black people are getting paid more money than
they’ve ever seen in their lives for their houses, and a once
sketchy neighborhood is now quiet and pleasant. And this is a
bad thing . . . why?
Lee seems to think it’s somehow an injustice whenever black
232

people pick up stakes. But I doubt many of the blacks now set
to pass fat inheritances on to their kids feel that way. This is
not the old story of poor blacks being pushed out of
neighborhoods razed down for highway construction. Lee
isn’t making sense.
— John McWhorter, “Spike Lee’s Racism Isn’t Cute”

See another argument on race by John McWhorter, this time on
what it means when we say someone “sounds black” or “sounds
white.”
LINK TO McWhorter, “Thick of Tongue,” in Chapter 25

When you encounter explicit charges like these, you analyze whether
and how the claims are supported by good reasons and reliable
evidence. A lengthy essay may, in fact, contain a series of claims, each
developed to support an even larger point. Here’s McWhorter, for
instance, expanding his argument by suggesting that Lee’s attitudes
toward whites are irreconcilable.
“Respect the culture” when you move in, Lee growls. But
again, he isn’t making sense. We can be quite sure that if
whites “respected” the culture by trying to participate in it,
Lee would be one of the first in line to call it “appropriation.”
So, no whites better open up barbecue joints or spoken word
cafes or try to be rappers. Yet if whites walk on by the culture
in “respectful” silence, then the word on the street becomes
233

that they want to keep blacks at a distance.

An anti-fur protestor in London makes a rather specific claim.

Indeed, every paragraph in an argument may develop a specific and
related idea. In a rhetorical analysis, you need to identify all these
separate propositions and examine the relationships among them: Are
they solidly linked? Are there inconsistencies that the writer should
acknowledge? Does the end of the piece support what the writer said
(and promised) at the beginning?
You’ll also need to examine the quality of the information presented in
an argument, assessing how accurately such information is reported,
how conveniently it’s displayed (in charts or graphs, for example), and

234

how well the sources cited represent a range of respected opinions on a
topic. (For more information on the use of evidence, see Chapter 4.)

Historian Catherine Nolan-Ferrell asks us to confront the value of
logos when she asks, “How do we navigate a world where many in
society have lost trust in shared data?”
LINK TO Nolan-Ferrell, “Balancing Classroom Civility and Free
Speech,” in Chapter 27

Knowing how to judge the quality of sources is more important now
than ever before because the digital universe is full of junk. In some
ways, the computer terminal has become the equivalent of a library
reference room, but the sources available online vary widely in quality
and have not been evaluated by a library professional. As a
consequence, you must know the difference between reliable,
firsthand, or fully documented sources and those that don’t meet such
standards. (For using and documenting sources, see Chapters 19, 20,
and 22.)

235

Examining the
Arrangement and Media
of Arguments
Aristotle carved the structure of logical argument to its bare bones
when he observed that it had only two parts:
statement
proof
You could do worse, in examining an argument, than to make sure that
every claim a writer makes is backed by sufficient evidence. Some
arguments are written on the fly in the heat of the moment. Most
arguments that you read and write, however, will be more than mere
statements followed by proofs. Some writers will lay their cards on the
table immediately; others may lead you carefully through a chain of
claims toward a conclusion. Writers may even interrupt their
arguments to offer background information or cultural contexts for
readers. Sometimes they’ll tell stories or provide anecdotes that make
an argumentative point. They’ll qualify the arguments they make, too,
and often pause to admit that other points of view are plausible.
In other words, there are no set formulas or acceptable patterns that fit
all successful arguments. In writing a rhetorical analysis, you’ll have to
assess the organization of a persuasive text on its own merits.
It’s fair, however, to complain about what may be absent from an

236

argument. Most arguments of proposal (see Chapter 12), for example,
include a section that defends the feasibility of a new idea, explaining
how it might be funded or managed. In a rhetorical analysis, you might
fault an editorial that supports a new stadium for a city without
addressing feasibility issues. Similarly, analyzing a movie review that
reads like an off-the-top-of-the-head opinion, you might legitimately
ask what criteria of evaluation are in play (see Chapter 10).
Rhetorical analysis also calls for you to look carefully at an argument’s
transitions, headings and subheadings, documentation of sources, and
overall tone or voice. Don’t take such details for granted, since all of
them contribute to the strength — or weakness — of an argument.
Nor should you ignore the way a writer or an institution uses media.
Would an argument originally made in a print editorial, for instance,
work better as a digital presentation (or vice versa)? Would a lengthy
essay have more power if it included more illustrations — graphs,
maps, photographs, and so on? Or do these images distract from a
written argument’s substance?
Finally, be open to the possibility of new or nontraditional structures of
arguments. The visual arguments that you analyze may defy
conventional principles of logic or arrangement — for example,
making juxtapositions rather than logical transitions between elements
or using quick cuts, fades, or other devices to link ideas. Quite often,
these nontraditional structures will also resist the neatness of a thesis,
leaving readers to construct at least a part of the argument in their
heads. As we saw with the “Portraits” Jeep spot at the beginning of this

237

chapter, advertisers are growing fond of soft-sell multimedia
productions that can seem like something other than what they really
are — product pitches. We may be asked not just to buy a product but
also to live its lifestyle or embrace its ethos. Is that a reasonable or
workable strategy for an argument? Your analysis might entertain such
possibilities.

238

Looking at Style
Even a coherent argument full of sound evidence may not connect with
readers if it’s dull, off-key, or offensive. Readers naturally judge the
credibility of arguments in part by how stylishly the case is made —
even when they don’t know exactly what style is (for more on style,
see Chapter 13). In fact, today rhetoricians and media critics alike point
out the crucial importance of style in getting and holding attention in a
time when readers are drowning in an overload of information.
Consider how these simple, blunt sentences from the opening of an
argument for gun control shape your image of the author and probably
determine whether you’re willing to continue to read the whole piece:
Six minutes and about twenty seconds. In a little over six
minutes, seventeen of our friends were taken from us. Fifteen
were injured, and everyone — absolutely everyone — in [our]
community was forever altered. Everyone who was there
understands. Everyone who has been touched by the cold grip
of gun violence understands.
— Emma Gonzalez, speech delivered at March for Our Lives
on March 24, 2018
The strong, straightforward tone, the drum-beat use of repetition, and
the stark evocation of just how little time it took to take the lives of
seventeen high school students and staff set the style for this speech,
which led to six minutes of silence and then to prolonged, and loud,
applause and cheers.
239

Now consider the brutally sarcastic tone of Nathaniel Stein’s hilarious
parody of the Harvard grading policy, a piece he wrote following up on
a professor’s complaint of out-of-control grade inflation at the school.
Stein borrows the formal language of a typical “grading standards”
sheet to mock the decline in rigor that the professor has lamented:
The A+ grade is used only in very rare instances for the
recognition of truly exceptional achievement.
For example: A term paper receiving the A+ is virtually
indistinguishable from the work of a professional, both in its
choice of paper stock and its font. The student’s command of
the topic is expert, or at the very least intermediate, or
beginner. Nearly every single word in the paper is spelled
correctly; those that are not can be reasoned out phonetically
within minutes. Content from Wikipedia is integrated with
precision. The paper contains few, if any, death threats. . . .
An overall course grade of A+ is reserved for those students
who have not only demonstrated outstanding achievement in
coursework but have also asked very nicely.
Finally, the A+ grade is awarded to all collages, dioramas and
other art projects.
— Nathaniel Stein, “Leaked! Harvard’s Grading Rubric”
Both styles probably work, but they signal that the writers are about to
make very different kinds of cases. Here, style alone tells readers what

240

to expect.
Manipulating style also enables writers to shape readers’ responses to
their ideas. Devices as simple as repetition, parallelism, or even
paragraph length can give sentences remarkable power. Consider this
brief announcement by Jason Collins, who played for the Washington
Wizards:
I’m a 34-year-old NBA center. I’m black. And I’m gay.
I didn’t set out to be the first openly gay athlete playing in a
major American team sport. But since I am, I’m happy to
start the conversation. I wish I wasn’t the kid in the classroom
raising his hand and saying, “I’m different.” If I had my way,
someone else would have already done this. Nobody has,
which is why I’m raising my hand.
— Jason Collins, Sports Illustrated, May 6, 2013
In this passage, Collins opens with three very short, very direct, and
roughly parallel sentences. He also uses repetition of first-person
pronouns to hammer home that he is claiming his own identity with
this statement. Doing so invites readers and listeners to listen to his
experience and to walk in his shoes, even for a brief time.

241

Jason Collins

In a rhetorical analysis, you can explore such stylistic choices. Why
does a formal style work for discussing one type of subject matter but
not another? How does a writer use humor or irony to underscore an
important point or to manage a difficult concession? Do stylistic
choices, even something as simple as the use of contractions or
personal pronouns, bring readers close to a writer, or do technical
words and an impersonal voice signal that an argument is for experts
only?
To describe the stylistic effects of visual arguments, you may use a
different vocabulary and talk about colors, camera angles, editing,
balance, proportion, fonts, perspective, and so on. But the basic
principle is this: the look of an item — whether a poster, an editorial
cartoon, or a film documentary — can support the message that it
242

carries, undermine it, or muddle it. In some cases, the look will be the
message. In a rhetorical analysis, you can’t ignore style.

Here’s an award-winning poster for Beauty and the Beast, praised by critics for
its stylistic elegance. As a commentator for DigitalSpy put it, “So chic. So stylish.
So yellow.”

A rhetorical analysis would note that the bright yellow dress and title
evoke the sun as the image of Beauty dominates the middle of the
image, while the beast’s profile is superimposed on a full moon. Here
the simplicity, vivid color, and careful juxtaposition suggest that these
two are made for each other. (For more on analyzing visual images, see
Chapter 14.)

RESPOND●
Find a recent example of a visual argument, either in print or on the

243

Internet. Even though you may have a copy of the image, describe it
carefully in your paper on the assumption that your description is all
readers may have to go on. Then make a judgment about its
effectiveness, supporting your claim with clear evidence from the
“text.”

244

Examining a Rhetorical
Analysis
On the following pages, well-known New York Times columnist
Nicholas Kristof reports on his family’s annual vacation, when they
“run away to the mountains.” He argues that we are plagued by “nature
deficit disorder,” that we have lost our connection with the wilderness,
with the land that supports us, and that we must do our best to preserve
and protect the “natural splendor that no billionaire is allowed to fence
off.” Responding to Kristof’s argument with a careful critical reading
and detailed rhetorical analysis is Cameron Hauer, a student at Portland
State University.
Fleeing to the Mountains
NICHOLAS KRISTOF
ON THE PACIFIC CREST TRAIL, NORTHWEST
OF TRUCKEE, Calif. —
This will make me sound grouchy and misanthropic,
but I sometimes wonder if what makes America great
isn’t so much its people as its trees and mountains.
In contrast to many advanced countries, we have a vast
and spectacular publicly owned wilderness, mostly free and available
to all. In an age of inequality, the affluent have gated neighborhoods,
private schools, backup generators and greater influence on elected
officials. But our most awe-inspiring wild places have remained largely
245

a public good to be shared by all, a bastion of equality.
My family and I have been backpacking on the Pacific Crest Trail
through the Sierras north of Donner Pass, enjoying magnificent
splendor that no billionaire is allowed to fence off. We all have equal
access, at no charge: If you can hold your own against mosquitoes and
bears, the spot is yours for the night.
Yet these public lands are at risk today. More on that in a moment, but
first let me tell you about the Kristofs’ grand vacation. As we do each
summer, we ran away from home to the mountains. We escaped the
tether of email and cellphones, the tyranny of the inbox, and fled with
everything we needed on our backs.
We’re yanked back to a simple life. We sleep under the stars rather
than in a tent; if it rains we pull out a tarp to keep dry. Dawn wakes us
up, we roll up our sleeping bags and plastic ground sheet, wolf down
trail mix or granola bars and start down the path. We fill our water
bottles at passing streams, stop for rest and meals wherever we fancy,
chat as we walk, and when dusk comes we look for a flat spot, kick
aside any rocks and branches and unroll our ground sheet and sleeping
bags again.
Granted, we also moan about blisters. And marauding mosquitoes. And
the heat — or, sometimes, the cold. We whine a lot, but that builds
family solidarity.
This is also a spiritual experience: It’s a chance to share a reverence for
the ethereal scenery of America’s wild places. The wilderness is
246

nature’s cathedral, and it’s a thrill to worship here.
The march of civilization has been about distancing ourselves from the
raw power of nature. At home, we move the thermostat up or down by
a degree, and we absorb the idea that we are lords of the universe. On
the trail, we are either sweating or freezing, and it always feels as if the
path is mainly uphill. Nature mocks us, usefully reminding us who’s
boss.

If your kids are suffering from what the writer Richard Louv calls
nature-deficit disorder, I recommend that you all run away from home
together. Flee to the mountains. It’s heaven with blisters.
There are often charges to enter much-trafficked spots like
Yellowstone or Yosemite, but the wilderness is mostly free to hikers.
This is our collective patrimony, a tribute to the wisdom of Theodore

247

Roosevelt, Gifford Pinchot and other visionaries who preserved our
wild places for the future. Thank God for them. Otherwise, these lands
might have been carved up and sold off as ranches for the rich.
Because of the foresight of past generations, the federal government
owns one million square miles, an area three times the size of
California, Oregon and Washington combined. Much of this is
unspoiled, our inheritance and our shared playground.
Yet today, President Trump sees this heritage as an opportunity for
development. More aggressively than past administrations, Trump’s is
systematically handing over America’s public lands for private
exploitation in ways that will scar the land forever.
The Trump administration lifted a moratorium on new coal mining
leases on public land, it is drawing up plans to reduce wilderness
protected as national monuments and it is rapidly opening up additional
public lands to coal mining and oil and gas drilling.
A second challenge comes from our paralysis in the face of climate
change, compounded by the Trump administration, and the risks this
creates to our wilderness. A warmer climate has led to droughts and to
the 20-year spread of the mountain pine beetle, and a result is the death
of vast swaths of Western forests. Last year, 62 million trees died in
California alone, the Forest Service says, and in Oregon and
Washington I’ve watched forests turn brown and sickly. In parts of
Wyoming and Colorado, the pine beetle has killed almost all the
mature lodgepole pine trees, and it’s arguably even worse in British
Columbia.
248

The third risk is from gradual degradation and chronic underfunding.
Even before Trump took office, wilderness trails and campgrounds
were in embarrassing disrepair. How is it that we could afford to
construct these trails 80 years ago in the Great Depression but cannot
manage even to maintain them today?
When public lands are lost — or mined in ways that scar the landscape
— something has been lost forever on our watch. A public good has
been privatized, and our descendants have been robbed.
To promote an understanding of what is being lost, I encourage
everyone to run away from home as well. Flee to the mountains,
deserts and babbling brooks to get in touch with wild spaces, to find
perspective and humility. The wilderness nourishes our souls, if we let
it.
Appeal, Audience, and Narrative in Kristof’s Wilderness
CAMERON HAUER

249

250

251

252

253

254

Cameron Hauer is a student at Portland State University, where he is majoring in
Applied Linguistics, having returned to school after a decade spent cooking in fine
dining establishments in the Pacific Northwest.

GUIDE to writing a rhetorical analysis

255

Finding a Topic
A rhetorical analysis is usually assigned: you’re asked to show how an
argument works and to assess its effectiveness. When you can choose
your own subject for analysis, look for one or more of the following
qualities:
a complex verbal or visual argument that challenges you — or
disturbs or pleases you
a text that raises current or enduring issues of substance
a text that you believe should be taken more seriously
Look for arguments to analyze in the editorial and op-ed pages of any
newspaper, political magazines such as the Nation or National Review,
Web sites of organizations and interest groups, political blogs such as
Huffington Post or Power Line, corporate Web sites that post their TV ad
spots, videos and statements posted to YouTube, and so on.

Researching Your Topic
Once you’ve got a text to analyze, find out all you can about it. Use
library or Web resources to explore:
who the author is and what his or her credentials are
if the author is an institution, what it does, what its sources of
funding are, who its members are, and so on
who is publishing or sponsoring the piece and what the
organization typically publishes
what the leanings or biases of the author and publisher might be,
where they are coming from in the argument, and what influences
may have led them to make the argument
what the context of the argument is — what preceded or provoked
it and how others have responded to it

256

Formulating a Claim
Begin with a hypothesis. A full thesis might not become evident until
you’re well into your analysis, but your final thesis should reflect the
complexity of the piece that you’re studying. In developing a thesis,
consider questions such as the following:
What is the major claim of the argument? What evidence is
presented in support of it?
How can I describe what this argument achieves?
What is the purpose, and is it accomplished?
What audiences does the argument address and what audiences
does it ignore, and why?
Which rhetorical appeals does the argument make use of and
which will likely influence readers most: ethos of the author?
emotional appeals? logical progression? style, use of images or
other illustrations? What aspects of the argument work better
than others?
How do the rhetorical elements of ethos, pathos, and logos
interact?
Here’s the hardest part for most writers of rhetorical analyses: whether
you agree or disagree with an argument should not keep you from
careful, meticulous analysis: you need to stay out of the fray and pay
attention only to how — and to how well — the argument works.

Examples of Possible Claims for a Rhetorical Analysis
Some people admire the directness and plain talking of Donald
Trump; others are put off by his lack of information, his tendency
to stretch or ignore the truth, and his noisy bluster. A close look at
several of his tweets and public appearances will illuminate both
sides of this debate.

257

Today’s editorial in the Daily Collegian about campus crimes may
scare first-year students, but its anecdotal reporting doesn’t get
down to hard numbers — and for a good reason. Those statistics
don’t back the position taken by the editors.
The imageboard 4chan has been called an “Internet hate
machine,” yet others claim it as a great boon to creativity. A close
analysis of its home-page can help to settle this debate.
The original design of New York’s Freedom Tower, with its torqued
surfaces and evocative spire, made a stronger argument about
American values than its replacement, a fortress-like skyscraper
stripped of imagination and unable to make any statement except
“I’m 1,776 feet tall.”
The controversy over speech on campuses has reached a fever
pitch, with some arguing that those who spout hate and bigotry
and prejudice should be barred from speaking.

Preparing a Proposal
If your instructor asks you to prepare a proposal for your rhetorical
analysis, here’s a format you might use:
Provide a copy of the work you’re analyzing, whether it’s a print
text, a photograph, a digital image, or a URL, for instance.
Offer a working hypothesis or tentative thesis.
Indicate which rhetorical components seem especially compelling
and worthy of detailed study and any connections between
elements. For example, does the piece seem to emphasize facts
and logic so much that it becomes disconnected from potential
audiences? If so, hint at that possibility in your proposal.
Indicate background information you intend to research about
the author, institution, and contexts (political, economic, social,
and religious) of the argument.
Define the audience you’d like to reach. If you’re responding to an

258

assignment, you may be writing primarily for a teacher and
classmates. But they make up a complex audience in themselves.
If you can do so within the spirit of the assignment, imagine that
your analysis will be published in a local newspaper, Web site, or
blog.
Conclude by briefly discussing the key challenges you anticipate
in preparing a rhetorical analysis.

Considering Genre and Media
Your instructor may specify that you use a particular genre and/or
medium. If not, ask yourself these questions to help you make a good
choice:
What genre is most appropriate for your rhetorical analysis? Does
it call for an academic essay, a report, an infographic, a poster,
brochure, or something else?
What medium is most appropriate for your analysis? Would it be
best delivered orally to a live audience? Presented as an audio
essay or podcast? Presented in print only or in print with
illustrations?
Will you need visuals, such as moving or still images, maps,
graphs, charts — and what function will they play in your analysis?
Make sure they are not just “added on” but are necessary
components of the analysis.

Thinking about Organization
Your rhetorical analysis is likely to include the following:
Facts about the text you’re analyzing: provide the author’s name;
the title or name of the work; its place of publication or its

259

location; the date it was published or viewed.
Evidence that you have read the argument carefully and critically,
that you have listened closely to and understand the points it is
making, and that you have been open and fair in your assessment.
Contexts for the argument: readers need to know where the text is
coming from, to what it may be responding, in what controversies
it might be embroiled, and so on. Don’t assume that they can infer
the important contextual elements.
A synopsis of the text that you’re analyzing: if you can’t attach the
original argument, you must summarize it in enough detail so that
a reader can imagine it. Even if you attach a copy of the piece, the
analysis should include a summary.
Some claim about the work’s rhetorical effectiveness: it might be
a simple evaluative claim or something more complex. The claim
can come early in the paper, or you might build up to it, providing
the evidence that leads toward the conclusion you’ve reached.
A detailed analysis of how the argument works: although you’ll
probably analyze rhetorical components separately, don’t let your
analysis become a dull roster of emotional, ethical, and logical
appeals. Your rhetorical analysis should be an argument itself that
supports a claim; a simple list of rhetorical appeals won’t make
much of a point.
Evidence for every point made in your analysis.
An assessment of alternative views and counterarguments to your
own analysis.

Getting and Giving Response: Questions for Peer Response
If you have access to a writing center, discuss the text that you intend
to analyze with a writing consultant before you write the analysis. Try
to find people who agree with the argument and others who disagree,
and take notes on their observations. Your instructor may assign you to

260

a peer group for the purpose of reading and responding to one
another’s drafts; if not, share your draft with someone on your own.
You can use the following questions to evaluate a draft. If you’re
evaluating someone else’s draft, be sure to illustrate your points with
examples. Specific comments are always more helpful than general
observations.

The Claim

Does the claim address the rhetorical effectiveness of the
argument itself rather than the opinion or position that it takes?
Is the claim significant enough to interest readers?
Does the claim indicate important relationships between various
rhetorical components?
Would the claim be one that the creator of the piece would regard
as serious criticism?

Evidence for the Claim

Is enough evidence given to support all your claims? What
evidence do you still need?
Is the evidence in support of the claim simply announced, or are
its significance and appropriateness analyzed? Is a more detailed
discussion needed?
Do you use appropriate evidence, drawn from the argument itself
or from other materials?
Do you address objections readers might have to the claim,
criteria, or evidence?
What kinds of sources might you use to explain the context of the
argument? Do you need to use sources to check factual claims
made in the argument?
Are all quotations introduced with appropriate signal phrases (for

261

instance, “As Áida Álvarez points out”), and do they merge
smoothly into your sentences?

Organization and Style

How are the parts of the argument organized? How effective is this
organization? Would some other structure work better?
Will readers understand the relationships among the original text,
your claims, your supporting reasons, and the evidence you’ve
gathered (from the original text and any other sources you’ve
used)? If not, what could be done to make those connections
clearer? Are more transitional words and phrases needed? Would
headings or graphic devices help?
Are the transitions or links from point to point, sentence to
sentence, and paragraph to paragraph clear and effective? If not,
how could they be improved?
Is the style suited to the subject and appropriate to your
audience? Is it too formal? Too casual? Too technical? Too bland
or boring?
Which sentences seem particularly effective? Which ones seem
weakest, and how could they be improved? Should some short
sentences be combined, or should any long ones be separated
into two or more sentences?
How effective are the paragraphs? Do any seem too skimpy or too
long? Do they break the analysis at strategic points?
Which words or phrases seem particularly effective, accurate, and
powerful? Do any seem dull, vague, unclear, or inappropriate for
the audience or your purpose? Are definitions provided for
technical or other terms that readers might not know?

Spelling, Punctuation, Mechanics, Documentation, and Format

262

Check the spelling of the author’s name, and make sure that the
name of any institution involved with the work is correct. Note
that the names of many corporations and institutions use
distinctive spelling and punctuation.
Check the title of the text you’re analyzing so you’re sure to get it
right.
Look for any errors in spelling, punctuation, capitalization, and
the like.
Check the format of your assignment and make sure it matches
instructions given on your original assignment.

RESPOND●

Find an argument on the editorial page or op-ed page in a recent
newspaper. Read it carefully and critically, taking time to make sure
you understand the claims it is making and the evidence that backs
up the claim. Then analyze it rhetorically, using principles discussed
in this chapter. Show how it succeeds, fails, or does something else
entirely. Perhaps you can show that the author is unusually
successful in connecting with readers but then has nothing to say.
Or perhaps you discover that the strong logical appeal is undercut
by a contradictory emotional argument. Be sure that the analysis
includes a summary of the original essay and basic publication
information about it (its author, place of publication, and
publisher).

263

PART 2 WRITING arguments

264

CHAPTER 7 Structuring Arguments

These two sets of statements illustrate the most basic ways in which
Western culture structures logical arguments. The first piles up specific
examples and draws a conclusion from them: that’s inductive
reasoning and structure. The second sets out a general principle (the
major premise of a syllogism) and applies it to a specific case (the
minor premise) in order to reach a conclusion: that’s deductive
reasoning and structure. In everyday reasoning, we often omit the
middle statement, resulting in what Aristotle called an enthymeme:
“Since dairy products make me sick, I better leave that ice cream
alone.” (See Using Reason and Common Sense in Chapter 4 for more
on enthymemes.)
But the arguments you will write in college call for more than just the
careful critical thinking offered within inductive and deductive
reasoning. You will also need to make claims, explain the contexts in
which you are offering them, defend the assumptions on which they are
based, offer convincing evidence, appeal to specific audiences,
consider counterarguments fairly and carefully, and more. And you
will have to do so using a coherent structure that moves your argument
265

forward. This chapter introduces you to three helpful ways to structure
arguments. Feel free to borrow from all of them!

266

The Classical Oration
The authors of this book once examined a series of engineering reports
and found that — to their great surprise — these reports were generally
structured in ways similar to those used by Greek and Roman rhetors
two thousand years ago. Thus, this ancient structuring system is alive
and well in twenty-first-century culture. The classical oration has six
parts, most of which will be familiar to you, despite their Latin names:
Exordium: You try to win the attention and goodwill of an
audience while introducing a topic or problem.
Narratio: You present the facts of the case, explaining what
happened when, who is involved, and so on. The narratio puts
an argument in context.
Partitio: You divide up the topic, explaining what the claim is,
what the key issues are, and in what order they will be
treated.
Confirmatio: You offer detailed support for the claim, using
both logical reasoning and factual evidence.
Refutatio: You carefully consider and respond to opposing
claims or evidence.
Peroratio: You summarize the case and move the audience to
action.
This structure is powerful because it covers all the bases: readers or
267

listeners want to know what your topic is, how you intend to cover it,
and what evidence you have to offer. And you probably need a
reminder to present a pleasing ethos when beginning a presentation and
to conclude with enough pathos to win an audience over completely.
Here, in outline form, is a five-part updated version of the classical
pattern, which you may find useful on many occasions:

Introduction
gains readers’ interest and willingness to listen
indicates your qualifications to write about your topic
establishes some common ground with your audience
demonstrates that you’re fair and even-handed
states your claim

Background
presents information, including personal stories or anecdotes
relevant to your argument

Lines of Argument
present good reasons, including logical and emotional appeals, in
support of your claim

Alternative Arguments
carefully consider different points of view and opposing
arguments
note the advantages and disadvantages of these views
explain why your view is preferable to others
268

Conclusion
summarizes the argument
elaborates on the implications of your claim
makes clear what you want the audience to think or do
reinforces your credibility and perhaps offers an emotional appeal
Not every piece of rhetoric, past or present, follows the structure of the
oration or includes all its components. But you can identify some of its
elements in successful arguments if you pay attention to their design.
Here are the words of the 1776 Declaration of Independence:

269

The authors might have structured this argument by beginning with the
270

last two sentences of the excerpt and then listing the facts intended to
prove the king’s abuse and tyranny. But by choosing first to explain the
purpose and “self-evident” assumptions behind their argument and
only then moving on to demonstrate how these “truths” have been
denied by the British, the authors forge an immediate connection with
readers and build up to the memorable conclusion. The structure is
both familiar and inventive — as your own use of key elements of the
oration should be in the arguments you compose.

Notice that John Hancock’s defiant signature on the Declaration of
Independence is still readable in this much reduced image of the original
document.

271

Rogerian and Invitational
Arguments
In trying to find an alternative to confrontational and angry arguments
like those that so often erupt in legislative bodies around the world,
scholars and teachers of rhetoric have adapted the nonconfrontational
principles employed by psychologist Carl Rogers in personal therapy
sessions. In simple terms, Rogers argued that people involved in
disputes should not respond to each other until they could fully, fairly,
and even sympathetically state the other person’s position. Scholars of
rhetoric Richard E. Young, Alton L. Becker, and Kenneth L. Pike
developed a four-part structure that is now known as Rogerian
argument:
1. Introduction: You describe an issue, a problem, or a conflict in
terms rich enough to show that you fully understand and respect
any alternative position or positions.
2. Contexts: You describe the contexts in which alternative positions
may be valid.
3. Writer’s position: You state your position on the issue and
present the circumstances in which that opinion would be valid.
4. Benefits to opponent: You explain to opponents how they would
benefit from adopting your position.
The key to Rogerian argumentation is a willingness to think about
opposing positions and to describe them fairly. In a Rogerian structure,
you have to acknowledge that alternatives to your claims exist and that
they might be reasonable under certain circumstances. In tone,
272

Rogerian arguments steer clear of heated and stereotypical language,
emphasizing instead how all parties in a dispute might gain from
working together.
In the same vein, feminist scholars Sonja Foss and Cindy Griffin have
outlined a form of argument they label “invitational,” one that begins
with careful attention to and respect for the person or the audience you
are in conversation with. Foss and Griffin show that such listening —
in effect, walking in the other person’s shoes — helps you see that
person’s points of view more clearly and thoroughly and thus offers a
basis for moving together toward new understandings. The kind of
argument they describe is what rhetorician Krista Ratcliffe calls
“rhetorical listening,” as we saw in Chapter 1 — listening that helps to
establish productive connections between people and thus helps enable
effective cross-cultural communications.
Invitational rhetoric has as its goal not winning over opponents but
getting people and groups to work together and identify with each
other; it strives for connection, collaboration, and the mutually
informed creation of knowledge. As feminist scholar Sally Miller
Gearhart puts it, invitational argument offers a way to disagree without
hurting one another, to disagree with respect. This kind of argument is
especially important in a society that increasingly depends on
successful collaboration to get things done. In college, you may have
opportunities to practice invitational rhetoric in peer-review sessions,
when each member of a group listens carefully in order to work
through problems and issues. You may also practice invitational
rhetoric looking at any contested issue from other people’s points of

273

view, taking them into account, and engaging them fairly and
respectfully in your own argument. Students we know who are
working in high-tech industries also tell us how much such arguments
are valued, since they fuel innovation and “out of the box” thinking.
Invitational arguments, then, call up structures that more resemble
good two-way conversations or free-ranging dialogues than straightline marches from thesis to conclusion. Even conventional arguments
benefit from invitational strategies by giving space early on to a full
range of perspectives, making sure to present them thoroughly and
clearly. Remember that in such arguments your goal is enhanced
understanding so that you can open up a space for new perceptions and
fresh ideas.
Consider how Frederick Douglass tried to broaden the outlook of his
audiences when he delivered a Fourth of July oration in 1852. Most
nineteenth-century Fourth of July speeches followed a pattern of
praising the Revolutionary War heroes and emphasizing freedom,
democracy, and justice. Douglass, a former slave, had that tradition in
mind as he delivered his address, acknowledging the “great principles”
that the “glorious anniversary” celebrates. But he also asked his (white)
listeners to see the occasion from another point of view:
Fellow-citizens, pardon me, allow me to ask, why am I called
upon to speak here today? What have I, or those I represent,
to do with your national independence? Are the great
principles of political freedom and natural justice, embodied
in the Declaration of Independence, extended to us? And am I,

274

Frederick Douglass

therefore, called upon to bring our humble offering to the
national altar, and to confess the benefits and express devout
gratitude for the blessings resulting from your independence
to us? . . . I say it with a sad sense of the disparity between us.
I am not included within the pale of this glorious anniversary!
Your high independence only reveals the immeasurable
distance between us. The blessings in which you, this day,
rejoice, are not enjoyed in common. The rich inheritance of
justice, liberty, prosperity and independence, bequeathed by

275

your fathers, is shared by you, not by me. The sunlight that
brought life and healing to you, has brought stripes and death
to me. This Fourth of July is yours, not mine. You may
rejoice, I must mourn.
— Frederick Douglass, “What to the Slave Is the Fourth of
July?”
Although his speech is in some ways confrontational, Douglass is also
inviting his audience to see a version of reality that they could have
discovered on their own had they dared to imagine the lives of African
Americans living in the shadows of American liberty. Issuing that
invitation, and highlighting its consequences, points a way forward in
the conflict between slavery and freedom, black and white, oppression
and justice, although response to Douglass’s invitation was a long time
in coming.
More recently, in the aftermath of Donald J. Trump’s unexpected
victory in the 2016 presidential election, pundits on the political left
reconsidered strategies that may have distanced many working-class
voters from any appeal Hillary Clinton might have made. Kevin Drum
in Mother Jones offers what amounts to a Rogerian analysis of how
liberal Democrats (like himself) might recapture middle-American
voters who swung to Trump by accepting, not denigrating, their
political values, such as being pro-life or owning a gun for selfdefense:
In the same way that right-wing Republicans need to learn
how to talk about women’s issues, Democrats need to learn
276

how to talk about middle America. No more deplorables. No
more clinging to guns and religion. Less swarming over every
tin-eared comment on race.
—Kevin Drum, “Less Liberal Contempt, Please,” May 31,
2017
In finding validity in views held by some of middle America’s
working-class voters, Drum urges his fellow liberals to take the high
road of respect and learn to talk with those with whom they might
share common interests.
The use of invitational argument like this in contemporary political life
may seem rare, but in spite of much evidence to the contrary (think of
brutal clashes on Twitter and cable news shows), the public claims to
prefer nonpartisan and invitational rhetoric to one-on-one, winner-takeall battles. The lesson to take from Rogerian or invitational argument
may be that it makes good sense to learn opposing positions well
enough to state them accurately and honestly, to strive to understand
the points of view of your opponents, to acknowledge those views
fairly in your own work, and to look for solutions that benefit as many
people as possible.

RESPOND●
Dividing into groups, choose a controversial topic that is frequently
in the news, and decide how you might structure an argument on
the subject, using the general principles of the classical oration.
Then look at the same subject from a Rogerian or invitational

277

perspective. How might your argument differ? Which approach
would work better for your topic? For the audiences you might want
to address?

278

Toulmin Argument
In The Uses of Argument (1958), British philosopher Stephen Toulmin
presented structures to describe the way that ordinary people make
reasonable arguments. Because Toulmin’s system acknowledges the
complications of life — situations when we qualify our thoughts with
words such as sometimes, often, presumably, unless, and almost — his
method isn’t as airtight as formal logic that uses syllogisms (see
introduction to Chapter 7 and Using Reason and Common Sense in
Chapter 4). But for that reason, Toulmin logic has become a powerful
and, for the most part, practical tool for understanding and shaping
arguments in the real world.
Toulmin argument will help you come up with and test ideas and also
figure out what goes where in many kinds of arguments. Let’s take a
look at the basic elements of Toulmin’s structure:
Claim

the argument you wish to prove

Qualifiers

any limits you place on your claim

Reason(s)/Evidence

support for your claim

Warrants

underlying assumptions that support your claim

Backing

evidence for warrant

If you wanted to state the relationship among them in a sentence, you
might say:
My claim is true, to a qualified degree, because of the
following reasons, which make sense if you consider the

279

warrant, backed by these additional reasons.
These terms — claim, evidence, warrants, backing, and qualifiers —
are the building blocks of the Toulmin argument structure. Let’s take
them one at a time.

Making Claims
Toulmin arguments begin with claims, debatable and controversial
statements or assertions you hope to prove.
A claim answers the question So what’s your point? or Where do you
stand on that? Some writers might like to ignore these questions and
avoid stating a position. But when you make a claim worth writing
about, then it’s worth standing up and owning it.
Is there a danger that you might oversimplify an issue by making too
bold a claim? Of course. But making that sweeping claim is a logical
first step toward eventually saying something more reasonable and
subtle. Here are some fairly simple, undeveloped claims:
Congress should enact legislation that establishes a path to
citizenship for undocumented immigrants.
It’s time to treat the opioid addiction in the United States as a
medical crisis.
NASA should affirm its commitment to a human expedition to
Mars.

280

Veganism is the most responsible choice of diet.
Military insurance should not cover the cost of sex
reassignment surgery for service men and women.
Good claims often spring from personal experiences. You may have
relevant work or military or athletic experience — or you may know a
lot about music, film, sustainable agriculture, social networking,
inequities in government services — all fertile ground for authoritative,
debatable, and personally relevant claims.
RESPOND●

Claims aren’t always easy to find. Sometimes they’re buried deep
within an argument, and sometimes they’re not present at all. An
important skill in reading and writing arguments is the ability to
identify claims, even when they aren’t obvious.
In class and working in a group, collect a sample of four to six brief
argumentative postings from political blogs or editorial postings
(from news sites). Read each item, and then try to identify every
claim that the writer makes. When you’ve compiled a list of claims,
look carefully at the words that the writer or writers use when
stating their positions. Is there a common vocabulary? Can you find
terms or phrases that signal an impending claim? Which of these
seem most effective? Which ones seem least effective? Why?

Offering Evidence and Good
281

Reasons
You can begin developing a claim by drawing up a list of reasons to
support it or finding evidence that backs up the point.

Academic arguments such as “Playing with Prejudice: The
Prevalence and Consequences of Racial Stereotypes in Video
Games” by Melinda C. R. Burgess et al. often closely follow the
Toulmin structure, making sure that all their claims are well
supported.
LINK TO Burgess et al., “Playing with Prejudice,” in Chapter 23

One student writer wanted to gather good reasons in support of an
assertion that his college campus needed more official spaces for
parking bicycles. He did some research, gathering statistics about
parking-space allocation, numbers of people using particular
designated slots, and numbers of bicycles registered on campus. Before
he went any further, however, he listed his primary reasons for wanting
to increase bicycle parking:
Personal experience: At least twice a week for two terms, he was
unable to find a designated parking space for his bike.
Anecdotes: Several of his friends told similar stories. One even
sold her bike as a result.
Facts: He found out that the ratio of car to bike parking spaces
282

was 100 to 1, whereas the ratio of cars to bikes registered on
campus was 25 to 1.
Authorities: The campus police chief told the college newspaper
that she believed a problem existed for students who tried to park
bicycles legally.
On the basis of his preliminary listing of possible reasons in support of
the claim, this student decided that his subject was worth more
research. He was on the way to amassing a set of good reasons and
evidence that were sufficient to support his claim.
In shaping your own arguments, try putting claims and reasons
together early in the writing process to create enthymemes. Think of
these enthymemes as test cases or even as topic sentences:
Bicycle parking spaces should be expanded because the
number of bikes on campus far exceeds the available spots.
It’s time to lower the driving age because I’ve been driving
since I was fourteen and it hasn’t hurt me.
National legalization of marijuana is long overdue since it is
already legal in many states, has proven to be less harmful
than alcohol, and provides effective relief from pain associated
with cancer.
Violent video games should be carefully evaluated and their
use monitored by the industry, the government, and parents
because such games cause addiction and even psychological
harm to players.
283

As you can see, attaching a reason to a claim often spells out the major
terms of an argument.
But your work is just beginning when you’ve put a claim together with
its supporting reasons and evidence — because readers are certain to
begin questioning your statement. They might ask whether the reasons
and evidence that you’re offering actually do support the claim: should
the driving age really be changed just because you’ve managed to drive
since you were fourteen? They might ask pointed questions about your
evidence: exactly how do you know that the number of bikes on
campus far exceeds the number of spaces available? Eventually,
you’ve got to address potential questions about the quality of your
assumptions and the reliability of your evidence. The connection
between claim and reason(s) is a concern at the next level in Toulmin
argument.

Anticipate challenges to your claims.

284

Determining Warrants
Briahna Joy Gray argues that charges of cultural appropriation
imply ownership of culture, as represented by music, costume,
food, etc. What warrants lie behind this claim?
LINK TO Gray, “The Question of Cultural Appropriation,” in
Chapter 24

Crucial to Toulmin argument is appreciating that there must be a
logical and persuasive connection between a claim and the reasons and
data supporting it. Toulmin calls this connection the warrant. It
answers the question How exactly do I get from the data to the claim?
Like the warrant in legal situations (a search warrant, for example), a
sound warrant in an argument gives you authority to proceed with your
case.

The warrant tells readers what your (often unstated) assumptions are —
for example, that any major medical problem should be a concern of
the government. If readers accept your warrant, you can then present
specific evidence to develop your claim. But if readers dispute your
warrant, you’ll have to defend it before you can move on to the claim

285

itself.
Stating warrants can be tricky because they can be phrased in various
ways. What you’re looking for is the general principle that enables you
to justify the move from a reason to a specific claim — the bridge
connecting them. The warrant is the assumption that makes the claim
seem believable. It’s often a value or principle that you share with your
readers. Here’s an easy example:
Don’t eat that mushroom: it’s poisonous.
The warrant supporting this enthymeme can be stated in several ways,
always moving from the reason (it’s poisonous) to the claim (Don’t eat
that mushroom):
Anything that is poisonous shouldn’t be eaten.
If something is poisonous, it’s dangerous to eat.
Here’s the relationship, diagrammed:

286

Perfectly obvious, you say? Exactly — and that’s why the statement is
so convincing. If the mushroom in question is a death cap or destroying
angel (and you might still need expert testimony to prove that it is), the
warrant does the rest of the work, making the claim that it supports
seem logical and persuasive.
Let’s look at a similar example, beginning with the argument in its
basic form:
We’d better stop for gas because the gauge has been reading
empty for more than thirty miles.
In this case, you have evidence that is so clear (a gas gauge reading
empty) that the reason for getting gas doesn’t even have to be stated:
the tank is almost empty. The warrant connecting the evidence to the
claim is also obvious:
If the fuel gauge of a car has been reading empty for more
than thirty miles, then that car is about to run out of gas.
Since most readers would accept this warrant as reasonable, they
would also likely accept the statement the warrant supports.
Naturally, factual information might undermine the whole argument:
the fuel gauge might be broken, or the driver might know from
experience that the car will go another fifty miles even though the fuel
gauge reads empty. But in most cases, readers would accept the
warrant.

287

A simple icon — a skull and crossbones — can make a visual argument that
implies a claim, a reason, and a warrant.

Now let’s consider how stating and then examining a warrant can help
you determine the grounds on which you want to make a case. Here’s a
political enthymeme of a familiar sort:
Flat taxes are fairer than progressive taxes because they treat
all taxpayers in the same way.
Warrants that follow from this enthymeme have power because they
appeal to a core American value — equal treatment under the law:
Treating people equitably is the American way.
All people should be treated in the same way.
You certainly could make an argument on these grounds. But stating
the warrant should also raise a flag if you know anything about tax
policy. If the principle is obvious and universal, then why do federal

288

and some state income taxes require people at higher levels of income
to pay at higher tax rates than people at lower income levels? Could the
warrant not be as universally popular as it seems at first glance? To
explore the argument further, try stating the contrary claim and
warrants:
Progressive taxes are fairer than flat taxes because people
with more income can afford to pay more, benefit more from
government, and shelter more of their income from taxes.
People should be taxed according to their ability to pay.
People who benefit more from government and can shelter
more of their income from taxes should be taxed at higher
rates.
Now you see how different the assumptions behind opposing positions
really are. If you decided to argue in favor of flat taxes, you’d be smart
to recognize that some members of your audience might have
fundamental reservations about your position. Or you might even
decide to shift your entire argument to an alternative rationale for flat
taxes:
Flat taxes are preferable to progressive taxes because they
simplify the tax code and reduce the likelihood of fraud.
Here, you have two stated reasons that are supported by two new
warrants:
Taxes that simplify the tax code are desirable.
289

Taxes that reduce the likelihood of fraud are preferable.
Whenever possible, you’ll choose your warrant knowing your
audience, the context of your argument, and your own feelings.
Be careful, though, not to suggest that you’ll appeal to any old warrant
that works to your advantage. If readers suspect that your argument for
progressive taxes really amounts to I want to stick it to people who
work harder than I, your credibility may suffer a fatal blow.

290

RESPOND●

At their simplest, warrants can be stated as “X is good” or “X is bad.”
Return to the editorials or blog posts that you analyzed in the
exercise on p. 144, this time looking for the warrant that is behind
each claim. As a way to start, ask yourself these questions:
If I find myself agreeing with the letter writer, what
assumptions about the subject matter do I share with him/her?

291

If I disagree, what assumptions are at the heart of that
disagreement?
The list of warrants you generate will likely come from these
assumptions.

Offering Evidence: Backing
The richest, most interesting part of a writer’s work — backing —
remains to be done after the argument has been outlined. Clearly stated
claims and warrants show you how much evidence you will need. Take
a look at this brief argument, which is both debatable and
controversial, especially in tough economic times:
NASA should affirm its commitment to a human expedition to
Mars because Americans need a unifying national goal.
Here’s one version of the warrant that supports the enthymeme:
What unifies the nation ought to be a national priority.
To run with this claim and warrant, you’d first need to place both in
context. Human space exploration has been debated with varying
intensity following the 1957 launch of the Soviet Union’s Sputnik
satellite, after the losses of the U.S. space shuttles Challenger (1986)
and Columbia (2003), and after the retirement of the Space Shuttle
program in 2011. Acquiring such background knowledge through
reading, conversation, and inquiry of all kinds will be necessary for
making your case. (See Chapter 3 for more on gaining authority.)

292

Sticker honoring the retirement of the Space Shuttle program

There’s no point in defending any claim until you’ve satisfied readers
that questionable warrants on which the claim is based are defensible.
In Toulmin argument, evidence you offer to support a warrant is called
backing.
Warrant
What unifies the nation ought to be a national priority.
Backing
Americans want to be part of something bigger than
themselves. (Emotional appeal as evidence)
In a country as diverse as the United States, common purposes
and values help make the nation stronger. (Ethical appeal as
evidence)
293

In the past, government investments such as the Hoover Dam
and the Apollo moon program enhanced economic progress
for many — though not all — Americans. (Logical appeal as
evidence)
In addition to evidence to support your warrant (backing), you’ll need
evidence to support your claim:
Argument in Brief (Enthymeme/Claim)
NASA should launch a human expedition to Mars because
Americans now need a unifying national goal.
Evidence
The American people are politically divided along lines of
race, ethnicity, religion, gender, and class. (Fact as evidence)
A common challenge or problem often unites people to
accomplish great things. (Emotional appeal as evidence)
A successful Mars mission would require the cooperation of
the entire nation — and generate tens of thousands of jobs.
(Logical appeal as evidence)
A human expedition to Mars would be an admirable scientific
project for the nation to pursue. (Appeal to values as
evidence)
As these examples show, appeals to values and emotions can be just as
appropriate as appeals to logic and facts, and all such claims will be
stronger if a writer presents a convincing ethos. In most arguments,
294

appeals work together rather than separately, reinforcing each other.
(See Chapter 3 for more on ethos.)

Using Qualifiers
Experienced writers know that qualifying expressions make writing
more precise and honest. Toulmin logic encourages you to
acknowledge limitations to your argument through the effective use of
qualifiers. You can save time if you qualify a claim early in the
writing process. But you might not figure out how to limit a claim
effectively until after you’ve explored your subject or discussed it with
others.
Qualifiers
few
it is possible
rarely
it seems
some
it may be
sometimes
more or less
in some cases
many

295

typically
routinely
most
one might argue
often
perhaps
under these conditions
possibly
for the most part
if it were so
in general
Never assume that readers understand the limits you have in mind.
Rather, spell them out as precisely as possible, as in the following
examples:

296

Unqualified
Claim

People who don’t go to college earn less than those who do.

Qualified
Claim

Statistics show that in most cases, people who don’t go to
college earn less than those who do.

Understanding Conditions of
Rebuttal
In the Toulmin system, potential objections to an argument are called
conditions of rebuttal. Understanding and reacting to these conditions
are essential to support your own claims where they’re weak and also
to recognize and understand the reasonable objections of people who
see the world differently. For example, you may be a big fan of the
Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) and the National Endowment for
the Arts (NEA) and prefer that federal tax dollars be spent on these
programs. So you offer the following claim:
297

Claim

The federal government should support the arts.

You need reasons to support this thesis, so you decide to present the
issue as a matter of values:
Argument
in Brief

The federal government should support the arts because it
also supports the military.

Now you’ve got an enthymeme and can test the warrant, or the
premises of your claim:
Warrant

If the federal government can support the military, then it can
also support other programs.

But the warrant seems frail: you can hear a voice over your shoulder
saying, “In essence, you’re saying that Because we pay for a military,
we should pay for everything!” So you decide to revise your claim:
Revised
Argument

If the federal government can spend huge amounts of money on
the military, then it can afford to spend moderate amounts on
arts programs.

298

Now you’ve got a new warrant, too:
Revised
Warrant

A country that can fund expensive programs can also afford
less expensive programs.

This is a premise that you can defend, since you believe strongly that
the arts are just as essential as a strong military is to the well-being of
the country. Although the warrant now seems solid, you still have to
offer strong grounds to support your specific and controversial claim.
So you cite statistics from reputable sources, this time comparing the
federal budgets for the military and the arts. You break them down in
ways that readers can visualize, demonstrating that much less than a
penny of every tax dollar goes to support the arts.
But then you hear those voices again, saying that the “common
defense” is a federal mandate; the government is constitutionally
obligated to support a military, and support for the arts is hardly in the
same league! Looks like you need to add a paragraph explaining all the
benefits the arts provide for very few dollars spent, and maybe you
should suggest that such funding falls under the constitutional mandate
to “promote the general welfare.” Though not all readers will accept
these grounds, they’ll appreciate that you haven’t ignored their point of
view: you’ve gained credibility by anticipating a reasonable objection.
Dealing with conditions of rebuttal is an essential part of argument. But
it’s important to understand rebuttal as more than mere opposition.
Anticipating objections broadens your horizons, makes you more open
to alternative viewpoints, and helps you understand what you need to

299

do to support your claim.
Within Toulmin argument, conditions of rebuttal remind us that we’re
part of global conversations: Internet newsgroups and blogs provide
potent responses to positions offered by participants in discussions;
instant messaging and social networking let you respond to and
challenge others; links on Web sites form networks that are infinitely
variable and open. In cyberspace, conditions of rebuttal are as close as
your screen.

RESPOND●
Using an essay or a project you are composing, do a Toulmin
analysis of the argument. When you’re done, see which elements of
the Toulmin scheme are represented. Are you short of evidence to
support the warrant? Have you considered the conditions of
rebuttal? Have you qualified your claim adequately? Next, write a
brief revision plan: How will you buttress the argument in the places
where it is weakest? What additional evidence will you offer for the
warrant? How can you qualify your claim to meet the conditions of
rebuttal? Then show your paper to a classmate and have him/her do
a Toulmin analysis: a new reader will probably see your argument in
different ways and suggest revisions that may not have occurred to
you.

Outline of a Toulmin Argument
Consider the claim that was mentioned on p. 150:
The federal government should ban e-cigarettes.

300

Claim
Qualifier

The ban would be limited to public spaces.

Good
Reasons

E-cigarettes have not been proven to be harmless.
E-cigarettes legitimize smoking and also are aimed at recruiting
teens and children with flavors like bubblegum and cotton
candy.

Warrants

The Constitution promises to “promote the general welfare.”
Citizens are entitled to protection from harmful actions by
others.

Backing

The United States is based on a political system that is supposed
to serve the basic needs of its people, including their health.

Evidence

Analysis of advertising campaigns that reveal direct appeals to
children
Lawsuits recently won against e-cigarette companies, citing the
link between e-cigarettes and a return to regular smoking
Examples of bans on e-cigarettes already imposed in many
public places

Authority

Cite the FDA and medical groups on effect of e-cigarette
smoking.

Conditions
of
Rebuttal

E-cigarette smokers have rights, too.
Smoking laws should be left to the states.
Such a ban could not be enforced.

Responses

The ban applies to public places; smokers can smoke in private.

A Toulmin Analysis
You might wonder how Toulmin’s method holds up when applied to

301

an argument that is longer than a few sentences. Do such arguments
really work the way that Toulmin predicts? In the following column
from Bloomberg Opinion (June 19, 2017), Stephen L. Carter explains
why he supports a unanimous Supreme Court decision protecting
offensive speech. Carter, a professor of law at Yale, novelist, and
essayist, begins by offering background information on a trademark
case brought before the Supreme Court by a band called The Slants.
Carter signals quite clearly (in what amounts to his core claim) that the
Court was right to strike down restrictions on potentially offensive
trademarks set in place during World War II. To justify his support for
the new ruling, Carter helps readers understand the Constitutional
rationale for defending forms of speech that some people might regard
as offensive, derogatory, or racist. Carter even draws upon the remarks
of two Supreme Court justices who reach the same conclusion about
the unconstitutionality of the so-called “disparagement clause” through
very different approaches. As you will see below, many elements of
Toulmin argument are in play throughout Carter’s essay, even if they
don’t follow a predictable sequence from claim to reason to evidence
to conditions of rebuttal to response pattern.

302

The Slants chose their band’s name to reappropriate the offensive slur. Anthony
Pidgeon/Getty Images

303

304

305

306

307

308

What Toulmin Teaches
As Carter’s essay demonstrates, few arguments you read have perfectly
sequenced claims or clear warrants, so you might not think of
Toulmin’s terms in building your own arguments. Once you’re into
your subject, it’s easy to forget about qualifying a claim or finessing a
warrant. But remembering what Toulmin teaches will always help you
strengthen your arguments:
Claims should be clear, reasonable, and carefully qualified.
Claims should be supported with good reasons and evidence.
Remember that a Toulmin structure provides the framework of an
argument, which you fill out with all kinds of data, including facts,
statistics, precedents, photographs, and even stories.
Claims and reasons should be based on assumptions your audience
will likely accept. Toulmin’s focus on warrants can be confusing
because it asks us to state the values that underlie our arguments
— something many would rather not do. Toulmin also prompts us
to consider how our assumptions relate to particular audiences.
309

Effective arguments respectfully anticipate objections readers
might offer. Toulmin argument acknowledges that any claim can
crumble under certain conditions, so it encourages complex views
that don’t insist on absolute or unqualified positions.
It takes considerable experience to write arguments that meet all these
conditions. Using Toulmin’s framework brings them into play
automatically. If you learn it well enough, constructing good
arguments can become a habit.

CULTURAL CONTEXTS FOR ARGUMENT

Organization
As you think about organizing your argument, remember that cultural
factors are at work: patterns that you find persuasive are probably ones
that are deeply embedded in your culture. In the United States, many
people expect a writer to “get to the point” as directly as possible and
to articulate that point efficiently and unambiguously. The
organizational patterns favored by many in business hold similarities
to the classical oration — a highly explicit pattern that leaves little or
nothing unexplained — introduction and thesis, background, overview
of the parts that follow, evidence, other viewpoints, and conclusion. If a
piece of writing follows this pattern, American readers ordinarily find it
“well organized.”
So it’s no surprise that student writers in the United States are
expected to make their structures direct and their claims explicit,
leaving little unspoken. Their claims usually appear early in an
argument, often in the first paragraph.

310

But not all cultures take such an approach. Some expect any claim or
thesis to be introduced subtly, indirectly, and perhaps at the end of a
work, assuming that audiences will “read between the lines” to
understand what’s being said. Consequently, the preferred structure of
arguments (and face-to-face negotiations, as well) may be elaborate,
repetitive, and full of digressions. Those accustomed to such writing
may find more direct Western styles naive, childish, or even rude.
When arguing across cultures, look for cues to determine how to
structure your presentations effectively. Here are several points to
consider:
Do members of your audience tend to be very direct, saying
explicitly what they mean? Or are they more restrained? Consider
adjusting your work to the expectations of the audience.
Do members of your audience tend to respect authority and the
opinions of groups? They may find blunt approaches disrespectful
or contrary to their expectations.
Consider when to state your thesis: At the beginning? At the end?
Somewhere else? Not at all?
Consider whether digressions are a good idea, a requirement, or
an element to avoid.

311

CHAPTER 8 Arguments of Fact

Some people believe that extensive use of smartphones and
social media is especially harmful to children and young adults,
and recent research provides disturbing evidence that they may
be right.
In the past, female screen stars like Marilyn Monroe could be
buxom and curvy, less concerned about their weight than
actresses today. Or so the legend goes. But measuring the
costumes worn by Monroe and other actresses reveals a
different story.
When an instructor announces a tough new attendance policy
for her course, a student objects that there is no evidence that
students who regularly attend classes perform any better than
those who do not. The instructor begs to differ.

312

Understanding Arguments
of Fact
Factual arguments come in many varieties, but they all try to
establish whether something is or is not so, answering
questions such as Is a historical legend true? Has a crime
occurred? or Are the claims of a scientific study replicable? At
first glance, you might object that these aren’t arguments at all
but just a matter of looking things up and then writing reports.
And you’d be correct to an extent: people don’t usually argue
factual matters that are settled or undisputed (The earth
revolves around the sun), that might be decided with simple
research (The Mendenhall Glacier has receded 1.75 miles since
1958), or that are the equivalent of a rule (One mile measures
5,280 feet). Reporting facts, you might think, should be free of
the friction of argument.
But the authority of “facts” has been routinely challenged. With
a full generation of contemporary philosophers insisting that
reality is just a creation of language, perhaps it’s not surprising
that politicians and pundits now find themselves arguing over
“fake news,” “known facts,” and “alternative facts.”
Yet facts do still become arguments whenever they’re
controversial on their own or challenge people’s conventional
beliefs and lifestyles. Disagreements about childhood obesity,
endangered species, or energy production ought to have a kind

313

of clean, scientific logic to them. But that’s rarely the case
because the facts surrounding them must be interpreted. Those
interpretations then determine what we feed children, where
we can build a dam, or how we heat our homes. In other words,
serious factual arguments almost always have consequences.
Can we rely on wind and solar power to solve our energy needs?
Will the Social Security trust fund really go broke? Is it healthy
to eat fatty foods? People need well-reasoned factual arguments
on subjects of this kind to make informed decisions. Such
arguments educate the public.
For the same reason, we need arguments to challenge beliefs
that are common in a society but held on the basis of
inadequate or faulty information. We sometimes need help, too,
noticing change that is occurring all around us. So corrective
arguments appear daily in the media, often based on studies
written by scientists or researchers that the public would not
encounter on their own. Many people, for example, still believe
that talking on a cell phone while driving is just like listening to
the radio. But their intuition is not based on hard data: scientific
studies show that using a cell phone in a car is comparable to
driving under the influence of alcohol. That’s a fact. As a result,
fifteen states (and counting) have banned the use of handheld
phones while driving—and almost all now ban texting while
driving.
Factual arguments also routinely address broad questions about
how we understand the past. For example, are the accounts that

314

we have of the American founding—or the Civil War,
Reconstruction, or the heroics of the “Greatest Generation” in
World War II—accurate? Or do the “facts” that we teach today
sometimes reflect the perspectives and prejudices of earlier
times or ideologies? The telling of history is almost always
controversial and rarely settled: the British and Americans will
always tell different versions of what happened in North
America in 1776.
The Internet puts mountains of information at our fingertips,
but we need to be sure to confirm whether or not that
information is fact, using what Howard Rheingold calls “crap
detection,” the ability to distinguish between accurate
information and inaccurate information, misinformation, or
disinformation. (For more on “crap detection,” see Chapter 19,
“Evaluating Sources.”)
As you can see, arguments of fact do much of the heavy lifting
in our world. They report on what has been recently discovered
or explore the implications of that new information. They also
add interest and complexity to our lives, taking what might
seem simple and adding new dimensions to it. In many
situations, they’re the precursors to other forms of analysis,
especially causal and proposal arguments. Before we can
explore why things happen as they do or solve problems, we
need to do our best to determine the facts.

315

RESPOND●
For each topic in the following list, decide whether the claim is
worth arguing to a college audience, and explain why or why not.
Earthquakes at Yellowstone National Park are increasing in
number and intensity.
Many people die annually of heart disease.
The planet would benefit enormously if more people learned to
eat insects.
Japan might have come to terms more readily in 1945 if the
Allies in World War II hadn’t demanded unconditional
surrender.
Boys would do better in school if there were more men
teaching in elementary and secondary classrooms.

316

The benefits of increasing oil and natural gas production via
fracking more than outweigh the environmental downsides of
the process.
There aren’t enough high-paying jobs for college graduates
these days.
Hydrogen may never be a viable alternative to fossil fuels
because it takes too much energy to change hydrogen into a
usable form.

317

Characterizing Factual
Arguments
Factual arguments are often motivated by simple human
curiosity or suspicion: Are people who earn college degrees
happier than those who don’t? If being fat is so unhealthy, why
aren’t mortality rates rising? Does it matter economically that so
many young people today think of themselves as foodies?
Researchers may notice a pattern that leads them to look more
closely at some phenomenon or behavior, exploring questions
such as What if? or How come? Or maybe a writer first notes
something new or different or unexpected and wants to draw
attention to that fact: Contrary to expectations, suicide rates are
much higher in rural areas than in urban ones.
Such observations can lead quickly to hypotheses—that is,
toward tentative and plausible statements of fact whose merits
need to be examined more closely. Perhaps people at different
educational levels define happiness differently? Maybe being a
little overweight isn’t as bad for people as we’ve been told?
Maybe self-identifying as a “foodie” is really a marker of class
and social aspirations? To support such hypotheses, writers
then have to uncover evidence that reaches well beyond the
casual observations that triggered an initial interest—like a
news reporter motivated to see whether there’s a verifiable
story behind a source’s tip.

318

For instance, the authors of Freakonomics, Stephen J. Dubner
and Steven D. Levitt, were intrigued by the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration’s claim that car seats for children
were 54 percent effective in preventing deaths in auto crashes
for children below the age of four. In a New York Times op-ed
column entitled “The Seat-Belt Solution,” they posed an
important question about that factual claim:
But 54 percent effective compared with what? The
answer, it turns out, is this: Compared with a child’s
riding completely unrestrained.
Their initial question about that claim led them to a more
focused inquiry, then to a database on auto crashes, and then to
a surprising conclusion: for kids above age twenty-four months,
those in car seats were statistically safer than those without any
protection but weren’t safer than those confined by ordinary
seat belts (which are much simpler, cheaper, and more readily
available devices). Looking at the statistics every which way, the
authors wonder if children older than two years would be just
as well off physically—and their parents less stressed and better
off financially—if the government mandated seat belts rather
than car seats for them.
What kinds of evidence typically appear in sound factual
arguments? The simple answer might be “all sorts,” but a case
can be made that factual arguments try to rely more on “hard
evidence” than do “constructed” arguments based on logic and
reason (see Chapter 4). Even so, some pieces of evidence are
319

harder than others!

320

Developing a Factual
Argument
Entire Web sites are dedicated to finding and posting errors
from news and political sources. Some, like Media Matters for
America and Accuracy in Media, take overtly partisan stands.
Here’s a one-day sampling of headlines from Media Matters:
After NASA Announces It Found Water on Mars, Rush
Limbaugh Says It’s Part of a Climate Change Conspiracy
Trump administration met with a GOP donor and a Fox
contributor about a fake story meant to distract from
Russia probe
Fox hosts can’t keep their facts straight while praising
Trump’s immigration cuts
And here’s a listing from Accuracy in Media from the same day:
Major Newspapers Just Pretend to Have Conservative
Columnists Left Claims Hitler-Style “Indoctrination” in
Trump’s Boy Scouts Speech Washington Post Reluctantly
Admits Stock Market Gains Linked to Trump
It would be hard to miss the blatant political agendas at work on
these sites.
Other fact-checking organizations have better reputations when
321

it comes to assessing the truths behind political claims and
media presentations. Although both are also routinely charged
with bias, Pulitzer Prize–winning PolitiFact.com and
FactCheck.org at least make an effort to seem fair-minded
across a broader political spectrum. FactCheck.org, for
example, provides a detailed analysis of the claims it
investigates in relatively neutral and denotative language, and
lists the sources its researchers used—just as if its writers were
doing a research paper. At its best, FactCheck.org demonstrates
what one valuable kind of factual argument can accomplish.
Any factual argument that you might compose—from how you
state your claim to how you present evidence and the language
you use—should be similarly shaped by the occasion for the
argument and a desire to serve the audiences that you hope to
reach. We can offer some general advice to help you get started.

322

PolitiFact uses a meter to rate political claims from “True” to “Pants on Fire.”

RESPOND●
The Annenberg Public Policy Center at the University of
Pennsylvania hosts FactCheck.org, a Web site dedicated to
separating facts from opinion or falsehood in the area of politics. It
claims to be politically neutral. Find a case that interests you, either
a recent controversial item listed on its homepage or another from
its archives. Carefully study the item. Pay attention to the devices
that FactCheck.org uses to suggest or ensure objectivity and the
way that it handles facts and statistics. Then offer your own brief
factual argument about the site’s objectivity.

Identifying an Issue
323

In their report about food insecurity on college campuses,
researchers James Dubick, Brandon Mathews, and Clare Cady
offer an argument of fact based on more than 3,700 surveys of
students on 34 college campuses.
LINK TO Dubick et al., “Hunger on Campus,” in Chapter 24

To offer a factual argument of your own, you need to identify an
issue or problem that will interest you and potential readers.
Look for situations or phenomena—local or national—that seem
novel or out of the ordinary in the expected order of things. For
instance, you might notice that many people you know are
deciding not to attend college. How widespread is this change,
and who are the people making this choice?
Or follow up claims that strike you as at odds with the facts as
you know them or believe them. Maybe you doubt explanations
being offered for your favorite sport team’s current slump or for
the declining number of male students majoring in the
humanities at your school. Or you might give a local spin to
factual questions that other people have already formulated on
a national level. Are more of your friends considering technical
apprenticeships (rather than expensive academic programs),
delaying any plans they might have for marriage or families, or
buying entirely online instead of at brick and mortar stores?
You will likely write a better paper if you take on a factual
question that genuinely interests you.

324

In fact, whole books are written when authors decide to pursue
factual questions that intrigue them. But you want to be careful
not to argue matters that pose no challenge for you or your
audiences. You’re not offering anything new if you just try to
persuade readers that smoking is harmful to their well-being.
So how about something fresh in the area of health?
Quick preliminary research and reading might allow you to
move from an intuition to a hypothesis, that is, a tentative
statement of your claim: Having a dog is good for your health.
As noted earlier, factual arguments often provoke other types of
analysis. In developing this claim, you’d need to explain what
“good for your health” means, potentially an argument of
definition. You’d also likely find yourself researching causes of
the phenomenon if you can demonstrate that it is factual. As it
turns out, your canine hypothesis would have merit if you
defined “good for health” as “encouraging exercise.” Here’s the
lede to a 2011 New York Times story reporting recent research:
If you’re looking for the latest in home exercise
equipment, you may want to consider something with
four legs and a wagging tail.
Several studies now show that dogs can be powerful
motivators to get people moving. Not only are dog
owners more likely to take regular walks, but new
research shows that dog walkers are more active overall
than people who don’t have dogs.

325

—Tara Parker-Pope, “Forget the Treadmill. Get a Dog,”
March 14, 2011
As always, there’s another side to the story: what if people likely
to get dogs are the very sort already inclined to be more
physically active? You could explore that possibility as well (and
researchers have) and then either modify your initial
hypothesis or offer a new one. That’s what hypotheses are for.
They are works in progress.

A Harvard source for your paper on dogs and health?

RESPOND●

326

Working with a group of colleagues, generate a list of a dozen
“mysteries” regularly explored on TV shows, in blogs, or in tabloid
newspapers. Here are three to get you started—the alien crash
landing at Roswell, the existence of Atlantis, and the uses of Area 51
in Nevada. Then decide which—if any—of these puzzlers might be
resolved or explained in a reasonable factual argument and which
ones remain eternally mysterious and improbable. Why are people
attracted to such topics? Would any of these items provide material
for a noteworthy factual argument?

Researching Your Hypothesis
Read C. Richard King’s excerpt from Redskins: Insult and Brand in
Chapter 23. What kind of research does King use to support his
argument?
LINK TO King, “Redskins: Insult and Brand,” in Chapter 23

How and where you research your subject will depend,
naturally, on your subject. You’ll certainly want to review
Chapter 18, “Finding Evidence,” Chapter 19, “Evaluating
Sources,” and Chapter 20, “Using Sources,” before constructing
an argument of fact. Libraries and the Web will provide you
with deep resources on almost every subject. Your task will
typically be to separate the best sources from all the rest. The
word best here has many connotations: some reputable sources
may be too technical for your audiences; some accessible

327

sources may be pitched too low or be too far removed from the
actual facts.
You’ll be making judgment calls like this routinely. But do use
primary sources whenever you can. For example, when
gathering a comment from a source on the Web, trace it
whenever possible to its original site, and read the comment in
its full context. When statistics are quoted, follow them back to
the source that offered them first to be sure that they’re recent
and reputable. Instructors and librarians can help you
appreciate the differences. Understand that even sources with
pronounced biases can furnish useful information, provided
that you know how to use them, take their limitations into
account, and then share what you know about the sources with
your readers.
Sometimes, you’ll be able to do primary research on your own,
especially when your subject is local and you have the resources
to do it. Consider conducting a competent survey of campus
opinions and attitudes, for example, or study budget documents
(often public) to determine trends in faculty salaries, tuition,
student fees, and so on. Primary research of this sort can be
challenging because even the simplest surveys or polls have to
be intelligently designed and executed in a way that samples a
representative population (see Chapter 4). But the work could
pay off in an argument that brings new information to readers.

Refining Your Claim
328

As you learn more about your subject, you might revise your
hypothesis to reflect what you’ve discovered. In most cases,
these revised hypotheses will grow increasingly complex and
specific. Following are three versions of essentially the same
claim, with each version offering more information to help
readers judge its merit:
Americans really did land on the moon, despite what some
people think!
Since 1969, when the Eagle supposedly landed on the moon,
some people have been unjustifiably skeptical about the
success of the United States’ Apollo program.
Despite plentiful hard evidence to the contrary—from
Saturn V launches witnessed by thousands to actual moon
rocks tested by independent labs worldwide—some people
persist in believing falsely that NASA’s moon landings were
filmed on deserts in the American Southwest as part of a
massive propaganda fraud.

329

The additional details about the subject might also suggest new
ways to develop and support it. For example, conspiracy
theorists claim that the absence of visible stars in photographs
of the moon landing is evidence that it was staged, but
photographers know that the camera exposure needed to
capture the foreground—astronauts in their bright space suits—
would have made the stars in the background too dim to see.
That’s a key bit of evidence for this argument.
As you advance in your research, your thesis will likely pick up
even more qualifying words and expressions, which help you to
make reasonable claims. Qualifiers—words and phrases such as
330

some, most, few, for most people, for a few users, under
specific conditions, usually, occasionally, seldom, and so on—
will be among your most valuable tools in a factual argument.
(See p. 153 in Chapter 7 for more on qualifiers.)
Sometimes it will be important to contextualize a factual claim
for others who may find it hard to accept. Of course, you could
just present the hard numbers, but research suggests that many
people double down on their positions when offered contrary
facts. What to do? Michael Shermer, writing in Scientific
American, suggests these common sense strategies:
[W]hat can we do to convince people of the error of their
beliefs? From my experience, 1. keep emotions out of the
exchange, 2. discuss, don’t attack (no ad hominem and no
ad Hitlerum), 3. listen carefully and try to articulate the
other position accurately, 4. show respect, 5.
acknowledge that you understand why someone might
hold that opinion, and 6. try to show how changing facts
does not necessarily mean changing worldviews. These
strategies may not always work to change people’s
minds, but now that the nation has just been put through
a political fact-check wringer, they may help reduce
unnecessary divisiveness.
—Michael Shermer, “How to Convince Someone When
Facts Fail”

331

Deciding Which Evidence to Use
In this chapter, we’ve blurred the distinction between factual
arguments for scientific and technical audiences and those for
the general public (in magazines, blogs, social media sites,
television documentaries, and so on). In the former kind of
arguments, readers will expect specific types of evidence
arranged in a formulaic way. Such reports may include a
hypothesis, a review of existing research on the subject, a
description of methods, a presentation of results, and finally a
formal discussion of the findings. If you are thinking “lab
report,” you are already familiar with an academic form of a
factual argument with precise standards for evidence.
Less scientific factual arguments—claims about our society,
institutions, behaviors, habits, and so on—are seldom so
systematic, and they may draw on evidence from a great many
different media. For instance, you might need to review old
newspapers, scan videos, study statistics on government Web
sites, read transcripts of congressional hearings, record the
words of eyewitnesses to an event, glean information by
following experts on Twitter, and so on. Very often, you will
assemble your arguments from material found in credible,
though not always concurring, authorities and resources—
drawing upon the factual findings of scientists and scholars, but
perhaps using their original insights in novel ways.
For example, you might be intrigued by a much cited article
from the Atlantic (August 5, 2017) in which author Jean M.
332

Twenge reviews evidence that suggests that adolescents who
spend more and more time on their cellphones are increasingly
unhappy—to the detriment of their emotional health. Here’s an
important moment in her lengthy argument:
You might expect that teens spend so much time in these
new spaces because it makes them happy, but most data
suggest that it does not. The Monitoring the Future
survey, funded by the National Institute on Drug Abuse
and designed to be nationally representative, has asked
12th-graders more than 1,000 questions every year since
1975 and queried eighth- and 10th-graders since 1991.
The survey asks teens how happy they are and also how
much of their leisure time they spend on various
activities, including nonscreen activities such as inperson social interaction and exercise, and, in recent
years, screen activities such as using social media,
texting, and browsing the web. The results could not be
clearer: Teens who spend more time than average on
screen activities are more likely to be unhappy, and those
who spend more time than average on nonscreen
activities are more likely to be happy.
There’s not a single exception. All screen activities are
linked to less happiness, and all nonscreen activities are
linked to more happiness.
—Jean M. Twenge, “Have Smartphones Destroyed a
Generation?”
333

Reading such dire news (and the article reports even more
frightening increases in suicide), may raise new questions for
you: Are there contrary studies? Is it conceivable that time spent
online has benefits? Twenge herself notes, for example, that
teen pregnancies have dropped dramatically in recent years.
Perhaps, too, adolescents so inwardly directed by screen use
might develop into more sensitive and less violent adults? Such
considerations might lead you to look for research that
complicates the earlier work by bringing fresh facts or
perspectives to the table.
Often, though, you may have only a limited number of words or
pages in which to make an academic argument. What do you do
then? You present your best evidence as powerfully as possible:
you can make a persuasive factual case with just a few examples
—three or four often suffice to make a point. Indeed, going on
too long or presenting even good data in uninteresting ways can
undermine a claim.

Presenting Your Evidence
In Hard Times (1854), British author Charles Dickens poked fun
at a pedagogue he named Thomas Gradgrind, who preferred
hard facts before all things human or humane. When poor Sissy
Jupe (called “girl number twenty” in his awful classroom) is
unable at his command to define horse, Gradgrind turns to his
star pupil, Bitzer:
“Bitzer,” said Thomas Gradgrind. “Your definition of a
334

horse.”
“Quadruped. Graminivorous. Forty teeth, namely twentyfour grinders, four eyeteeth, and twelve incisive. Sheds
coat in the spring; in marshy countries, sheds hoofs, too.
Hoofs hard, but requiring to be shod with iron. Age
known by marks in mouth.” Thus (and much more)
Bitzer.
“Now girl number twenty,” said Mr. Gradgrind. “You
know what a horse is.”
—Charles Dickens, Hard Times
But does Bitzer? Rattling off facts about a subject isn’t quite the
same thing as knowing it, especially when your goal is, as it is in
an argument of fact, to educate and persuade audiences. So you
must take care how you present your evidence.
Factual arguments, like any others, take many forms. They can
be as simple and pithy as a letter to the editor (or Bitzer’s
definition of a horse) or as comprehensive and formal as a
senior thesis or even a dissertation, meant for just two or three
readers evaluating the competence of your work. But to earn
the attention of readers in more public forums, you may need to
work harder, affirming your expertise by offering engaging and
authoritative sources, presenting your argument with grace and
clarity, including tables, graphs, photographs and other visual
evidence when appropriate, and documenting all your claims.
335

Such moves will establish the ethos of your work, making it
seem serious, credible, well-conceived, and worth reading.

Considering Design and Visuals
For an example of how to use design effectively in a factual
argument, see “How Do Your Eating Habits Differ from Your
Grandparents’?” in Chapter 24. Compare the chart to the table
that accompanies it. How does design impact the success of the
factual argument?
LINK TO United States Department of Agriculture, “How Do Your
Eating Habits Differ from Your Grandparents’?” in Chapter 24

When you prepare a factual argument, consider how you can
present your evidence most effectively. Precisely because
factual arguments often rely on evidence that can be measured,
computed, or illustrated, they benefit from thoughtful, even
artful presentation of data. If you have lots of examples, you
might arrange them in a list (bulleted or otherwise) and keep
the language in each item roughly parallel. If you have an
argument that can be translated into a table, chart, or graph
(see Chapter 14), try it. Below, for example, are three of the six
tables that accompanied Jean M. Twenge’s essay on
smartphones, all dramatically illustrating a decline in various
adolescent behaviors following the introduction of the iPhone
in 2007. And if there’s a more dramatic medium for your factual
argument—a Prezi slide show, a multimedia mashup, a
336

documentary video posted via a social network—experiment
with it, checking to be sure it would satisfy the assignment.

337

338

Jean M. Twenge uses graphs to support her claims about the impact of
smartphones on teenagers.

Images and photos—from technical illustrations to imaginative
re-creations—have the power to document what readers might
otherwise have to imagine, whether actual conditions of
drought, poverty, or a disaster like Hurricane Harvey that
dropped 27 trillion gallons of water on Texas and Louisiana in
2017, or the dimensions of the Roman forum as it existed in the
time of Julius Caesar. Readers today expect the arguments they
read to include visual elements, and there’s little reason not to
offer this assistance if you have the technical skills to create
them.
Consider also the rapid development of the genre known as
infographics—basically data presented in bold visual form.
These items can be humorous and creative, but many, such as
“Learning Out of Poverty” on the following page, make
powerful factual arguments even when they leave it to viewers
to draw their own conclusions. Just search “infographics” on
the Web to find many examples.

339

340

“Learning Out of Poverty.” Infographics like this one turn facts and data into
arguments.

GUIDE to writing an argument of fact
Finding a Topic
You’re entering an argument of fact when you:
make a claim about fact or existence that’s controversial or
surprising: Climate change is threatening species in all regions by
extending the range of non-native plants and animals.
correct an error of fact: The overall abortion rate is not increasing
in the United States, though rates are increasing in some states.
challenge societal myths: Many Mexicans fought alongside Anglos
in battles that won Texas its independence from Mexico.
wish to discover the state of knowledge about a subject or
examine a range of perspectives and points of view: The rationales
of parents who homeschool their children reveal some surprising
differences.
Researching Your Topic
Use both a library and the Web to locate the information you need. A
research librarian is often a valuable resource, as are experts or
eyewitnesses. Begin research by consulting the following types of
sources:
scholarly books on your subject
newspapers, magazines, reviews, and journals (online and print)
online databases
government documents and reports
Web sites, blogs, social networking sites, and listservs or

341

newsgroups
experts in the field, some of whom might be right on your campus
Do field research if appropriate—a survey, a poll, or systematic
observation. Or invite people with a stake in the subject to present
their interpretations of the facts. Evaluate all sources carefully, making
sure that each is authoritative and credible.
Formulating a Hypothesis
Don’t rush into a thesis. Instead, begin with a hypothesis that expresses
your beliefs at the beginning of the project but that may change as you
learn more. It’s okay to start with a question to which you don’t have
an answer or with a broad, general interest in a subject:
Question: Have higher admissions standards at BSU reduced the
numbers of entering first-year students from small, rural high
schools?
Hypothesis: Higher admissions standards at BSU are reducing the
number of students admitted from rural high schools, which tend
to be smaller and less well-funded than those in suburban and
urban areas.
Question: Have music sites like Pandora and Spotify reduced the
amount of illegal downloading of music?
Hypothesis: Services like Pandora and Spotify may have done
more than lawsuits by record companies to discourage illegal
downloads of music.
Question: How dangerous is nuclear energy, really?
Hypothesis: The danger posed by nuclear power plants is far less
than that attributable to other viable energy sources.
Question: Why can’t politicians and citizens agree about the
threat posed by the huge federal deficit?
Hypothesis: People with different points of view see different

342

threats in the budget numbers and so react differently.
Examples of Arguable Factual Claims
A campus survey that shows that far more students have read
Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban than Hamlet indicates
that our current core curriculum lacks depth.
Evidence suggests that the European conquest of the Americas
may have had more to do with infectious diseases than any
superiority in technology or weaponry.
In the long run, dieting may be more harmful than moderate
overeating.
Preparing a Proposal
If your instructor asks you to prepare a proposal for your project, here’s
a format that may help:
State your thesis or hypothesis completely. If you are having
trouble doing so, try outlining it in Toulmin terms:
Claim:
Reason(s):
Warrant(s):
Alternatively, you might describe the complications of a factual
issue you hope to explore in your project, with the thesis perhaps
coming later.
Explain why the issue you’re examining is important, and
provide the context for raising the issue. Are you introducing
new information, making available information better known,
correcting what has been reported incorrectly, or

343

complicating what has been understood more simply?
Identify and describe those readers you most hope to reach
with your argument. Why is this group of readers most
appropriate for your project? What are their interests in the
subject? How might you involve them in the paper?
Discuss the kinds of evidence you expect to use in the project
and the research the paper will require.
Briefly discuss the key challenges you anticipate in preparing
your argument.
Considering Genre and Media
Your instructor may specify that you use a particular genre and/or
medium. If not, ask yourself these questions to help you make a good
choice:
What genre is most appropriate for your argument of fact? Does it
call for an academic essay, a report, an infographic, a brochure, or
something else?
What medium is most appropriate for your argument? Would it be
best delivered orally to a live audience? Presented as an audio
essay or podcast? Presented in print only or in print with
illustrations?
Will you need visuals, such as moving or still images, maps,
graphs, charts—and what function will they play in your
argument? Make sure they are not just “added on” but are
necessary components of the argument.
Thinking about Organization
The simplest structure for a factual argument is to make a claim and
then prove it. But even a basic approach needs an introductory section
that provides a context for the claim and a concluding section that
assesses the implications of the argument. A factual argument that

344

corrects an error or provides an alternative view of some familiar
concept or historical event will also need a section early on explaining
what the error or the common belief is. Be sure your opening section
answers the who, what, where, when, how, and (maybe) why questions
that readers will bring to the case.
Factual arguments offered in some academic fields follow formulas
and templates. A format favored in the hard sciences and also in the
social and behavioral sciences is known by its acronym, IMRAD, which
stands for Introduction, Methods, Research, and Discussion. Another
typical format calls for an abstract, a review of literature, a discussion
of method, an analysis, and a references list. When you have flexibility
in the structure of your argument, it makes sense to lead with a striking
example to interest readers in your subject and then to conclude with
your strongest evidence. Pay particular attention to transitions
between key points.
If you are defending a specific claim, anticipate the ways people with
different points of view might respond to your argument. Consider how
to address such differences respectfully in the body of your argument.
But don’t let a factual argument with a persuasive thesis end with
concessions or refutations, especially in pieces for the general public.
Such a strategy leaves readers thinking about problems with your
claim at precisely the point when they should be impressed by its
strengths. On the other hand, if your factual argument becomes
exploratory, you may find yourself simply presenting a range of
positions.
Getting and Giving Response: Questions for Peer Response
Your instructor may assign you to a group for the purpose of reading
and responding to each other’s drafts. If not, ask for responses from

345

serious readers or consultants at a writing center. Use the following
questions to evaluate a colleague’s draft. Since specific comments help
more than general observations, be sure to illustrate your comments
with examples. Some of the questions below assume a conventional,
thesis-driven project, but more exploratory or invitational arguments
of fact also need to be clearly phrased, organized, and supported with
evidence.
The Claim

Does the claim clearly raise a serious and arguable factual issue?
Is the claim as clear and specific as possible?
Is the claim qualified? If so, how?
Evidence for the Claim

Is the evidence provided enough to persuade readers to believe
your claim? If not, what additional evidence would help? Does any
of the evidence seem inappropriate or ineffective? Why?
Is the evidence in support of the claim simply announced, or do
you explain its significance and appropriateness? Is more
discussion needed?
Are readers’ potential objections to the claim or evidence
addressed adequately? Are alternative positions understood
thoroughly and presented fairly?
What kinds of sources are cited? How credible and persuasive will
they be to readers? What other kinds of sources might work
better?
Are all quotations introduced with appropriate signal phrases
(such as “As Tyson argues, . . .”) and blended smoothly into the
writer’s sentences?
Are all visuals titled and labeled appropriately? Have you
introduced them and commented on their significance?

346

Organization and Style

How are the parts of the argument organized? Is this organization
effective?
Will readers understand the relationships among the claims,
supporting reasons, warrants, and evidence? If not, how might
those connections be clearer? Is the function of every visual clear?
Are more transitions needed? Would headings or graphic devices
help?
Are the transitions or links from point to point, sentence to
sentence, and paragraph to paragraph clear and effective? If not,
how could they be improved?
Are all visuals carefully integrated into the text? Is each visual
introduced and commented on to point out its significance? Is
each visual labeled as a figure or a table and given a caption as
well as a citation?
Is the style suited to the subject? Is it too formal, casual, or
technical? Can it be improved?
Which sentences seem effective? Which ones seem weaker, and
how could they be improved? Should short sentences be
combined, and any longer ones be broken up?
How effective are the paragraphs? Too short or too long? How can
they be improved?
Which words or phrases seem effective? Do any seem vague or
inappropriate for the audience or the writer’s purpose? Are
technical or unfamiliar terms defined?
Spelling, Punctuation, Mechanics, Documentation, and Format

Are there any errors in spelling, punctuation, capitalization, and
the like?
Is an appropriate and consistent style of documentation used for
parenthetical citations and the list of works cited or references?
(See Chapter 22.)

347

Does the paper or project follow an appropriate format? Is it
appropriately designed and attractively presented? How could it
be improved?

PROJECTS●
1. Turn a database of information you find in the library or online
into a traditional argument or, alternatively, into a multimodal
project such as an infographic that offers various ways to
present a claim. FedStats, a government Web site, provides
endless data, but so can the sports or financial sections of a
newspaper. Once you find a rich field of study, examine the
data and draw your ideas from it, perhaps amplifying these
ideas with material from other related sources of information.
If you decide to create an infographic, you’ll find good
examples online at VizWorld or Cool Infographics. Software
tools you can use to create infographics include Piktochart and
Google Public Data Explorer. Have fun.
2. Write an argument about a factual matter you are confident—
based on personal experience or your state of knowledge—that
most people get wrong, time and again. Use your expertise to
correct this false impression.
3. Tough economic and political times sometimes reinforce and
sometimes undermine cultural myths. With your classmates,
generate a list of common beliefs about education,
employment, family life, marriage, social progress, technology,
and so on that seem to be under unusual scrutiny today. Does it
still pay to invest in higher education? Do two-parent households
matter as much as they used to? Can children today expect to do
better than their parents? Is a home still a good investment? Pick

348

one area to explore in depth, narrow the topic as much as you
can, and then gather facts that inform it by doing research,
perhaps working collaboratively to expand your findings. Turn
your investigation into a factual argument.
4. Since critic and writer Nicholas Carr first asked “Is Google
Making Us Stupid?” many have answered with a resounding
“yes,” arguing that extensive time online is reducing attention
spans and leaving readers less critical than ever. Others have
disagreed, saying that new technologies are doing just the
opposite—expanding our brain power. Do some research on
this controversy, on the Web or in the library, and consult with
a wide range of people interested in the subject, perhaps
gathering them together for a panel discussion. Then offer a
factual argument based on what you uncover, reflecting the
range of perspectives and opinions you have encountered.

Two Sample Factual Arguments

349

350

351

352

353

354

355

356

Don’t Believe Facebook: The Demise of the Written Word Is Very Far
Off
MICHAEL HILTZIK
June 17, 2016
Facebook executive Nicola Mendelsohn shook up the online-osphere earlier this week with one of those offhand declarations
that sound superficially profound for a moment or two but are
vacuous at their core. In five years, she told a Fortune
conference in London, her platform will probably be “all
video,” and the written word will be essentially dead.

357

“I just think if we look already, we’re seeing a year-on-year
decline on text,” she said. “If I was having a bet, I would say:
video, video, video.” That’s because “the best way to tell stories
in this world, where so much information is coming at us,
actually is video. It conveys so much more information in a
much quicker period. So actually the trend helps us to digest
much more information.”
This is, of course, exactly wrong. We don’t mean her prediction
about Facebook; in that respect she’s talking her own book,
since Facebook has made a big commercial bet on video. It’s
her assertion that video conveys more information—and faster
—than text that’s upside-down.
We’ll outsource the initial pushback to Kevin Drum of Mother
Jones, who observes, “Video has many benefits, but
information density generally isn’t one of them. . . . I can read
the transcript of a one-hour speech in about five or 10 minutes
and easily pick out precisely what’s interesting and what’s not.
With video, I have to slog through the full hour.” That’s why his
policy is never to click a link that goes to video.
Drum’s most salient point applies to the definition of the
“information” people are seeking when they’re accessing video
or text. “I read/view stuff on the Web in order to gather actual
information that I can comment on,” he writes. Plainly, video is
hopelessly overmatched by text in conveying hard information
—facts, figures, data. A given video may arguably convey more

358

“information” in bulk, but most of that is self-reinforcing
context—color, motion, sound. The underlying factual
information is relatively meager, in the same sense that the
energy capacity of an electric-car battery can’t match that of an
average gasoline fuel tank (the range of a fully charged Tesla
Model S is about 250 miles, while that of a typical gasolinefueled sedan can exceed 400).
Then there’s the challenge of extracting usable information
from video vs. text. Video is a linear medium: You have to allow
it to unspool frame by frame to glean what it’s saying. Text can
be absorbed in blocks; the eye searches for keywords or names
or other pointers such as quotation marks. Text is generally
searchable online. Some programs can convert some videos to
searchable form, but more often, the search is done via a
transcript keyed to points in the video. Here, for example, is the
full transcript of “Meet the Press” for May 29. Below is the video
of the entire show. If your task was to find the moment when
Chuck Todd first mentioned Trump University, which would
you use to find it? (We’re not even counting the five commercial
breaks.) [A video appears here in Hiltzik’s original text.]
Give up? It’s at about the 24:43 mark.
The demise of text is often predicted, but the horizon seems to
perpetually recede. Tech writer Tim Carmody puts his finger on
the reasons why “text is surprisingly resilient” in an essay at
Kottket.org: “It’s cheap, it’s flexible, it’s discreet. Human brains

359

process it absurdly well considering there’s nothing really builtin for it. Plenty of people can deal with text better than they can
spoken language, whether as a matter of preference or
necessity. And it’s endlessly computable—you can search it,
code it. . . . In short, all of the same technological advances that
enable more and more video, audio, and immersive VR
entertainment also enable more and more text. We will see
more of all of them as the technological bottlenecks open up.”
He concludes that “nothing has proved as invincible as writing
and literacy. Because text is just so malleable. Because it fits
into any container we put it in. Because our world is
supersaturated in it, indoors and out. Because we have so much
invested in it. . . . Unless our civilization fundamentally
collapses, we will never give up writing and reading.”
In predicting a world overtaken by video, Mendelsohn seems to
be making a category error; she’s conflating visual with video.
Facebook and other online platforms understand that their
users are accessing their sites for their visual offerings, but
that’s not the same as saying they’re doing nothing but watching
clips.
That notion is contradicted by the findings of Oxford
University’s Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism in its
just-released Digital News Report for 2016.
The study found that most consumers of online news (59%) still
gravitate to news articles—that is, text; only 24% said they
360

accessed news video in the week before they were polled. “One
surprise in this year’s data,” the report’s authors found, “is that
online news video appears to be growing more slowly than
might be expected.” The 24% figure “represents surprisingly
weak growth given the explosive growth and prominence on the
supply side.” In other words, there’s more video than ever
before, but it’s not attracting a commensurately large audience.
Why not? For the same reasons Drum mentioned:
They take too long to load and unspool, and extracting the
sought-after information is slower and more inconvenient than
reading the written word. The number-two complaint—“Pre-roll
ads put me off”—is another artifact of the linear nature of video,
compounded by the cleverness of video providers in forcing you
to watch through an entire ad, or three, before the clip even
starts.
The secret underlying Mendelsohn’s claim is that there is
something at which video is better than text: marketing.
The goal of advertising is not to impart information, but to keep
it from the audience—to distract viewers from thinking too hard
or asking questions. Video is ideal for that because that color,
movement, noise, and light is all distraction. Video is
entertainment, often of the empty-calorie variety. People love
circuses, but they don’t normally go there to study zoology.
Indeed, it seems that most of the articles (yes, articles) written
361

about the coming dominance of video look at the phenomenon
from the marketer’s standpoint: “A recent campaign from
Volkswagen,” the Guardian reported last year, “saw a trio of its
videos viewed a combined 155 million times.” Here’s a safe bet:
those videos weren’t produced to explain why the car company
had been faking emissions data, but to entice viewers to buy
their cars. Mendelsohn, by the way, came to Facebook from the
advertising industry.
Certainly text and the written word will change to meet the
demands of the new technologies through which we do our
reading. That’s always been the case. Novels tended to be
structured as a series of cliffhangers when they were read in
monthly installments in a popular magazine; and in a different
narrative form when they began to be printed in books sized to
fit conveniently in a saddlebag, or valise, or before the
fireplace. The length of news articles began to shrink when the
reading audience began to migrate from newspapers that
arrived on the stoop in the morning and were kept around to be
perused at leisure, and toward smartphones and pads to be read
between elevator stops.
That’s a testament to the infinite malleability of text. Text can
conform to the relentless shrinkage of people’s attention spans;
video can’t. Who will have time in the future to watch even a
five-minute video, when they can learn so much more by
scanning five paragraphs of text? “Bet for better video, bet for
better speech, bet for better things we can’t imagine,” Carmody

362

writes, “but if you bet against text, you will lose.”
Michael Hiltzik’s argument originally appeared in the Los Angeles Times, where he is a
columnist who ordinarily writes about financial issues. You’ll see that orientation in
his reflections on why the written word will likely thrive in the digital era. The piece
includes no endnotes, but we’ve underlined where the online text provides links to
source materials.

363

CHAPTER 9 Arguments of Definition

Everyone seems convinced that products like Amazon’s Alexa
and Apple’s Homekit are redefining the way people live in and
control their homes. But what exactly do these products do?
What defines them?
A panel of judges must decide whether computer-enhanced
images must be identified as such in a contest for landscape
photography. At what point is an electronically manipulated
image no longer a photograph—or does it even matter?
A conservative student group accuses the student government
on campus of sponsoring a lecture series featuring a
disproportionate number of “social justice warrior types.” A
spokesperson for the student government defends its program
by questioning whether the term actually means anything.

364

Understanding Arguments
of Definition
Definitions matter. Just ask scientists, mathematicians,
engineers, judges—or people who want to use restrooms
consistent with their gender identification. Looking back, in
1996 the Congress passed, and President Clinton signed, the
Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA), which defined marriage in
federal law this way:
In determining the meaning of any Act of Congress, or of
any ruling, regulation, or interpretation of the various
administrative bureaus and agencies of the United States,
the word “marriage” means only a legal union between
one man and one woman as husband and wife, and the
word “spouse” refers only to a person of the opposite sex
who is a husband or a wife. 1 U.S.C. 7.
This decision and its definitions of marriage and spouse have
been challenged over and over again in the ensuing decades,
leading eventually to another Supreme Court decision, in the
summer of 2013, that declared DOMA unconstitutional. The
majority opinion, written by Justice Kennedy, found that the
earlier law was discriminatory and that it labeled same-sex
unions as “less worthy than the marriage of others.” In so
ruling, the court affirmed that the federal government cannot
differentiate between a “marriage” of heterosexuals and one of

365

homosexuals. Debates over laws that involve definitions of
marriage and, more recently, gender are still ongoing, and you
might want to check the status of such controversies in your
own state.
Cases like these demonstrate that arguments of definition aren’t
abstract academic exercises: they often have important
consequences for ordinary people—that’s why farmers,
landowners, Congress, and the Environmental Protection
Agency have battled for decades over how that agency defines
“wetlands,” which Congress long ago gave it power to regulate.
And why it was so controversial when in Citizens United v.
Federal Election Commission (2010) the Supreme Court decided
that individuals in association—such as unions or corporations
—are equivalent to individual citizens when it comes to the
exercise of free speech rights and thus have no limit on their
spending in election campaigns. Opponents of the decision
argue that it enhances the power of monied interests in
American politics; others see it as affirming free speech in the
face of increasing government censorship.
Arguments about definition even sometimes decide what
someone or something is or can be. Such arguments can both
include or exclude: A wolf in Montana either is an endangered
species or it isn’t. An unsolicited kiss is or is not sexual
harassment. A person merits official political refugee status in
the United States or doesn’t. Another way of approaching
definitional arguments, however, is to think of what falls

366

between is and is not in a definitional claim. In fact, many
definitional disputes occur in that murky realm.
Consider the controversy over how to define human
intelligence. Some argue that human intelligence is a capacity
that is measured by tests of verbal and mathematical reasoning.
In other words, it’s defined by IQ and SAT scores. Others define
intelligence as the ability to perform specific practical tasks.
Still others interpret intelligence in emotional terms as a
competence in relating to other people. Any of these positions
could be defended reasonably, but perhaps the wisest approach
would be to construct a definition of intelligence that is rich
enough to incorporate all these perspectives—and maybe more.
The fact is that crucial political, social, and scientific terms—
such as intelligence, justice, free speech, or gender—are
reargued, reshaped, and updated for the times.
Why not just consult a dictionary when the meanings of terms
are disputed? It doesn’t work that way, no matter how up to date
or authoritative a dictionary might be. In fact, dictionaries
(almost by definition!) inevitably reflect the way individual
groups of people use words at a specified time and place. And
like any form of writing, these reference books mirror the
interests and prejudices of their makers—as shown, perhaps
most famously, in the entries of lexicographer Samuel Johnson
(1709–1784), who gave the English language its first great
dictionary. No friend of the Scots, Johnson defined oats as “a

367

grain which in England is generally given to horses, but in
Scotland supports the people.” (To be fair, he also defined
lexicographer as “a writer of dictionaries, a harmless drudge.”)
Thus, it’s possible to disagree with dictionary definitions or to
regard them merely as starting points for arguments.

The Dictionary for Landlubbers defines words according to their point of view!

RESPOND●
Briefly discuss how you might define the italicized terms in the
following controversial claims of definition. Compare your
definitions of the terms with those of your classmates.
Graphic novels can be serious literature.
Burning a nation’s flag is a hate crime.

368

Neither Matt Drudge nor Rachel Maddow is a journalist.
College sports programs have become big businesses.
Plagiarism can be an act of civil disobedience.
The menus at Taco Bell and Panda Express illustrate cultural
appropriation.
Satanism is a religion properly protected by the First
Amendment.
The District of Columbia should not have all the privileges of an
American state.
Polyamorists should have the option of marriage.

369

Kinds of Definition
Because there are various kinds of definitions, there are also
different ways to make a definition argument. Fortunately,
identifying a particular type of definition is less important than
appreciating when an issue of meaning is at stake. Let’s explore
some common definitional issues.

Formal Definitions
Formal definitions are what you find in dictionaries. Such
definitions place a term in its proper genus and species—first
determining its class and then identifying the features or
criteria that distinguish it from other members of that class.
That sounds complicated, but an example will help you see the
principle. To define electric car, for example, you might first
place it in a general class—passenger vehicles. Then you define
its species. Here’s how the U.S. Department of Energy does that,
explaining specific differences between cars powered by
electricity (EVs):
Just as there are a variety of technologies available in
conventional vehicles, plug-in electric vehicles (also
known as electric cars or EVs) have different capabilities
that can accommodate different drivers’ needs. A major
feature of EVs is that drivers can plug them in to charge
from an off-board electric power source. This
distinguishes them from hybrid electric vehicles, which
supplement an internal combustion engine with battery
370

power but cannot be plugged in.
Got that? It gets even more complicated (or precise) as the
government goes on to distinguish among plug-in hybrid
electric vehicles (PHEVs), all-electric vehicles (AEVs), battery
electric vehicles (BEVs), and even fuel cell electric vehicles
(FCEVs).
But all these definitional distinctions can actually make matters
clearer. For instance, suppose that you are considering a new
car and prefer an electric one this time. Quickly, the
definitional question becomes—what kind? A Toyota Prius, or
maybe a Tesla Model 3? How do they differ? Both are clearly
passenger cars—one might even add four-door sedans, so the
genus raises no question. But the Prius is an electrically assisted
version of a regular gasoline car while the Tesla is fully electric
—just battery and motor, no engine. That’s the species
difference, which obviously has consequences for consumers
concerned, let’s say, either about range or about CO2 emissions.
(Or maybe it just comes down to good looks?)

371

Tesla Model 3

Operational Definitions
Consider how Ben Schwartz defines funny in his response to claims
of a “humor crisis” in America.
LINK TO Schwartz, “Shutting Up,” in Chapter 27

Operational definitions identify an object or idea by what it
does or by what conditions create it. For example, someone’s
offensive sexual imposition on another person may not meet
the technical definition of harassment unless it is considered
unwanted, unsolicited, and repeated. These three conditions
then define what makes an act that might be acceptable in some
situations turn into harassment. But they might also then
become part of a highly contentious debate: were the conditions
actually present in a given case? For example, could an
offensive act be harassment if the accused believed sexual
interest was mutual and therefore solicited?
As you might imagine, arguments arise from operational
definitions whenever people disagree about what the conditions
define or whether these conditions have been fulfilled. Here are
some examples of those types of questions:

Questions Related to Conditions
372

Can institutional racism occur in the absence of specific
and individual acts of racism?
Can people paid for their community service still be called
volunteers?
Does academic dishonesty occur if a student accepts
wording suggested by a writing center tutor?

Questions Related to Fulfillment of
Conditions
Has an institution supported traditions or policies that have
led to widespread racial inequities?
Was the compensation given to volunteers really “pay” or
simply “reimbursement” for expenses?
Did the student actually copy down what the tutor said with
the intention of using it?

373

Prince Charming considers whether an action would fulfill the conditions for an
operational definition.

RESPOND●
This chapter opens with three rhetorical situations that center on
definitional issues: What is Alexa? What is a photograph? What
defines a social justice warrior (SJW)? Select one of these situations,

374

and then address it, using the strategies either of formal definitions
or of operational ones. For example, might a formal definition help
to explain what products like Alexa or Homekit are? (You may have
to do some quick research.) Would an operational definition work to
explain or defend what SJWs allegedly do or don’t do?

Definitions by Example
Resembling operational definitions are definitions by example,
which define a class by listing its individual members. Such
definitions can be helpful when it is easier to illustrate or show
what related people or things have in common than to explain
each one in precise detail. For example, one might define the
broad category of virtual reality products by listing the major
examples of these items or define Libertarian Democrat by
naming politicians or thinkers associated with that title.

375

An app like Discovr Music defines musical styles by example when it connects
specific artists or groups to others who make similar sounds.

Arguments of this sort may focus on who or what may be
included in a list that defines a category—classic movies, worst
natural disasters, groundbreaking painters, acts of terror. Such
arguments often involve comparisons and contrasts with the
items that most readers would agree belong in this list. One
could ask why Washington, D.C., is denied the status of a state:
how does it differ from the fifty recognized American states? Or
one might wonder why the status of planet is denied to
asteroids, when both planets and asteroids are bodies that orbit
the sun. A comparison between planets and asteroids might
suggest that size is one essential feature of the eight recognized
planets that asteroids don’t meet. (In 2006, in a famous exercise
in definitional argument, astronomers decided to deny poor
Pluto its planetary classification.)

Negative Definitions
Definitional arguments sometimes involve explaining what a
person, thing, or concept is by defining what it is not or
explaining with what it should be contrasted. Such strategies of
definition play a substantial role in politics today, as individuals
or political groups craft public images that show them in the
best light—as not radicals, not fascists, not Alt-Right, not Antifa,
not coastal elitists, not one-percenters, and so on. But this
strategy of argument has other uses as well, especially when a
writer wants to counter stereotypes or change expectations. For
376

a thoughtful—and particularly apropos—example, see Rob
Jenkins’s “Defining the Relationship” at the end of this chapter.

377

Developing a Definitional
Argument
Legal scholar John Palfrey’s discussion of free speech on college
campuses depends on the definition and limits of free expression.
LINK TO Palfrey, “Safe Spaces, Brave Spaces,” in Chapter 27

Definitional arguments don’t just appear out of the blue; they
often evolve from daily life. You might get into an argument
over the definition of ordinary wear and tear when you return a
rental car with some soiled upholstery. Or you might be asked
to write a job description for a new position to be created in
your workplace: you have to define the job position in a way
that doesn’t step on anyone else’s turf. Or maybe employees at
your school object to being defined as temporary workers when
they’ve held their same jobs for years. Or someone derides one
of your best friends as fake woke and you’re unsure how to read
the term. In a dozen ways every day, you encounter situations
that are questions of definition. They’re so inevitable that you
barely notice them for what they are.

Formulating Claims
In addressing a question of definition, you’ll likely formulate a
tentative claim—a declarative statement that represents your
first response to such situations. Note that such initial claims
378

usually don’t follow a single definitional formula.

Claims of Definition
A person paid to do public service is not a volunteer.
Institutional racism can exist—maybe even thrive—in the
absence of overt civil rights violations.
Climate change is not the same thing as global warming.
Political bias has been routinely practiced by some media
outlets.
Theatergoers shouldn’t confuse musicals with operas.
None of the statements listed here could stand on its own
because it likely reflects a first impression and gut reaction. But
that’s fine because making a claim of definition is typically a
starting point, a cocky moment that doesn’t last much beyond
the first serious rebuttal or challenge. Statements like these
aren’t arguments until they’re attached to reasons, data,
warrants, and evidence (see Chapter 7).
Finding good reasons to support a claim of definition usually
requires formulating a general definition by which to explore
the subject. To be persuasive, the definition must be broad and
not tailored to the specific controversy:
A volunteer is . . .
379

Institutional racism is . . .
Climate change is . . . but global warming is . . .
Political bias is . . .
A musical is . . . but an opera is . . .
Now consider how the following claims might be expanded with
a general definition to become full-fledged definitional
arguments:

Arguments of Definition
Someone paid to do public service is not a volunteer
because volunteers are people who . . .
Institutional racism can exist even in the absence of overt
violations of civil rights because, by definition,
institutional racism is . . .
Climate change differs from global warming because . . .
Political bias in media outlets is evident whenever . . .
Musicals focus on words first while operas . . .
Notice, too, that some of the issues can involve comparisons
between things—such as operas and musicals.

380

Crafting Definitions
Imagine that you decide to tackle the concept of paid volunteer
in the following way:
Participants in the federal AmeriCorps program are not
really volunteers because they receive “education
awards” for their public service. Volunteers are people
who work for a cause without receiving compensation.
In Toulmin terms, as explained in Chapter 7, the argument
looks like this:
Claim

Participants in AmeriCorps aren’t volunteers . . .

Reason

. . . because they are paid for their service.

Warrant

People who are compensated for their services are, ordinarily,
employees.

As you can see, the definition of volunteers will be crucial to the
shape of the argument. In fact, you might think you’ve settled
the matter with this tight little formulation. But now it’s time to
listen to the readers over your shoulder (again, see Chapter 7),
who are pushing you further. Do the terms of your definition
account for all pertinent cases of volunteerism—in particular,
any related to the types of public service AmeriCorps members
might be involved in? What do you do with unpaid interns: how
do they affect your definition of volunteers? Consider, too, the
word cause in your original claim of the definition:
Volunteers are people who work for a cause without
381

receiving compensation.
Cause has political connotations that you may or may not
intend. You’d better clarify what you mean by cause when you
discuss its definition in your paper. Might a phrase such as the
public good be a more comprehensive or appropriate substitute
for a cause? And then there’s the matter of compensation in the
second half of your definition:
Volunteers are people who work for a cause without
receiving compensation.
Aren’t people who volunteer to serve on boards, committees,
and commissions sometimes paid, especially for their
expenses? What about members of the so-called all-volunteer
military? They’re financially compensated during their years of
service, and they enjoy benefits after they complete their tours
of duty.
As you can see, you can’t just offer up a definition as part of an
argument and expect that readers will accept it. Every part of a
definition has to be interrogated, critiqued, and defended. So
investigate your subject in the library, on the Internet, and in
conversation with others, especially genuine experts if you can.
You might then be able to present your definition in a single
paragraph, or you may have to spend several pages coming to
terms with the complexity of the core issue.
After conducting research of this kind, you’ll be in a better
382

position to write an extended definition that explains to your
readers what you believe makes a volunteer a volunteer, how to
identify institutional racism, or how to distinguish between a
musical and an opera.

Matching Claims to Definitions
Once you’ve formulated a definition that readers will accept—a
demanding task in itself—you might need to look at your
particular subject to see if it fits your general definition. It
should provide evidence of one of the following:
It is a clear example of the class defined.
It clearly falls outside the defined class.
It falls between two closely related classes or fulfills some
conditions of the defined class but not others.
It defies existing classes and categories and requires an
entirely new definition.
How do you make this key move in an argument? Here’s an
example from an article by Anthony Tommasini entitled
“Opera? Musical? Please Respect the Difference.” Early in the
piece, Tommasini argues that a key element separates the two
musical forms:
Both genres seek to combine words and music in
dynamic, felicitous and, to invoke that all-purpose term,
artistic ways. But in opera, music is the driving force; in
musical theater, words come first.

383

This explains why for centuries opera-goers have revered
works written in languages they do not speak.
Tommasini’s claim of definition (or of difference) makes sense
because it clarifies aspects of the two genres.
If evidence you’ve gathered while developing an argument of
definition suggests that similar limitations may be necessary,
don’t hesitate to modify your claim. It’s amazing how often
seemingly cut-and-dried matters of definition become blurry—
and open to compromise and accommodation—as you learn
more about them. That has proved to be the case as various
campuses across the country have tried to define hate speech or
internship—tricky matters indeed. And even the Supreme Court
has never said exactly what pornography is. Just when matters
seem to be settled, new legal twists develop. Should virtual child
pornography created with software be illegal, as is the real
thing? Or is a virtual image—even a lewd one—an artistic
expression that is protected (as other works of art are) by the
First Amendment?

Considering Design and Visuals
In thinking about how to present your argument of definition,
you may find a simple visual helpful, such as the Venn diagram
below from Wikimedia Commons that defines sustainability as
the place where our society and its economy intersect with the
environment. Such a visual might even suggest a structure for
an oral presentation.
384

Remember too that visuals like photographs, charts, and graphs
can also help you make your case. Such items could
demonstrate that the conditions for a definition have been met
—for example, a widely circulated photograph of children in
Flint, Michigan, carrying bottled water (see p. 210) might define
crisis or civic collapse. Or you might create a graphic yourself to
illustrate a concept you are defining, perhaps through
comparison and contrast.

385

Finally, don’t forget that basic design elements—such as
boldface and italics, headings, or links in online text—can
contribute to (or detract from) the credibility and
persuasiveness of your argument of definition. (See Chapter 14
for more on “Visual Rhetoric.”)

GUIDE to writing an argument of definition
● Finding a Topic
You’re entering an argument of definition when you:
formulate a controversial or provocative definition: Cultural
appropriation is the disrespectful borrowing of the ideas, history,
cultural achievements, dress, music, traditions, foods, or any other
cultural artifacts of an exploited or marginalized group by a more
powerful one.

386

challenge a definition: For many Americans today, cultural
appropriation is an idea that runs counter to the melting-pot ideal
of American assimilation.
try to determine whether something fits an existing definition:
Dining at Taco Bell or Panda Express is (or is not) an act of cultural
appropriation.
seek to broaden an existing definition or create a new definition to
accommodate wider or differing perspectives: In a world where
cultural information is shared so fluidly via social media, it may be
time to explore alternative representations of cultural
appropriation.
Look for issues of definition in your everyday affairs—for instance, in
the way that jobs are classified at work, that key terms are used in your
academic major, that politicians visually represent social issues that
concern you, and so on. Be especially alert to definitional arguments
that arise when you or others deploy adjectives such as true, real,
actual, or genuine: a true patriot, real reform, authentic Kombucha tea.
● Researching Your Topic
You can research issues of definition by using the following sources:
college dictionaries and encyclopedias
unabridged dictionaries
specialized reference works and handbooks, such as legal and
medical dictionaries
your textbooks (check their glossaries)
Web articles and blogs that focus on particular topics, especially
political ones
community or advocacy groups focused on legal or social issues
social media postings by experts you respect
Browse in your library reference room and use the electronic indexes

387

and databases to determine how often disputed or contentious terms
or phrases occur in influential online newspapers, journals, and Web
sites.
When dealing with definitions, ask librarians about the most
appropriate and reliable sources. For instance, to find the definition of
a legal term, Black’s Law Dictionary or a database such as FindLaw may
help. Check USA.gov for how the government defines terms.
● Formulating a Claim
After exploring your subject, try to formulate a thesis that lets readers
know where you stand or what issues are at stake. Begin with the
following types of questions:
questions related to genus: Is assisting in suicide a crime?
questions related to species: Is marijuana a harmful addictive drug
or a useful medical treatment?
questions related to conditions: Must the imposition of sexual
attention be both unwanted and unsolicited to be considered sexual
harassment?
questions related to fulfillment of conditions: Has our college kept
in place traditions or policies that might embody forms of racial
privilege?
questions related to membership in a named class: Can a story put
together out of thirty-one retweets be called a novel, or even a short
story?
If you start with a thesis, it should be a complete statement that makes
a claim of definition and states the reasons supporting it. You may later
decide to separate the claim from its supporting reasons. But a working
thesis should be a fully articulated thought that spells out all the
details and qualifications: Who? What? Where? When? How many? How

388

regularly? How completely?
However, since arguments of definition are often exploratory and
tentative, an initial thesis (if you have one) may simply describe
problems in formulating a particular definition: What we mean by X is
likely to remain unsettled until we can agree more fully about Y and Z;
The key to understanding what constitutes X may lie in appreciating how
different groups approach Y and Z.
● Examples of Definitional Claims
Assisting a gravely ill person in committing suicide should not be
considered murder when the motive for the act is to ease a
person’s suffering and not to benefit from the death.
Although somewhat addictive, marijuana should not be classified
as a dangerous drug because it damages individuals and society
less than heroin or cocaine and because it helps people with lifethreatening diseases live more comfortably.
Giving college admission preference to all racial minorities can be
an example of class discrimination because such policies may
favor middle- and upper-class students who are already
advantaged.
Attempts to define the concept of free speech need to take into
account the way the term is understood in cultures worldwide,
not just in the countries of Western Europe and North America.
● Preparing a Proposal
If your instructor asks you to prepare a proposal for your project, here’s
a format that may help:
State your thesis or hypothesis completely. If you’re having trouble
doing so, try outlining it in Toulmin terms:

389

Claim:
Reason(s):
Warrant(s):
Alternatively, you might describe the complications of a
definitional issue you hope to explore in your project, with the
thesis perhaps coming later.
Explain why this argument of definition deserves attention.
What’s at stake? Why is it important for your readers to
consider?
Identify whom you hope to reach through your argument and
why these readers would be interested in it. How might you
involve them in the paper?
Briefly discuss the key challenges that you anticipate in
preparing your argument.
Determine what sources you expect to consult: Social media?
Databases? Dictionaries? Encyclopedias? Periodicals?
Determine what visuals to include in your definitional
argument.
● Considering Genre and Media
Your instructor may specify that you use a particular genre. If not, ask
yourself these questions to help you make a good choice:
What format is most appropriate for your argument of definition?
Does it call for an academic essay, report, infographic, poster, or
something else?
What medium is most appropriate for your argument? Would it be
best delivered orally to a live audience? Presented as an audio
essay or podcast? Presented in print only or in print with
illustrations?

390

Will you need visuals, such as moving or still images, maps,
graphs, charts—and what function will they play in your
argument? Make sure they are not just “added on” but are
necessary components of the argument.
● Thinking about Organization
An argument of definition is likely to include some of the following
parts:
a claim involving a question of definition
a general definition of some key concept
a careful look at your subject in terms of that general definition
evidence for every part of the argument, including visual evidence
if appropriate
a careful consideration of alternative views and
counterarguments
a conclusion drawing out the implications of the argument
It’s impossible, however, to predict what emphasis each of those parts
might receive or what the ultimate shape of an argument of definition
will be. Try to account for the ways people with different points of view
will likely respond to your argument. Then, consider how to address
such differences civilly in the body of your argument.
● Getting and Giving Response: Questions for Peer Response
Your instructor may assign you to a group for the purpose of reading
and responding to each other’s drafts. If not, ask for responses from
serious readers or consultants at a writing center. Use the following
questions to evaluate a colleague’s draft. Be sure to illustrate your
comments with examples; specific comments help more than general
observations.

391

The Claim

Is the claim clearly an issue of definition?
Is the claim significant enough to interest readers?
Are clear and specific criteria established for the concept being
defined? Do the criteria define the term adequately? Using this
definition, could most readers identify what’s being defined and
distinguish it from other related concepts?
Evidence for the Claim

Is enough evidence furnished to explain or support the definition?
If not, what kind of additional evidence is needed?
Is the evidence in support of the claim simply announced, or are
its significance and appropriateness analyzed? Is a more detailed
discussion needed?
Are all the conditions of the definition met in the concept being
examined?
Are any objections readers might have to the claim, criteria,
evidence, or way the definition is formulated adequately
addressed? Have you represented other points of view completely
and fairly?
What kinds of sources are cited? How credible and persuasive will
they be to readers? What other kinds of sources might work
better?
Are all quotations introduced with appropriate signal phrases
(such as “As Tyson argues, . . .”) and blended smoothly into the
writer’s sentences?
Are all visual sources labeled, introduced, and commented upon?
Organization and Style

How are the parts of the argument organized or presented? Is this
organization effective?
Will readers understand the relationships among the claims,

392

supporting reasons, warrants, and evidence? If not, how might
those connections be clearer? Does every visual serve a clear
purpose? Are more transitions (verbal or visual) needed? Would
headings help?
Are the transitions or links from point to point, sentence to
sentence, and paragraph to paragraph clear and effective? If not,
how could they be improved?
Are all visuals (or other elements such as audio or video clips)
carefully integrated into the text? Is each visual introduced and
commented on to point out its significance? If your argument of
definition is an academic essay, is each visual labeled as a figure
or a table and given a caption as well as a citation?
Is the style suited to the subject? Is it too formal, casual, or
technical? Can it be improved?
Which sentences seem effective? Which ones seem weaker, and
how could they be improved? Should short sentences be
combined, and any longer ones be broken up?
How effective are the paragraphs? Too short or too long? How can
they be improved?
Which words or phrases seem effective? Do any seem vague or
inappropriate for the audience or the writer’s purpose? Are
technical or unfamiliar terms defined?
Spelling, Punctuation, Mechanics, Documentation, and Format

Are there any errors in spelling, punctuation, capitalization, and
the like?
Is the documentation appropriate and consistent? (See Chapter
22.)
Does the paper or project follow an appropriate format? Is it
appropriately designed and attractively presented?

393

PROJECTS●
1. Write an argument of definition about a term such as fake news
or intersectionality that has suddenly become culturally
significant or recently changed in some important way. Either
defend the way the term has come to be defined or raise
questions about its appropriateness, offensiveness, accuracy,
and so on. Consider words or expressions such as Antifa, big
data, deep state, disruptive technology, Islamophobia, machine
learning, marginalization, white nationalist, etc.
2. Write an essay in which you compare or contrast the meaning
of two related terms, explaining the differences between them
by using one or more methods of definition: formal definition,
operational definition, definition by example. Be clever in your
choice of the initial terms: look for a pairing in which the
differences might not be immediately apparent to people
unfamiliar with how the terms are used in specific
communities. Consider terms such as liberal/progressive,
classy/cool, lead soprano/prima donna, student athlete/jock,
highbrow/intellectual, manual laborer/blue collar worker,
babysitter/nanny, and so on.
3. In an essay at the end of this chapter, Natasha Rodriguez
explores the adjective underprivileged, trying to understand
why this label bothers her so much. She concludes that
needing financial aid should not be conflated with being
disadvantaged. After reading this selection carefully, respond
to Rodriguez’s argument in an argument of definition of your
own—either an academic essay or a multimodal presentation,
combining various media such as audio, video, posters, etc.
Alternatively, explore a concept similar to “underprivileged”

394

with the same intensity that Rodriguez brings to her project.
Look for a term to define and analyze either from your major or
from an area of interest to you.
4. Because arguments of definition can have such important
consequences, it helps to develop one by first getting input
from lots of “stakeholders,” that is, from people or groups likely
to be affected by any change in the way a term is defined.
Working with a small group, identify a term in your school or
wider community that might need a fresh formulation or a
close review. It could be a familiar campus word or phrase such
as nontraditional student, diversity, scholastic dishonesty, or
social justice; or it may be a term that has newly entered the
local environment, perhaps reflecting an issue of law
enforcement, safety, transportation, health, or even
entertainment. Once you have settled on a significant term,
identify a full range of stakeholders. Then, through some
systematic field research (interviews, questionnaires) or by
examining existing documents and materials (such as library
sources, Web sites, pamphlets, publications), try to understand
how the term currently functions in your community. Your
definitional argument will, in effect, be what you can learn
about the meanings that word or phrase has today for a wide
variety of people.

Two Sample Definitional Arguments

395

396

397

398

Defining the Relationship

ROB JENKINS
August 9, 2016
Dear Students: I think it’s time we had the talk. You know, the
one couples who’ve been together for a while sometimes have
to review boundaries and expectations? Your generation calls
this “DTR”—short for “defining the relationship.”
We definitely need to define our relationship because, first of
all, it is a long-term relationship—maybe not between you and
me, specifically, but between people like you (students) and
people like me (professors). And, second, it appears to need
some defining, or redefining. I used to think the boundaries and
expectations were clear on both sides, but that no longer seems
to be the case.
The truth is, I wonder if college students today truly understand
the nature of their relationship to professors. Perhaps their
experiences with other authority figures—high-school teachers,
parents, and bosses—have led them to make assumptions that
aren’t quite accurate. Or perhaps students are just not too
thrilled with authority figures in general. That’s always been the
case, to some extent. But it seems to me, after 31 years of
college teaching, that the lines have grown blurrier, the
misconceptions more profound.
So I’d like to take a few moments to define the professor-student
399

relationship. And if no one has ever put it to you quite this way
before—well, that just highlights the need for a DTR.
And by the way, please keep in mind that I’m not trying to
offend you or tick you off. I actually like you quite a bit, or I
wouldn’t even bother having this discussion.
I don’t work for you. Students (or their parents), when they’re
unhappy with something I’ve said or done, occasionally try
throwing this line in my face: “You work for me.” They mean
that by paying tuition and taxes, they pay my salary and I
should, therefore, be responsive in the way they desire.
Let’s dismiss that old canard right off the bat. Yes, as a
professor at a state institution, I am a public employee. But
that’s precisely the point: I’m employed by the college and by
the public, not by any particular member of the public. My duty
—to the institution and to the people of this state—is to ensure
that students in my courses meet the standards set by the
college’s faculty and are well-prepared for further study and for
life.
You’re not a customer, and I’m not a clerk. Unfortunately, too
many students have been told for too long that they are
“customers” of the institution—which means, of course, that
they’re always right. Right?
Wrong. This is not Wal-Mart. You are not a customer, and I
don’t even own a blue smock. Our relationship is much more
400

like that of doctor and patient. My only obligation: to tell you
what you need to hear (not what you want to hear) and to do
what I think is best (not what you think is best).
I’m not a cable network or streaming site. What you get out of
this relationship is that you'll be better equipped to succeed in
this and other college courses, and life in general. What I get is
a great deal of professional and personal satisfaction.
Natives of today’s social-media-fueled digital universe have
come to expect that everything they want will be available
whenever they want it, on demand. That includes, or ought to
include, their professors. I mean, we have email, don’t we? And
cellphones?
Consider this official notice that I have opted out of the ondemand world. My office hours are listed on my syllabus. If for
some reason I can’t be in my office during those hours, I’ll let
you know beforehand if possible or post a note on my door. But
I’m usually there.
As for email, yes, I have it and I check it often, but not
constantly. I do have a life outside this classroom—a wife, kids,
hobbies, other professional obligations. That’s why I don’t give
out my private cell number. If you need me after hours, email
me and I’ll probably see it and respond within 24 to 48 hours.
I’m not a high-school teacher. A common refrain among firstyear college students is, “But my high-school teacher said. . . .”
401

Those teachers did their best to prepare you for college and tell
you what to expect. Unfortunately, some of their information
was outdated or just plain wrong. For example, not every essay
has exactly five paragraphs, and it’s OK, in certain situations, to
begin a sentence with “because.” One of the main differences
between them and me is that I’m not telling you how you’re
going to do things “once you get to college.” This is college, and
this is how we do things.
Plus, because of something called “academic freedom,” which
most college professors enjoy but most high-school teachers
don’t, I’m not nearly as easy to intimidate when you think you
deserved an A. I’m sure you (or your parents) would never
dream of trying anything like that, but I thought I’d go ahead
and mention it, just in case.
I’m not your boss. Please don’t misunderstand: I don’t take a
“my way or the highway” approach to teaching. In my view,
that’s not what education, and certainly not higher education, is
all about. I’m here to help you learn. Whether you choose to
accept that help—ultimately, whether you choose to learn
anything—is up to you.
My role is not to tell you what to do, like your shift manager at
the fast-food restaurant. Rather, I will provide information,
explain how to do certain things, and give you regular
assignments and assessments designed to help you internalize
that knowledge and master those skills. Internalizing and

402

mastering are your responsibility. I can’t “fire” you, any more
than you can get me fired. But I can and will evaluate the quality
and timeliness of your work, and that evaluation will be
reflected in your final grade.
I’m not your parent. Some of my colleagues (especially among
the administration) believe the institution should act “in loco
parentis,” which means “in the place of a parent.” In other
words, when you’re away from your parents, we become your
parents.
I’ve never really subscribed to that theory, at least not in the
classroom. I suppose there are certain areas of the college, like
student services, that have some parental-like obligation to
students. But as a professor, I don’t. And what that means, more
than anything else, is that I’m not going to treat you like a child.
I’m not your BFF. When I first started teaching, I was only a few
years older than many of my students. It was tempting, at times,
to want to be friends with some of them. I occasionally
struggled to maintain an appropriate professional distance.
Not anymore. I’ve been doing this for a while now—over 30
years—and I’m no longer young. (Sadly, I’m no longer mistaken
for a student, either.) I try to be friendly and approachable, but
if by “friendly” you think I mean “someone to hang out with,” I
don’t. I regret that we cannot actually be friends.
That applies to virtual friendship, too. Even if you happen to
403

track me down on Facebook, I will not accept your friend
request. You’re welcome to follow me on Twitter, if you like, but
I won’t follow you back. And I don’t do Instagram or Snapchat
or, um, whatever else there is.
I’m not your adversary. Just because we’re not best buds,
please don’t think I’m your enemy. Nothing could be further
from the truth. In fact, if by “friend” you mean someone who
cares about your well-being and success, then I guess I am a
friend after all.
Yet there is always a degree of tension in the student-professor
relationship. You may at times feel that I am behaving in an
adversarial manner—questioning the quality and relevance of
your work, making judgments that you perceive as negative.
Understand that is only because I do want you to succeed. It’s
not personal, on my end, and you must learn not to take it
personally.
I’d like to be your partner. More than anything, I’d like for us to
form a mutually beneficial alliance in this endeavor we call
education.
I pledge to do my part. I will:
Stay abreast of the latest ideas in my field.
Teach you what I believe you need to know, with all the
enthusiasm I possess.
Invite your comments and questions and respond

404

constructively.
Make myself available to you outside of class (within
reason).
Evaluate your work carefully and return it promptly with
feedback.
Be as fair, respectful, and understanding as I can humanly
be.
If you need help beyond the scope of this course, I will do
my best to provide it or see that you get it.
In return, I expect you to:
Show up for class each day or let me know (preferably in
advance) if you have some good reason to be absent.
Do your reading and other assignments outside of class and
be prepared for each class meeting.
Focus during class on the work we’re doing and not on
extraneous matters (like whoever or whatever is on your
phone at the moment).
Participate in class discussions.
Be respectful of your fellow students and their points of
view.
In short, I expect you to devote as much effort to learning
as I devote to teaching.
What you get out of this relationship is that you’ll be better
equipped to succeed in this and other college courses, workrelated assignments, and life in general. What I get is a great
deal of professional and personal satisfaction. Because I do
really like you guys and want the best for you.
405

All in all, that’s not a bad deal. It’s a shame more relationships
aren’t like ours.
Rob Jenkins is an associate professor of English at Georgia State University–
Perimeter College and a regular contributor to the Chronicle of Higher Education,
where this argument was published.

406

CHAPTER 10 Evaluations

“We don’t want to go there for coffee. Their beans aren’t fair
trade, the drinks are high in calories, and the stuff is way
overpriced.”
The campus storytelling project has just won a competition
sponsored by NPR, and everyone involved is thrilled. Then they
realize that this year all but one of the leaders of this project will
graduate and that they have very few new recruits. So they put
their heads together to figure out what qualities they need in
new recruits that will help maintain the excellence of their
project.
Orson Welles’s masterpiece Citizen Kane is playing at the
Student Union for only one more night, but the new Marvel
Avengers epic is featured across the street in 3-D. Guess which
movie your roomie wants to see? You intend to set her straight.

407

Understanding
Evaluations
Evaluations are everyday arguments. By the time you leave
home in the morning, you’ve likely made a dozen informal
evaluations: You’ve selected neat but informal clothes because
you have a job interview with a manufacturing company
looking for machinists. You’ve chosen low-fat yogurt and fruit
over the pancakes you really love. You’ve queued up the perfect
playlist on your iPhone for your hike to campus. In each case,
you’ve applied criteria to a particular problem and then made a
decision. That’s evaluating on the fly.
Some professional evaluations require more elaborate
standards, evidence, and paperwork (imagine an aircraft
manufacturer certifying a new jet for passenger service), but
they don’t differ structurally from the simpler choices that
people make all the time. People love to voice their opinions,
and they always have. In fact, a mode of ancient rhetoric—
called the ceremonial or epideictic (see Chapter 1)—was devoted
entirely to speeches of praise and blame.
Today, rituals of praise and (mostly) blame are a significant part
of American life. Adults who would choke at the notion of
debating causal or definitional claims will happily spend hours
appraising the Oakland Raiders, Boston Red Sox, or Pittsburgh
Penguins. Other evaluative spectacles in our culture include

408

awards shows, late-night comedy shows, most-valuable-player
presentations, lists of best-dressed or worst-dressed celebrities,
literary prizes, consumer product magazines, and—the ultimate
formal public gesture of evaluation—elections. Indeed, making
evaluations is a form of entertainment in America and
generates big audiences (think of The Voice) and revenues.

Arguments about sports are usually evaluations of some kind.

RESPOND●
The last ten years have seen a proliferation of “reality” talent shows
around the world—Dancing with the Stars, So You Think You Can
Dance, American (or Canadian or Australian or many other) Idol,
America’s Got Talent, The Voice, and so on. Write a short opinion
piece assessing the merits of a particular “talent” show. What
should a proper event of this kind accomplish? Does the event
you’re reviewing do so?

409

Criteria of Evaluation
Arguments of evaluation can produce simple rankings and
winners or can lead to profound decisions about our lives, but
they always involve standards. The particular standards we
establish for judging anything—whether a political candidate,
consumer product, work of art, or career strategy—are called
criteria of evaluation. Sometimes criteria are self-evident: a
truck that gets nine miles per gallon is a gas hog, and a piece of
fish that smells even a little off shouldn’t be eaten. But criteria
get complicated when a subject is abstract: What constitutes a
fair wage? What are the qualities of a classic song? What makes
an event worthy of news coverage? Struggling to identify such
amorphous criteria of evaluation can lead to important insights
into your values, motives, and preferences.
Why make such a big deal about criteria when many acts of
evaluation seem effortless? Because we should be suspicious of
opinions we offer too casually. Spontaneous quips and snap
judgments can’t carry the same weight as well-informed and
well-argued opinions. Serious evaluations require reflection,
and when we look deeply into our judgments, we sometimes
discover important questions that typically go unasked, many
prefaced by why:
You challenge the grade you received in a course, but you
don’t question the practice of grading.
You argue passionately that a Democratic Congress is better
for America than a Republican one, but you fail to consider
410

why voters get only two choices.
You argue that news coverage is biased, but it doesn’t occur
to you to ask what makes an event worthy of news
coverage.
Push an argument of evaluation hard enough and even simple
judgments become challenging and intriguing.
In fact, for many writers, grappling with criteria is the toughest
step in producing an evaluation. When you offer an opinion
about a topic you know well, readers ought to learn something
from your argument. So you need to formulate and then justify
the criteria for your opinions, whatever the subject.
Do you think, for instance, that you could explain what (if
anything) makes a veggie burger good? Though many people
have eaten veggie burgers, they probably haven’t spent much
time thinking about them. Moreover it wouldn’t be enough
merely to assert that a proper one should be juicy or tasty—such
observations are trite, uninteresting, and obvious. The
following criteria offered on the Cook’s Illustrated Web site
show what happens when experts give the matter their attention:
We wanted to create veggie burgers that even meat
eaters would love. We didn’t want them to taste like
hamburgers, but we did want them to act like
hamburgers, having a modicum of chew, a harmonious
blend of savory ingredients, and the ability to go from
411

grill to bun without falling apart. [emphasis added]
—Cook’s Illustrated
After a lot of experimenting, Cook’s Illustrated came up with a
recipe that met these criteria.

What criteria of evaluation are embedded in this visual argument?

Criteria of evaluation aren’t static, either. They may evolve over
time depending upon audience. Much market research, for
example, is designed to find out what particular consumers
want now or may want in the future—what their criteria are for
choosing a product or service. In good economic times, people
may demand homes with soaring entryways, lots of space, and
premium appliances. In tougher times, they may care more
about quality insulation and energy-efficient stoves and

412

dishwashers. Shifts in values, attitudes, and criteria happen all
the time.
Criteria can also reveal biases we hardly notice. In a Current
Affairs column (July 28, 2017), Nathan J. Robinson, citing a 2007
study featured on the Our World In Data Web site, argues that
we are blind to an especially insidious omission in mainstream
American news coverage—the unspoken and often racially
motivated criteria networks use to decide what merits public
attention at all. Robinson contends that only “the purest kind of
subconscious prejudice” is at work in determining whose death
is worth reporting. Looking closely at 700,000 major network
news stories, the researchers found that
the loss of 1 European life was equivalent to the loss of 45
African lives, in terms of the amount of coverage
generated. Deaths in Europe and the Americas were
given tens of times more weight than Asian, African, and
Pacific lives.
Robinson is clearly asking news providers and consumers alike
to reconsider how they evaluate newsworthiness.

413

A graph from the Our World In Data Web site shows significant disparities in
news coverage given to loss of life in different parts of the world.

RESPOND●
Choose one item from the following list that you understand well
enough to evaluate (or choose a category of your own). Develop
several criteria of evaluation that you could defend to distinguish
excellence from mediocrity in the area. Then choose an item that
you don’t know much about and explain the research you might do
to discover reasonable criteria of evaluation for it.
smartwatches
NFL quarterbacks
social media sites
TV journalists

414

video games
virtual reality products
Navajo rugs
U.S. vice presidents
organic vegetables
electric cars
spoken word poetry
specialty coffee
country music bands
superhero films

415

Characterizing Evaluation
One way of understanding evaluative arguments is to consider
the types of evidence they use. A distinction explored in
Chapter 4 between hard evidence and constructed arguments
based on reason is helpful here: we defined hard evidence as
facts, statistics, testimony, and other kinds of arguments that
can be measured, recorded, or even found—the so-called
smoking gun in a criminal investigation. We defined
constructed arguments based on reason as those that are
shaped by language and various kinds of logic.
We can talk about arguments of evaluation the same way,
looking at some as quantitative and others as qualitative.
Quantitative arguments of evaluation employ criteria that can
be measured, counted, or demonstrated in some mechanical
fashion (something is taller, faster, smoother, quieter, or more
powerful than something else). In contrast, qualitative
arguments rely on criteria that must be explained through
language and media, alluding to such matters as values,
traditions, and emotions (something is more ethical, more
beneficial, more handsome, or more noble than something
else). A claim of evaluation might be supported by arguments of
both sorts.

Quantitative Evaluations
At first glance, quantitative evaluations seem to hold all the
cards, especially in a society as enamored of science and
416

technology as our own is. Making judgments should be easy if
all it involves is measuring and counting—and in some cases,
that’s the way things work out. Who’s the tallest or oldest or
loudest person in your class? If your classmates allow
themselves to be measured, you could find out easily enough,
using the right equipment and internationally sanctioned
standards of measurement—the meter, the calendar, or the
decibel.
But what if you were to ask, Who’s the smartest person in class?
You could answer this more complex question quantitatively,
using IQ tests or college entrance examinations that report
results numerically. In fact, almost all college-bound students
in the United States submit to this kind of evaluation, taking
either the SAT or the ACT to demonstrate their verbal and
mathematical prowess. Such measures are widely accepted by
educators and institutions, but they are also vigorously
challenged. What do they actually measure? They predict likely
academic success only in college, which is one kind of
intelligence. As you might guess, quantitative measures of
evaluation have limits. Devised to measure only certain criteria
and ignore others, they have an inevitably limited perspective.
And yet quantitative evaluations may still be full of insight. For
example, even if you are not concerned with finding a mate at
this point, you might be interested to know what people are
looking for in a potential partner. Good looks? Of course—
according to a Business Wire story, 51 percent of the people on

417

online dating services value attractiveness in a potential mate.
Others look for modesty (39 percent), ambition (50 percent),
and a sense of humor (67 percent). But what trumps all these
qualities is something you might not have thought much about
at this point: your credit rating. Fully 69 percent of those
surveyed thought a good credit score was important or very
important in considering whom they might date. An odd
criterion? Not at all. Dr. Helen Fischer, chief scientific advisor
for Match.com, explains why:
When it comes to dating, a good credit score ups your
mate value, helping you win a responsible, long-term
partner, more so than some other qualities that online
daters might highlight on their profile. Money talks, but
your credit score can speak more about who you are as a
person, and singles agree that those with good credit
tend to be conscientious and reliable.
—“Online Daters Say a Good Credit Score Is More
Attractive Than a Fancy Car,” Business Wire, August 21,
2017
Something to remember when your next credit card bill comes
due?

Qualitative Evaluations
Many issues of evaluation that are closest to people’s hearts
aren’t subject to quantification. What makes a movie great or

418

significant? If you suggested a quantitative measure like length,
your friends would probably hoot, “Get serious!” But what about
box-office receipts, adjusted for inflation? Would films that
made the most money—an easily quantifiable measure—be the
“best pictures”? That select group would include movies such as
Star Wars, The Sound of Music, Gone with the Wind, Titanic,
Avatar, and E.T. An interesting group of films—but the best?
To define the criteria for “significant movie,” you’d more likely
look for the standards and evidence that serious critics explore
in their arguments, abstract or complicated issues such as their
societal impact, cinematic technique, dramatic structures,
intelligent casting, and so on. Most of these markers of quality
could be defined or identified with some precision but not
actually measured or counted. You’d also have to make your
case rhetorically, convincing the audience to accept the
benchmarks of quality you are offering and yet appreciating
that they might not.
Indeed, a movie reviewer (or anyone else) making strong
qualitative judgments might spend as much time defending
criteria of evaluation as providing evidence that these standards
are present in a particular film. And putting those standards
into action can be what makes a review attention getting or,
even better, worth reading. Here’s a paragraph from Mehera
Bonner, an entertainment editor for Marie Claire who is not shy
about applying a feminist perspective to Christopher Nolan’s
World War II epic Dunkirk (2017), depicting the evacuation of

419

more than 300,000 allied soldiers trapped by German forces on
the coast of France at the outset of the conflict:
[M]y main issue with Dunkirk is that it’s so clearly
designed for men to man-out over. And look, it’s not like I
need every movie to have “strong female leads.” Wonder
Woman can probably tide me over for at least a year, and
I understand that this war was dominated by brave male
soldiers. I get that. But the packaging of the film, the
general vibe, and the tenor of the people applauding it
just screams “men-only”—and specifically seems to cater
to a certain type of very pretentious man who would love
nothing more than to explain to me why I’m wrong about
not liking it. . . . [T]o me, Dunkirk felt like an excuse for
men to celebrate maleness.
—Mehera Bonner, “I Think Dunkirk Was Mediocre at
Best, and It’s Not Because I’m Some Naïve Woman Who
Doesn’t Get It”

420

Web sites such as Netflix and Rotten Tomatoes offer recommendations for films
based on users’ past selections and the ratings of other users and critics.
Sometimes those judgments are at odds. Then whom do you trust?

RESPOND●
For examples of powerful evaluation arguments, search the Web for
eulogies or obituaries of famous, recently deceased individuals. Try
to locate at least one such item, and then analyze the types of
claims it makes about the accomplishments of the deceased. What
types of criteria of evaluation hold the obituary or eulogy together?
Why should we respect or admire the person?

421

Developing an Evaluative
Argument
Developing an argument of evaluation can seem like a simple
process, especially if you already know what your claim is likely
to be. To continue the movie theme for one more example:
Citizen Kane is likely the finest film ever made by an
American director.
Having established a claim, you would then explore the
implications of your belief, drawing out the reasons, warrants,
and evidence that might support it:
Claim

Citizen Kane is the finest film ever made by an American director .
..

Reason

. . . because it revolutionizes the way we see the world.

Warrant

Great films change viewers in fundamental ways.

Evidence

Shot after shot, Citizen Kane presents the life of its protagonist
through cinematic images that viewers can never forget.

The warrant here is, in effect, an implied statement of criteria—
in this case, the quality that defines “great film” for the writer. It
may be important for the writer to share that assumption with
readers and perhaps to identify other great films that similarly
make viewers appreciate new perspectives.
As you can see, in developing an evaluative argument, you’ll
want to pay special attention to criteria, claims, and evidence.
422

Formulating Criteria
What criteria does Deanna Hartley use in evaluating what makes
some candidates more successful than others in how they use
social media during a job search?
LINK TO Hartley, “Creative Ways to Get Noticed by Employers on
Social Media,” in Chapter 26

Although even casual evaluations (This band sucks!) might be
traced to reasonable criteria, most people don’t defend their
positions until they are challenged (Oh yeah?). Writers who
address readers with whom they share core values rarely
discuss their criteria in great detail. Similarly, critics with
established reputations in their fields aren’t expected to restate
all their principles every time they write reviews. They assume
audiences will—over time—come to appreciate their standards.
Indeed, the expertise they command becomes a part of their
persuasive ethos (see Chapter 3). Still, criteria can make or
break a piece.
So spend time developing your criteria of evaluation. What
exactly makes a shortstop an all-star? What marks a
standardized test as an unreliable measure of intelligence?
What distinguishes an inspired rapper from a run-of-the-mill
one? In cases like these, list the possibilities and then pare them
down to the essential qualities. If you propose vague, dull, or
unsupportable principles, expect to be challenged.
423

You’re most likely to be vague about your beliefs when you
haven’t thought, read, or experienced enough about your
subject. Push yourself at least as far as you imagine readers will.
Anticipate readers looking over your shoulder, asking difficult
questions. Say, for example, that you intend to argue that
anyone who wants to stay on the cutting edge of personal
technology will obviously want Microsoft’s latest Surface Pro
because it does so many amazing things. But what does that
mean exactly? What makes the device “amazing”? Is it that it
offers the flexibility of a touch screen, boasts an astonishing
high-resolution screen, and gives artists the ability to draw with
a stylus? These are particular features of the device. But can you
identify a more fundamental quality to explain the product’s
appeal, such as a Surface user’s experience, enjoyment, or
productivity? You’ll often want to raise your evaluation to a
higher level of generality like this so that your appraisal of a
product, book, performance, or political figure works as a
coherent argument, and not just as a list of random
observations.
Be certain, too, that your criteria of evaluation apply to more
than just your topic of the moment. Your standards should
make sense on their own merits and apply across the board. If
you tailor your criteria to get the outcome you want, you are
doing what is called “special pleading.” You might be pleased
when you prove that the home team is awesome, but it won’t
take skeptics long to figure out how you’ve cooked the books.

424

RESPOND●
Local news and entertainment magazines often publish “best of”
issues or articles that catalog their readers’ and editors’ favorites in
such categories as “best place to go on a first date,” “best ice cream
sundae,” and “best dentist.” Sometimes the categories are specific:
“best places to say ‘I was retro before retro was cool’” or “best
movie theater seats.” Imagine that you’re the editor of your own
local magazine and that you want to put out a “best of” issue
tailored to your hometown. Develop five categories for evaluation.
For each category, list the evaluative criteria that you would use to
make your judgment. Next, consider that because your criteria are
warrants, they’re especially tied to audience. (The criteria for “best
dentist,” for example, might be tailored to people whose major
concern is avoiding pain, to those whose children will be regular
patients, or to those who want the cheapest possible dental care.)
For several of the evaluative categories, imagine that you have to
justify your judgments to a completely different audience. Write a
new set of criteria for that audience.

Making Claims
Food blogger Jess Kapadia makes a strong evaluative claim when
she asserts that, for example, the best Indian food she ever ate
was not in India but in Singapore.
LINK TO Kapadia, “I Still Don’t Understand the Cultural
Appropriation of Food,” in Chapter 24

425

In evaluations, claims can be stated directly or, more rarely,
strongly implied. For most writers, strong and specific
statements followed by reasonable qualifications work best.
Consider the differences between the following three claims
and how much greater the burden of proof is for the first claim:
J. R. R. Tolkien is the best writer of fantasy ever.
J. R. R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings is a better fantasy
series than J. K. Rowling’s Harry Potter series, even for
children.
For most readers, J. R. R. Tolkien’s The Return of the
King offers, arguably, a more profound examination of
evil than J. K. Rowling’s Harry Potter and the Deathly
Hallows.
Here’s a second set of examples demonstrating the same
principle, that knowledgeable qualifications generally make a
claim of evaluation easier to deal with and smarter:
Chicago mayor Rahm Emanuel’s recent suggestion for a
new graduation requirement for high school seniors in
his city sure is dumb!
A proposal by Mayor Rahm Emanuel of Chicago that
students in his city’s schools not receive high school
diplomas unless they’ve been admitted to college, joined
the military, or are already employed, might do more

426

harm than good.
While praiseworthy in its goal to make high school
seniors think about their futures, Mayor Emanuel’s
proposed graduation requirement might force many
working-class students into making the wrong choices—
going to trade school, joining the military, enrolling in
second-rate online schools—just to claim a high school
diploma they’ve already earned.
The point of qualifying theses like these isn’t to make evaluative
claims bland but to make them responsible and reasonable.
Consider how Reagan Tankersley uses the criticisms of a
musical genre he enjoys to frame an assertion he makes in its
defense:
Structurally, dubstep is a simple musical form, with
formulaic progressions and beats, something that gives a
musically tuned ear little to grasp or analyze. For this
reason, a majority of traditionally trained musicians find
the genre to be a waste of time. These people have a
legitimate position. . . . However, I hold that it is the
simplicity of dubstep that makes it special: the primal
nature of the song is what digs so deeply into fans. It
accesses the most primitive area in our brains that
connects to the uniquely human love of music.
—Reagan Tankersley, “Dubstep: Why People Dance”

427

Tankersley doesn’t pretend that dubstep is a subtle or
sophisticated musical form, nor does he expect his argument to
win over traditionally minded critics. Yet he still makes a claim
worth considering.

Dubstep band Dope D.O.D. performing live in Moscow in 2015

One tip: Nothing adds more depth to an opinion than letting
others challenge it. When you can, use the resources of the
Internet or local discussion boards to get responses to your
opinions or topic proposals. It can be eye-opening to realize
how strongly people react to ideas or points of view that you
regard as perfectly normal. Share your claim and then, when
you’re ready, your first draft with friends, classmates, or tutors
at the writing center, asking them to identify places where your
ideas need additional support, either in the discussion of
criteria or in the presentation of evidence.

428

Presenting Evidence
Generally, the more evidence in an evaluation the better,
provided that the evidence is relevant. For example, in
evaluating the performance of two laptops, the speed of their
processors would be essential; the quality of their keyboards or
the availability of service might be less crucial yet still worth
mentioning. But you have to decide how much detail your
readers want in your argument. For technical subjects, you
might make your basic case briefly and then attach additional
supporting documents at the end—tables, graphs, charts—for
those who want more data.
Just as important as relevance in selecting evidence is
presentation. Not all pieces of evidence are equally convincing,
nor should they be treated as such. Select evidence that is most
likely to influence your readers, and then arrange the argument
to build toward your strongest points. In most cases, that best
material will be evidence that’s specific, detailed, memorable,
and derived from credible sources. The following example
comes from a celebratory defense of art and artists by musician,
songwriter, and producer T Bone Burnett, delivered at the 2016
AmericanaFest music festival in Nashville. The energy of his
language and the memorable examples likely solidify the case
that music is foundational to the American mythology:
This is the story of the United States: a kid walks out of
his home with a song and nothing else, and conquers the
world. We have replicated that phenomenon over and
429

over: Elvis Presley, ... Rosetta Tharpe, Johnny Cash,
Howlin Wolf, Mahalia Jackson, Bob Dylan, John Coltrane,
Billie Holiday.
—T Bone Burnett, Nashville, TN, September 22, 2016

T Bone Burnett gave the keynote speech at the AmericanaFest (Americana Music
Festival & Conference) in Nashville.

In evaluation arguments, don’t be afraid to concede a point
when evidence goes contrary to the overall claim you wish to
make. If you’re really skillful, you can even turn a problem into
an argumentative asset, as Bob Costas does in acknowledging
the flaws of baseball great Mickey Mantle in the process of
praising him:

430

None of us, Mickey included, would want to be held to
account for every moment of our lives. But how many of
us could say that our best moments were as magnificent
as his?
—Bob Costas, “Eulogy for Mickey Mantle”

Considering Design and Visuals
Visual components play a significant role in many kinds of
evaluation arguments, especially during political campaigns—as
the image on the following page suggests. But they can also be
important in more technical arguments as well (see the graph
from Our World in Data earlier in this chapter). As soon as
numbers are involved in supporting your claim, think about
ways to arrange quantitative information in tables, charts,
graphs, or infographics to make the information more
accessible to readers. Visual elements are especially helpful
when comparing items. The facts can seem to speak for
themselves if they are presented with care and deliberation.
But don’t ignore other basic design features of a text—such as
headings for the different criteria you’re using or, in online
evaluations, links to material related to your subject.

RESPOND●

431

Vote Hillary by Deborah Kass

Take a close look at what artist Deborah Kass described in July 2016
as her “official fundraising screen print” for the presidential
campaign of Hillary Clinton. In what ways did it make an argument
of evaluation designed to make Americans consider voting for the
Democratic candidate rather than for Republican Donald Trump?
Would any elements in it make some voters perhaps less likely to
support Clinton? Explain your assessment of the image.

GUIDE to writing an evaluation
Finding a Topic
You’re entering an argument of evaluation when you:
make a judgment about quality: Citizen Kane is probably the finest
film ever made by an American director.
challenge such a judgment: Citizen Kane is vastly overrated by

432

most film critics.
construct a ranking or comparison: Citizen Kane is a more
intellectually challenging movie than Casablanca.
explore criteria that might be used in making critical judgments:
Criteria for judging films are evolving as the production and
audiences of films become ever more international.
Issues of evaluation crop up everywhere—in the judgments you make
about public figures or policies; in the choices you make about
instructors and courses; in the recommendations you offer about
books, films, or television programs; in the preferences you exercise in
choosing products, activities, or charities. Evaluations typically use
terms or images that indicate value or rank—good/bad,
effective/ineffective, best/worst, competent/incompetent,
successful/unsuccessful. When you can choose a topic for an evaluation,
consider writing about something on which others regularly ask your
opinion or advice.
Researching Your Topic
You can research issues of evaluation by using the following sources:
journals, reviews, and magazines (for current political and social
issues)
books (for assessing judgments about history, policy, etc.)
biographies (for assessing people)
research reports and scientific studies
books, magazines, and Web sites for consumers
periodicals and Web sites that cover entertainment and sports
blogs and social media sites that explore current topics
Surveys and polls can be useful in uncovering public attitudes: What
kinds of movies are young people seeing today? Who are the most

433

admired people in the country? What activities or businesses are thriving
or waning? You’ll discover that Web sites, newsgroups, and blogs thrive
on evaluation. (Ever receive an invitation to “like” something on social
media?) Browse these public forums for ideas, and, when possible,
explore your own topic ideas there. But remember that all sources
need to be critically assessed themselves; examine each source
carefully, making sure that it is legitimate and credible.
Formulating a Claim
After exploring your subject, try to draw up a full and specific claim that
lets readers know where you stand and on what criteria you’ll base
your judgments. Come up with a thesis that’s challenging enough to
attract readers’ attention. In developing a thesis, you might begin with
questions like these:
What exactly is my opinion? Where do I stand?
Can I make my judgment more clear-cut?
Do I need to narrow or qualify my claim?
By what standards will I make my judgment?
Will readers or viewers accept my criteria, or will I have to defend
them, too? What criteria might others offer?
What evidence or major reasons can I offer in support of my
evaluation?
For a conventional evaluation, such as a book or restaurant review,
your thesis should be a complete statement. In one sentence, make a
claim of evaluation and state the reasons that support it. Be sure your
claim is specific. Anticipate the questions readers might have: Who?
What? Where? Under what conditions? With what exceptions? In all
cases? Don’t expect readers to guess where you stand.
For a more exploratory argument, you might begin (and even end) with

434

questions about the process of evaluation itself. What are the qualities
we seek—or ought to—in our political leaders? What does it say about our
cultural values when we find so many viewers entertained by so-called
reality shows on television? What might be the criteria for collegiate
athletic programs consistent with the values of higher education?
Projects that explore topics like these might not begin with
straightforward theses or have the intention to persuade readers.
Examples of Evaluative Claims
Though they may never receive Oscars for their work, Tom Cruise
and Angela Bassett deserve credit as actors who have succeeded
in a wider range of film roles than most of their contemporaries.
The much-vaunted population shift back to urban areas in the
United States has really been mostly among rich, educated, and
childless people who can afford the high costs of living there.
The most remarkable aspect of Elon Musk as an entrepreneur is
the way he blatantly uses public money to build his companies—
from Tesla to SpaceX.
Jimmy Carter has been highly praised for his work as a former
president of the United States, but history may show that even his
much-derided term in office laid the groundwork for the foreign
policy and economic successes now attributed to later
administrations.
Young adults today are shying away from diving into the housing
market because they no longer believe that homeownership is a
key element in economic success.
Preparing a Proposal
If your instructor asks you to prepare a proposal for your project, here’s
a format that may help:

435

State your thesis completely. If you’re having trouble doing so, try
outlining it in Toulmin terms:
Claim:
Reason(s):
Warrant(s):
Alternatively, you might describe your intention to explore a
particular question of evaluation in your project, with the thesis
perhaps coming later.
Explain why this issue deserves attention. What’s at stake?
Identify whom you hope to reach through your argument and
why these readers would be interested in it.
Briefly discuss the key challenges you anticipate in preparing
your argument.
Determine what research strategies you’ll use. What sources
do you expect to consult?
Considering Genre and Media
Your instructor may specify that you use a particular genre and/or
medium. If not, ask yourself these questions to help you make a good
choice:
What genre is most appropriate for your argument of evaluation?
Does it call for an academic essay, a report, an infographic, a
video, or something else?
What medium is most appropriate for your argument? Would it be
best delivered orally to a live audience? Presented as an audio
essay or podcast? Presented in print only or in print with
illustrations?
Will you need visuals, such as moving or still images, maps,

436

graphs, charts—and what function will they play in your
argument? Make sure they are not just “added on” but are
necessary components of the argument.
Thinking about Organization
Your evaluation will likely include elements such as the following:
an evaluative claim that makes a judgment about a person, idea,
or object
the criterion or criteria by which you’ll measure your subject
an explanation or justification of the criteria (if necessary)
evidence that the particular subject meets or falls short of the
stated criteria
consideration of alternative views and counterarguments
All these elements may be present in arguments of evaluation, but they
won’t follow a specific order. In addition, you’ll often need an opening
paragraph to explain what you’re evaluating and why. Tell readers why
they should care about your subject and take your opinion seriously.
Getting and Giving Response: Questions for Peer Response
Your instructor may assign you to a group for the purpose of reading
and responding to each other’s drafts. If not, ask for responses from
serious readers or consultants at a writing center. Use the following
questions to evaluate a colleague’s draft. Be sure to illustrate your
comments with examples; specific comments help more than general
observations.
The Claim

Is the claim an argument of evaluation? Does it make a critical
judgment about something?
Does the claim establish clearly what’s being evaluated?

437

Is the claim too sweeping or too narrow? Does it need to be
qualified or expanded?
Will the criteria used in the evaluation be clear to readers? Do the
criteria need to be defined more precisely?
Are the criteria appropriate ones to use for this evaluation? Are
they controversial? Should they be defended?
Evidence for the Claim

Is enough evidence provided to show that what’s being evaluated
meets the established criteria? If not, what additional evidence is
needed?
Is the evidence in support of the claim simply announced, or are
its significance and appropriateness analyzed? Is more detailed
discussion needed?
Are any objections readers might have to the claim, criteria, or
evidence adequately addressed?
What kinds of sources are cited? How credible and persuasive will
they be to readers? What other kinds of sources might work
better?
Are all quotations introduced with appropriate signal phrases
(such as “As Tyson argues, . . .”) and blended smoothly into the
writer’s sentences?
Are all visual sources labeled, introduced, and commented upon?
Organization and Style

How are the parts of the argument organized? Is this organization
effective?
Will readers understand the relationships among the claims,
supporting reasons, warrants, and evidence? If not, how might
those connections be clearer? Does every visual serve a clear
purpose? Are more transitions needed? Would headings or
graphic devices help?

438

Are the transitions or links from point to point, sentence to
sentence, and paragraph to paragraph clear and effective? If not,
how could they be improved?
Are all visuals carefully integrated into the text? Is each visual
introduced and commented on to point out its significance? Is
each visual labeled as a figure or a table and given a caption as
well as a citation?
Is the style suited to the subject? Is it too formal, casual, or
technical? Can it be improved?
Which sentences seem effective? Which ones seem weaker, and
how could they be improved? Should short sentences be
combined, and any longer ones be broken up?
How effective are the paragraphs? Too short or too long? How can
they be improved?
Which words or phrases seem effective? Do any seem vague or
inappropriate for the audience or the writer’s purpose? Are
technical or unfamiliar terms defined?
Spelling, Punctuation, Mechanics, Documentation, and Format

Are there any errors in spelling, punctuation, capitalization, and
the like?
Is the documentation appropriate and consistent? (See Chapter
22.)
Does the paper or project follow an appropriate format? Is it well
designed and attractively presented?

PROJECTS●
1. What kinds of reviews or evaluations do you read or consult
most often—those of TV shows, sports teams, video games,
fashions, fishing gear, political figures? Try composing an

439

argument of evaluation in your favorite genre: make and
defend a claim about the quality of some object, item, work, or
person within your area of interest or special knowledge. Let
the project demonstrate an expertise you have gained. If it
helps, model your evaluation upon the work of a reviewer or
expert you particularly respect and choose the medium that
you think works best.
2. Prepare a project in which you challenge what you regard as a
wrong-headed evaluation, providing sound reasons and solid
evidence for challenging this existing and perhaps commonly
held view. Maybe you believe that a classic novel you had to
read in high school is overrated or that people who criticize a
particular social media platform really don’t understand it.
Explain why the subject of your evaluation needs to be
reconsidered and provide reasons, evidence, and, if necessary,
different criteria of evaluation for doing so. For an example of
this type of (re)evaluation, see Becca Stanek’s “I took vitamins
every day for a decade. Then I found out they’re useless.”
3. Write an evaluation in which you compare or assess the
contributions or achievements of two or three notable people
working within the same field or occupation. They may be
educators, entrepreneurs, public officials, artists, legislators,
editorial cartoonists, fashion designers, programmers, athletes,
faculty at your school, or employees where you work. While
your first instinct might be to rank these individuals and pick a
“winner,” you could also aim to help readers appreciate the
different paths by which your subjects have achieved
distinction.
4. Within this chapter, the authors claim that criteria of evaluation
can change depending on times and circumstances: “In good
economic times, people may demand homes with soaring

440

entryways, lots of space, and premium appliances. In tougher
times, they may care more about quality insulation and energyefficient stoves and dishwashers.” Working in a group, discuss
several scenarios of change and then explore how those
circumstances could alter the way we evaluate particular
objects, activities, or productions. For example, what impact
might global warming have upon the way we determine
desirable places to live or vacation? How might growing
resistance worldwide to immigration or open borders affect
political alliances or cultural diversity? If people across the
globe continue to put on weight, how might standards of
personal beauty or fashion alter? If media and news outlets
continue to fall in public esteem, how might we change the way
we make political decisions? Following the discussion, write a
paper or prepare a project in which you explore how one
scenario for change might revise customary values and
standards of evaluation.

Two Sample Evaluations

441

442

443

444

445

446

I took vitamins every day for a decade. Then I found out they’re
useless.
BECCA STANEK
447

March 22, 2017
Save for a few lapses in my irresponsible college days, I’ve
popped a multivitamin every single day since middle school.
First it was the chalky multivitamins that left a lump in my
throat for minutes after I’d gulped one down. Then it was the
slightly grainy, massive pills that my mom bought in bulk at
Costco. (They were technically for post-menopausal women,
but my mother assured me they would be just fine for my 17year-old self.) Then last year, tired of big, bad-tasting pills, I
bought gummy vitamins. Who doesn’t like noshing on some
candy that holds the promise of great health?
Well, last week I threw my vitamins away. I’ll miss that sugary,
fruity taste—but, according to my doctor, that’s about all I’ll be
missing.
At my appointment last Wednesday, my doctor bluntly
informed me that my multivitamins weren’t doing a darn thing
for me. Though the idea of getting just a little bit more of all the
most important vitamins may seem like a foolproof idea, she
informed me that more isn’t necessarily better. Few people
have vitamin deficiencies. Moreover, for those who do have a
deficiency in, say, Vitamin D or Vitamin B12, those little grapeshaped gummies—or any multivitamin, for that matter—don’t
pack anywhere near enough of any one vitamin to correct that
deficiency, she explained.

448

That could be passed off as just one doctor’s opinion . . . except
there are a plethora of studies out there that back up her
argument. A much buzzed-about study published in Annals of
Internal Medicine in 2013, for instance, came to this clear-cut
conclusion after reviewing three trials of multivitamin
supplements and 24 trials of “single or paired vitamins that
randomly assigned more than 40,000 participants”:
Evidence is sufficient to advise against routine
supplementation, and we should translate null and
negative findings into action. The message is simple: Most
supplements do not prevent chronic disease or death, their
use is not justified, and they should be avoided. This
message is especially true for the general population with
no clear evidence of micronutrient deficiencies, who
represent most supplement users in the United States and
in other countries. [Annals of Internal Medicine]
Specifically, the study found vitamins to be ineffective when it
comes to reducing the risk of heart disease, cancer, declines in
cognitive ability, and premature death. And, Quartz noted,
some vitamins can even be “harmful in high enough
quantities”:
Our bodies can easily get rid of excess vitamins that
dissolve in water, like vitamin C, all the B vitamins, and
folate, but they hold onto the ones that are fat soluble.
Buildup of vitamin A, K, E, or D—all of which are necessary
in low levels—can cause problems with your heart and
449

kidneys, and can even be fatal in some cases. [Quartz]
Though the FDA says on its vitamins information page that
there “are many good reasons to consider taking supplements,”
it indicates vitamins only “may be useful when they fill a
specific identified nutrient gap that cannot or is not otherwise
being met by the individuals’ intake of food.” The CDC
estimated in 2014 that “nine out of 10 people in the U.S. are
indeed getting enough of some important vitamins and
nutrients.”
So why are so many Americans still taking multivitamins?
Steven Salzberg, a medicine professor at Johns Hopkins, told
NPR multivitamins are “a great example of how our intuition
leads us astray.” “It seems reasonable that if a little bit of
something is good for you, then more should be better for you.
It’s not true,” Salzberg said. “Supplementation with extra
vitamins or micronutrients doesn’t really benefit you if you
don’t have a deficiency.”
Americans’ abysmally bad diets also give vitamin companies
some marketing ammunition. When the average American is
eating just one or two servings of fruits and veggies a day
(experts recommend as many as 10 servings of fruits and
veggies a day for maximum benefits), a little boost of vitamins
might seem like a good idea. But popping a pill isn’t going to
make up for all those lost servings. “Food contains thousands of
phyto-chemicals, fiber, and more that work together to promote

450

good health that cannot be duplicated with a pill,” said
nutritionist Karen Ansel.
And if it’s those tasty gummy vitamins we’re falling back on,
there’s an even better chance we’re not offsetting our sugar-and
fat-laden diets. The women’s gummy multivitamins I was taking
pack three grams of sugar per gummy. A serving size is two
gummies. Even before breakfast, I was consuming six grams of
sugar—almost a quarter of the American Heart Association’s
recommended maximum sugar intake for women.
So why, if there are so many signs pointing to no on
multivitamins, had I never really heard any of them until that
fateful visit to the doctor? Pediatrician Paul Offit explained in a
2013 New York Times opinion article that it might have
something to do with a bill introduced in the 1970s:
In December 1972, concerned that people were consuming
larger and larger quantities of vitamins, the FDA
announced a plan to regulate vitamin supplements
containing more than 150 percent of the recommended
daily allowance. Vitamin makers would now have to prove
that these “megavitamins” were safe before selling them.
Not surprisingly, the vitamin industry saw this as a threat,
and set out to destroy the bill. In the end, it did far more
than that.
Industry executives recruited William Proxmire, a
Democratic senator from Wisconsin, to introduce a bill
451

preventing the FDA from regulating megavitamins. [Paul
Offit, via the New York Times]
That bill became law in 1976. Some 30 years later, almost a third
of Americans were still taking a daily multivitamin. But count
this gal out.
Becca Stanek, a writer for TheWeek.com, explains exactly why she gave up a habit
common to many Americans—taking multivitamins. Citing ample research, she
argues that most people don’t need them and people with genuine vitamin
deficiencies need something more potent than an over-the-counter pill. We’ve
underlined the hyperlinked words and phrases to give you an idea of how a
professional writer backs up important claims in an evaluative argument. You can
find the piece online at http://theweek.com/articles/687917/took-multivitaminsevery-day-decade-found-theyre-useless.

452

CHAPTER 11 Causal Arguments

Although they have thrived for over fifty million years, several
decades ago colonies of bees started dying . . . and dying. Are
pesticides the cause? Or perhaps it’s the move agriculture has
made from planting cover crops like alfalfa and clover that
create natural fertilizers to using synthetic fertilizers. Or has the
decline been triggered by viruses transmitted by the varroa
mite, which infested the United States beginning in the mid1980s? Scientists believe a combination of these factors
accounts for a continuing decline in bees.
Somewhat unexpectedly, marijuana prices have declined
sharply in locales that have recently legalized pot. As a result,
state governments have not enjoyed the tax bonanzas they
anticipated, but at least they’ve enjoyed a reduction in law
enforcement costs.
Despite attempts to raise oil prices by cutting production, OPEC
(Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) has discovered
that fracking techniques pioneered in the United States — which
453

will likely spread around the world — have broken the power
the cartel once held over petroleum markets.

454

Understanding Causal
Arguments
Americans seem to be getting fatter, so fat in fact that we hear
often about the “obesity crisis” in the United States. But what is
behind this rise in weight? Rachel Berl, writing for U.S. News
and World Report, points to the combination of unhealthy foods
and a sedentary lifestyle. Berl quotes Harvard nutrition
professor Walter Willett, who notes that individuals with lower
income and lower education are more likely to buy inexpensive
foods high in refined sugar and starch:
“There is no single, simple answer to explain the obesity
patterns” in America, says Willett. . . . “More deeply,
[obesity] also reflects lower public investment in
education, public transportation, and recreational
facilities,” he says. The bottom line: cheap, unhealthy
foods mixed with a sedentary lifestyle have made obesity
the new normal in America.
— Rachel Pomerance Berl
Many others agree that as processed fast food and other things
such as colas have gotten more and more affordable,
consumption of them has gone up, along with weight. But
others offer different theories for the rise in obesity.
Whatever the reasons for our increased weight, the
455

consequences can be measured by everything from the width of
airliner seats to the rise of diabetes in the general population.
Scientists, social critics, and health gurus offer many
explanations, and some are challenged or refuted. But figuring
out exactly what’s going on is a national concern — and an
important example of cause-and-effect argument.

Causal arguments — from the causes of an opioid addiction
crisis in many American communities to the consequences of
ocean pollution around the globe — are at the heart of many
major policy decisions, both national and international. But
arguments about causes and effects also inform choices that
people make every day. Suppose that you need to petition for a
grade change because you were unable to turn in a final project
on time. You’d probably enumerate the reasons for your failure
— the illness of your hamster, followed by an attack of the
hives, followed by a crash of your computer — hoping that an
456

associate dean reading the petition might see these
explanations as tragic enough to change your grade. In
identifying the causes of the situation, you’re implicitly arguing
that the effect (your failure to submit the project on time)
should be considered in a new light. Unfortunately, the
administrator might accuse you of faulty causality (see Faulty
Causality in Chapter 5) and propose that your failure to
complete the project is due more to procrastination than to the
reasons you offer — a causal analysis of her own.
Causal arguments exist in many forms and frequently appear as
part of other arguments (such as evaluations or proposals). It
may help focus your work on causal arguments to separate
them into three major categories:

457

Arguments That State a Cause
and Then Examine Its Effects
What would happen if Congress ever came together and passed
immigration reform that gave millions of people in the United
States a legal pathway to citizenship? Before such legislation
could be enacted, the possible consequences of this “cause”
would have to be examined in detail and argued intensely. In
fact, groups on all sides of this hot-button issue have been doing
so for decades now, and they generally posit different
outcomes. In this debate, you’d be successful if you could
convincingly describe the consequences of such a change and
make people see them as beneficial. Alternatively, you could
challenge the causal explanations made by groups you don’t
agree with. But, either way, speculation about causes and
effects can be dicey simply because life is complicated.
Consider the following passage from an essay in the Chronicle
of Higher Education by political scientist and self-identifying
liberal Mark Lilla, in which he describes the effects that he
believes follow from focusing too single-mindedly on “identity
politics,” especially in higher education:
Identity politics on the left was at first about large classes
of people — African-Americans, women, gays — seeking
to redress major historical wrongs by mobilizing and
then working through our political institutions to secure
their rights. But by the 1980s it had given way to a

458

pseudo-politics of self-regard and increasingly narrow
and exclusionary self-definition that is now cultivated in
our colleges and universities. The main result has been to
turn young people back onto themselves, rather than
turning them outward toward the wider world they share
with others. It has left them unprepared to think about
the common good in non-identity terms and what must
be done practically to secure it — especially the hard and
unglamorous task of persuading people very different
from themselves to join a common effort. Every advance
of liberal identity consciousness has marked a retreat of
effective liberal political consciousness.
— Mark Lilla, “How Colleges Are Strangling Liberalism”
Predictably, Professor Lilla’s causal analysis received much
attention and criticism, but he raised issues and described
consequences that merit serious discussion.

Arguments That State an Effect
and Then Trace the Effect Back
to Its Causes
This type of argument might begin with a specific effect (an
unprecedented drop in sales of traditional four-door sedans)
and then trace it to its most likely causes (the popularity of
crossover SUVs, availability of all-wheel drive SUVs, cheaper
gas). Or you might examine the reasons auto manufacturers
459

offer for the sales decline of their once most popular models —
Honda Accords and Toyota Camrys — and decide whether their
causal explanations pass muster.
Like other types of causal arguments, those tracing effects to a
cause can offer provocative insights. You can see that in a 2017
Atlantic article by Jean M. Twenge, already excerpted in
Chapter 8. In the piece, Twenge, a professor at San Diego State
University, examines research that documents disturbing
behaviors she’d been noticing in post-millennial children and
adolescents. She begins the piece describing those effects
(generally) before going on to propose a not entirely surprising
cause:
I’ve been researching generational differences for 25
years, starting when I was a 22-year-old doctoral student
in psychology. Typically, the characteristics that come to
define a generation appear gradually, and along a
continuum. Beliefs and behaviors that were already
rising simply continue to do so. Millennials, for instance,
are a highly individualistic generation, but individualism
had been increasing since the Baby Boomers turned on,
tuned in, and dropped out. I had grown accustomed to
line graphs of trends that looked like modest hills and
valleys. Then I began studying [the current] generation.
Around 2012, I noticed abrupt shifts in teen behaviors
and emotional states. The gentle slopes of the line graphs
became steep mountains and sheer cliffs, and many of
460

the distinctive characteristics of the Millennial
generation began to disappear. In all my analyses of
generational data — some reaching back to the 1930s — I
had never seen anything like it.
At first I presumed these might be blips, but the trends
persisted, across several years and a series of national
surveys. The changes weren’t just in degree, but in kind.
The biggest difference between the Millennials and their
predecessors was in how they viewed the world; teens
today differ from the Millennials not just in their views
but in how they spend their time. The experiences they
have every day are radically different from those of the
generation that came of age just a few years before them.
What happened in 2012 to cause such dramatic shifts in
behavior? It was after the Great Recession, which
officially lasted from 2007 to 2009 and had a starker effect
on Millennials trying to find a place in a sputtering
economy. But it was exactly the moment when the
proportion of Americans who owned a smartphone
surpassed 50 percent.
— Jean M. Twenge, “Have Smartphones Destroyed a
Generation?”
Twenge goes on to connect the iPhone (and its clones) to a host
of specific effects, some positive, but most negative: fewer auto
accidents; less drinking; higher rates of depression and suicide;
461

declines in dating and sexual activity; avoidance of adult
responsibilities. Needless to say, her analysis caused a stir,
likely because many readers found the evidence she cited
compelling.

Arguments That Move through a
Series of Links: A Causes B,
Which Leads to C and Perhaps to
D
As you might guess, entire arguments can be structured around
a series of linked causal connections. But you can see that
structure within individual paragraphs too when writers want to
draw out the consequences of their cause/effect studies. Here
are two such paragraphs near the end of Twenge’s essay
(described above) on how smartphones have damaged a whole

462

generation of children; note how she uses the causal links to
emphasize the consequences over time of that addiction:
The correlations between depression and smartphone
use are strong enough to suggest that more parents
should be telling their kids to put down their phone. As
the technology writer Nick Bilton has reported, it’s a
policy some Silicon Valley executives follow. Even Steve
Jobs limited his kids’ use of the devices he brought into
the world.
What’s at stake isn’t just how kids experience
adolescence. The constant presence of smartphones is
likely to affect them well into adulthood. Among people
who suffer an episode of depression, at least half become
depressed again later in life. Adolescence is a key time
for developing social skills; as teens spend less time with
their friends face-to-face, they have fewer opportunities
to practice them. In the next decade, we may see more
adults who know just the right emoji for a situation, but
not the right facial expression.
What is happening now, Twenge argues, has predictable
implications for the future.

RESPOND●
The causes of the following events and phenomena are well known
and frequently discussed. But do you understand these causes well

463

enough to spell them out to someone else? Working in a group, see
how well (and in how much detail) you can explain these events or
phenomena. Which explanations are relatively clear, and which
seem more open to debate?
earthquakes/tsunamis
swelling caused by a bee sting
sharp rises in reported cases of autism or asthma
fake news
climate change
popularity of the Netflix series 13 Reasons Why
increasing post-graduation debt for college students
outcome of the 2016 presidential election
controversies in schools and online over free speech

464

465

Characterizing Causal
Arguments
Causal arguments tend to share several characteristics.

They Are Often Part of Other
Arguments
Many stand-alone causal arguments address questions that are
fundamental to our well-being: What accounts for the rise of
violent extremist political groups — left and right — in the
United States? What will happen as space travel moves into the
private sector, thanks to companies like SpaceX, Blue Origin,
and Virgin Galactic? How will the American middle class adjust
to its diminishing status? What will happen to Europe or Japan
if birthrates there continue to decline?
But causal analyses often work to support other types of
arguments — especially proposals. For example, a proposal to
limit the time that people spend on social media (see Two
Sample Proposals in Chapter 12) might begin with evidence
establishing that too much time on Facebook and Instagram can
have dire psychological consequences. This initial causal
analysis then provides a rationale for the proposal argument
that follows.

They Are Almost Always Complex
466

C. Richard King examines the complex network of cause and effect
surrounding the racial slur and professional football team name
“redskin,” wondering if the slur is the result of racism or its cause
— or both.
LINK TO King, “Redskins: Insult and Brand,” in Chapter 23

The complexity of most causal relationships makes it difficult to
establish causes and effects. For example, in 2011 researchers at
Northwestern University reported a startling correlation: youths
who participated in church activities were far more likely to
grow into obese adults than their counterparts who were not
engaged in religious activities. How does one even begin to
explain such a peculiar and unexpected finding? Too many
church socials? Unhealthy food at potluck meals? More regular
social engagement? Perhaps.
Or consider the complexity of analyzing cause and effect when
it relates to consuming specific foods. In Chapter 4 we
mentioned a Wall Street Journal article by economist Emily
Oster examining the research behind many of the dietary
prohibitions pregnant women routinely face. When she took
the time to read the actual research behind the advice, Oster
made interesting discoveries. Some of the causal connections
stood up to scrutiny, but other claims were more ambiguous.
The claim that light drinking could cause behavior problems in
children was complicated by the fact that 45 percent of the
women in the study who had one drink a day also used cocaine.
467

As Oster wryly observed, “Perhaps the problem is that cocaine,
not the occasional glass of Chardonnay, makes your child more
likely to have behavior problems.”
With all its careful details and qualifications, what Oster’s
article illustrates — and it’s worth reading in its entirety — is
that causal claims, even those you have heard routinely, are
rarely simple or beyond scrutiny.

They Are Often Definition Based
One reason that causal arguments are complex is that they often
depend on careful definitions. Recent figures from the U.S.
Department of Education, for example, show that the number
of high school dropouts is rising and that this rise has caused an
increase in youth unemployment. But exactly how does the
study define dropout? A closer look may suggest that some
students (perhaps a lot) who drop out later “drop back in” and
complete high school or that some who drop out become
successful entrepreneurs or business owners. Further, how
does the study define employment? Until you can provide
definitions for all key terms in a causal claim, you should
proceed cautiously with your argument.

468

Causal arguments can also be confusing.

They Usually Yield Probable
Rather Than Absolute
Conclusions
Because causal relationships are almost always complex or
subtle, they seldom can yield more than a high degree of
probability. Consequently, they are almost always subject to
criticism or open to charges of false causality. (We all know
smokers who defy the odds to live long, cancer-free lives.)
Scientists in particular are wary when making causal claims.
Even after an event, proving precisely what caused it can be
hard. During the student riots of the late 1960s, for example, a
commission was charged with determining the causes of riots
469

on a particular campus. After two years of work and almost a
thousand pages of evidence and reports, the commission was
unable to pinpoint anything but a broad network of
contributing causes and related conditions. And how many
years is it likely to take to unravel all the factors responsible for
the extended recession and economic decline in the United
States that began in 2008? After all, serious scholars are still
arguing about the forces responsible for the Great Depression
of 1929.
To demonstrate that X caused Y, you must find the strongest
possible evidence and subject it to the toughest scrutiny. But a
causal argument doesn’t fail just because you can’t find a single
compelling cause. In fact, causal arguments are often most
effective when they help readers appreciate how tangled our
lives and landscapes really are.

470

Developing Causal
Arguments
Exploring Possible Claims
In her essay “The Careless Language of Sexual Violence,” Roxane
Gay looks closely at the cultural and linguistic causes and effects
of “rape culture” — the way male violence toward women has
become expected and even accepted.
LINK TO Gay, “The Careless Language of Sexual Violence,” in
Chapter 25

To begin creating a strong causal claim, try listing some of the
effects — events or phenomena — that you’d like to know the
causes of:
Why do college and university tuition costs so greatly
outstrip the rate of inflation?
Why are almost all the mothers in animated movies either
dead to begin with or quickly killed off?
Why have American schools largely abandoned technical
training programs that, in the past, led to successful bluecollar careers?
Why do so few younger Americans vote, even in major
elections?

471

Or try moving in the opposite direction, listing some
phenomena or causes you’re interested in and then
hypothesizing what kinds of effects they may produce:
What effect is fracking having on the development of
alternative energy sources?
What consequences will follow from the politicization of
traditional news organizations?
What will be the consequences if more liberal (or
conservative) judges are appointed to the U.S. Supreme
Court?
What will happen as China and India become dominant
industrialized nations?
Read a little about the causal issues that interest you most, and
then try them out on friends and colleagues. They might suggest
ways to refocus or clarify what you want to do or offer leads to
finding information about your subject. After some initial
research, map out the causal relationship you want to explore
in simple form:
X might cause (or might be caused by) Y for the following
reasons:
1.
2.
3. (add more as needed)
Such a statement should be tentative because writing a causal
argument should be an exercise in which you uncover facts, not
472

assume them to be true. Often, your early assumptions (Tuition
was raised to renovate the stadium) might be undermined by
the facts you later discover (Tuition doesn’t fund the
construction or maintenance of campus buildings).
You might even decide to write a wildly exaggerated or parodic
causal argument for humorous purposes. Humorist Dave Barry
does this when he explains the causes of El Niño and other
weather phenomena: “So we see that the true cause of bad
weather, contrary to what they have been claiming all these
years, is TV weather forecasters, who have also single-handedly
destroyed the ozone layer via overuse of hair spray.” Most of the
causal reasoning you do, however, will take a serious approach
to subjects that you, your family, and your friends care about.

RESPOND●
Working with a group, write a big Why? on a sheet of paper or
computer screen, and then generate a list of why questions. Don’t
be too critical of the initial list:
Why
— do people laugh?
— do swans mate for life?
— do college students binge drink?
— do teenagers no longer care about getting driver’s licenses?
— do babies cry?

473

— do politicians, celebrities, or journalists take risks on social
media?
Generate as lengthy a list as you can in fifteen minutes. Then decide
which of the questions might make plausible starting points for
intriguing causal arguments.

Defining the Causal
Relationships
In developing a causal claim, examine the various types of
causes and effects in play in a given argument and define their
relationship. Begin by listing all the plausible causes or effects
you need to consider. Then decide which are the most
important for you to analyze or the easiest to defend or critique.
The following chart on “Causes” may help you to appreciate
some important terms and relationships.
Type of
Cause

What It Is or Does

What It Looks Like

474

Sufficient
cause

Enough for
something to
occur on its own

Lack of oxygen is sufficient to cause
death
Cheating on an exam is sufficient to
fail a course

Necessary
cause

Required for
something to
occur (but in
combination
with other
factors)

Fuel is necessary for fire
Capital is necessary for economic

Precipitating
cause

Brings on a
change

Protest march ignites a strike by
workers
Plane flies into strong thunderstorms

Proximate
cause

Immediately
present or visible
cause of action

Strike causes company to declare
bankruptcy
Powerful wind shear causes plane to

growth

crash
Remote
cause

Reciprocal
causes

Indirect or
underlying
explanation for
action

Company was losing money on bad
designs and inept manufacturing
Wind shear warning failed to sound

One factor leads
to a second,
which reinforces
the first, creating
a cycle

Lack of good schools in a
neighborhood leads to poverty,
which further weakens education,
which leads to even fewer
opportunities . . .

in cockpit

Even the most everyday causal analysis can draw on such
distinctions among reasons and causes. What factors might
persuade a student in choosing a post-secondary school?
Proximate reasons might be the location of the school or its
excellent track record of graduate employment. But what are
the necessary reasons — the ones without which your choice of

475

that college could not occur? Adequate financial support? Good
test scores and academic record? The expectations of a parent?
Once you’ve identified a causal claim, you can draw out the
reasons, warrants, and evidence that can support it most
effectively:
Claim

Certain career patterns cause women to be paid less than men.

Reason

Women’s career patterns differ from men’s.

Warrant

Successful careers are made during the period between ages
twenty-five and thirty-five.

Evidence

Women often drop out of or reduce work during the decade
between ages twenty-five and thirty-five to raise families.

Claim

Lack of community and alumni support caused the football coach
to lose his job.

Reason

Ticket sales and alumni support have declined for three seasons in
a row despite a respectable team record.

Warrant

Winning over fans is as important as winning games for college
coaches in smaller athletic programs.

Evidence

Over the last ten years, coaches at several programs have been
sacked because of declining support and revenues.

RESPOND●
Here’s a schematic causal analysis of one event, exploring the
difference among precipitating, necessary, and sufficient causes.
Critique and revise the analysis as you see fit. Then create another
of your own, beginning with a different event, phenomenon,
incident, fad, or effect.
Event: Traffic fatality at an intersection

476

Precipitating cause: A pickup truck that runs a red light, totals
a Miata, and injures its driver
Necessary cause: Two drivers who are navigating Friday rushhour traffic (if no driving, then no accident)
Sufficient cause: A truck driver who is distracted by a cellphone conversation

Supporting Your Point
In drafting your causal argument, you’ll want to do the
following:
Show that the causes and effects you’ve suggested are
highly probable and backed by evidence, or show what’s
wrong with the faulty causal reasoning you may be
critiquing.
Assess any links between causal relationships (what leads
to or follows from what).
Show that your explanations of any causal chains are
accurate, or identify where links in a causal chain break
down.
Show that plausible cause-and-effect explanations haven’t
been ignored or that the possibility of multiple causes or
effects has been considered.
In other words, you will need to examine your subject carefully
and find appropriate ways to support your claims. There are

477

different ways to accomplish that goal.
For example, in studying effects that are physical and
measurable (as they would be with diseases or climate
conditions), you can usually offer and test hypotheses, or
theories about possible causes. That means exploring such
topics thoroughly to draw upon authorities and research
articles for your explanations and evidence. (See Chapter 17,
“Academic Arguments,” and Chapter 18, “Finding Evidence.”)
Don’t be surprised if you find yourself debating which among
conflicting authorities make the most plausible causal or
explanatory arguments. Your achievement as a writer may be
simply that you present these differences in an essay, leaving it
to readers to make judgments of their own.
But not all the evidence in compelling causal arguments needs
to be strictly scientific or scholarly. Many causal arguments rely
on ethnographic observations — the systematic study of
ordinary people in their daily routines. How would you explain,
for example, why some people step aside when they encounter
someone head-on and others do not? In an argument that
attempts to account for such behavior, investigators Frank
Willis, Joseph Gier, and David Smith observed “1,038
displacements involving 3,141 persons” at a Kansas City
shopping mall. In results that surprised the investigators,
“gallantry” seemed to play a significant role in causing people to
step aside for one another — more so than other causes that the
investigators had anticipated (such as deferring to someone

478

who’s physically stronger or higher in status). Doubtless you’ve
read of other such studies, perhaps in psychology or sociology
courses. You may even decide to do a little fieldwork on your
own — which raises the possibility of using personal
experiences in support of a causal argument.
Indeed, people’s experiences generally lead them to draw
causal conclusions about things they know well. Personal
experience can also help build your credibility as a writer, gain
the empathy of listeners, and thus support a causal claim.
Although one person’s experiences cannot ordinarily be
universalized, they can still argue eloquently for causal
relationships. Listen to Sara Barbour, writing in 2011 as a
student at Columbia University and drawing upon her own
carefully described experiences to bemoan what may happen
when e-readers finally displace printed books:
In eliminating a book’s physical existence, something
crucial is lost forever. Trapped in a Kindle, the story
remains but the book can no longer be scribbled in,
hoarded, burned, given, or received. We may be able to
read it, but we can’t share it with others in the same way,
and its ability to connect us to people, places, and ideas is
that much less powerful.
I know the Kindle will eventually carry the day — an
electronic reader means no more embarrassing coffee
stains, no more library holds and renewals, no more
frantic flipping through pages for a lost quote, or going to
479

three bookstores in one afternoon to track down an
evasive title. Who am I to advocate the doom of millions
of trees when the swipe of a finger can deliver all 838
pages of Middlemarch into my waiting hands?
But once we all power up our Kindles something will be
gone, a kind of language. Books communicate with us as
readers — but as important, we communicate with each
other through books themselves. When that connection
is lost, the experience of reading — and our lives — will be
forever altered.
— Sara Barbour, “Kindle vs. Books: The Dead Trees
Society,” Los Angeles Times, June 17, 2011
All these strategies — testing hypotheses, presenting
experimental evidence, and offering personal experience — can
help you support a causal argument or undermine a causal
claim you regard as faulty.

RESPOND●
One of the fallacies of argument discussed in Chapter 5 is the post
hoc, ergo propter hoc (“after this, therefore because of this”) fallacy.
Causal arguments are particularly prone to this kind of fallacious
reasoning, in which a writer asserts a causal relationship between
two entirely unconnected events. When Angelina Jolie gave birth to
twins in 2008, for instance, the stock market rallied by nearly six
hundred points, but it would be difficult to argue that either event is
related to the other.

480

Because causal arguments can easily fall prey to this fallacy, you
might find it instructive to create and defend an absurd connection
of this kind. Begin by asserting a causal link between two events or
phenomena that likely have no relationship: Isn’t it more likely that
rising sea levels, usually attributed to global warming, are due to the
water displaced by ever larger ocean-going cargo vessels and by
more numerous cruise ships filled with much heavier passengers?
Then spend a page or two spinning out an imaginative argument to
defend the claim. It’s OK to have fun with this assignment exercise,
but see how convincing you can be at generating plausibly
implausible arguments.

A graph can provide visual evidence for a causal claim—in this case, the link
between opioid prescriptions and opioid deaths.

481

Considering Design and Visuals
You may find that the best way to illustrate a causal relationship
is to present it visually. Even a simple bar graph or chart can
demonstrate a relationship between two variables that might be
related to a specific cause, like the one above suggesting a
connection between the rise in opioid prescriptions and the rise
in opioid deaths. The report accompanying the graph,
published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
sets out guidelines for prescribing opioids to relieve chronic
pain without increasing the likelihood of addiction and
overdose.
Or you may decide that the most dramatic way to present
important causal information about a single issue or problem is
via an infographic, cartoon, or public service announcement.
Our arresting example is part of a campaign by People for the
Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA). An organization that
advocates for animal rights, PETA promotes campaigns that
typically try to sway people to adopt vegetarian diets by
depicting the practices of the agriculture industry as cruel. But
in this item, they make a very different causal argument,
connect eating meat to . . . well, you’ll see if you check the fine
print.

482

“Meat interrupts your sex life.” This PETA ad campaign makes a causal argument
that’s hard to ignore.

GUIDE to writing a causal argument
Finding a Topic

483

You’re entering a causal argument when you:
state a cause and then examine its effects: An enduring economic
downturn in many blue-collar areas of the country changed the
political landscape in 2016.
describe an effect and trace it back to its causes: There has been a
recent decline in migration to the U.S., likely due to questions about
what immigration policies will look like in the immediate future.
trace a string of causes to figure out why something happened:
The housing and financial markets collapsed in 2008 after
government mandates to encourage homeownership led banks to
invent questionable financial schemes in order to offer subprime
mortgages to borrowers who bought homes they could not afford
with loans they could not pay back.
explore plausible consequences (intended or not) of a particular
action, policy, or change: The ban on incandescent lightbulbs may
draw more attention to climate change than any previous
government action.
Spend time brainstorming possibilities for causal arguments. Many
public issues lend themselves to causal analysis and argument: browse
the home-page of a newspaper or news source on any given day to
discover plausible topics. Consider topics that grow from your own
experiences.
It’s fair game, too, to question the accuracy or adequacy of existing
arguments about causality. You can write a strong paper by raising
doubts about the facts or assumptions that others have made and
perhaps offering a better causal explanation on your own.
Researching Your Topic
Causal arguments will lead you to many different resources:

484

current news media — especially magazines, newspapers (online
or in print), and news networks
online databases and search engines
scholarly journals
books written on your subject (here you can do a keyword search,
either in your library or online)
social media
In addition, why not carry out some field research? Conduct interviews
with appropriate authorities on your subject, create a questionnaire
aimed at establishing a range of opinions on your subject, or arrange a
discussion forum among people with a stake in the issue. The
information you get from interviews, questionnaires, or open-ended
dialogue might provide ideas to enrich your argument or evidence to
back up your claims.
Formulating a Claim
For a conventional causal analysis, try to formulate a claim that lets
readers know where you stand on some issue involving causes and
effects. First, identify the kind of causal argument that you expect to
make (see Understanding Causal Arguments for a review of these kinds
of arguments) or decide whether you intend, instead, to debunk an
existing cause-and-effect claim. Then explore your relationship to the
claim. What do you know about the subject and its causes and effects?
Why do you favor (or disagree with) the claim? What significant reasons
can you offer in support of your position?
End this process by formulating a thesis — a complete sentence that
says, in effect, A causes (or does not cause or is caused by) B, followed by
a summary of the reasons supporting this causal relationship. Make
your thesis as specific as possible and be sure that it’s sufficiently
controversial or intriguing to hold a reader’s interest. Of course, feel

485

free to revise any such claim as you learn more about a subject.
For causal topics that are more open-ended and exploratory, you may
not want to take a strong position, particularly at the outset. Instead,
your argument might simply present a variety of reasonable (and
possibly competing) explanations and scenarios.
Examples of Causal Claims
Right-to-carry gun laws have led to increased rates of violent
crime in states that have approved such legislation.
Sophisticated use of social media like Twitter is now a must for
any political candidate who hopes to win.
Grade inflation is lowering the value of a college education.
The proliferation of images in film, television, and education is
changing the way we read and use information.
The disappearance of rewarding blue-collar jobs and careers will
likely further polarize the country between haves and have-nots.
Preparing a Proposal
If your instructor asks you to prepare a proposal for your project, here’s
a format that may help:
State your thesis completely. If you’re having trouble doing so, try
outlining it in Toulmin terms:
Claim:
Reason(s):
Warrant(s):
Alternatively, you might indicate an intention to explore a
particular causal question in your project, with the thesis perhaps

486

coming later.
Explain why this issue deserves attention. What’s at stake?
Identify whom you hope to reach through your argument and
why this group of readers would be interested in it.
Briefly discuss the key challenges you anticipate in preparing
your argument.
Determine what research strategies you’ll use. What sources
do you expect to consult?
Briefly identify and explore the major stakeholders in your
argument and what alternative perspectives you may need to
consider as you formulate your argument.
Considering Genre and Media
Your instructor may specify that you use a particular genre and/or
medium. If not, ask yourself these questions to help you make a good
choice:
What genre is most appropriate for your causal argument? Does it
call for an academic essay, a report, an infographic, a video, or
something else?
What medium is most appropriate for your argument? Would it be
best delivered orally to a live audience? Presented as an audio
essay or podcast? Presented in print only or in print with
illustrations?
Will you need visuals, such as moving or still images, maps,
graphs, charts — and what function will they play in your
argument? Make sure they are not just “added on” but are
necessary components of the argument.
Thinking about Organization
Your causal argument will likely include elements such as the

487

following:
a specific causal claim somewhere in the paper — or the
identification of a significant causal issue
an explanation of the claim’s significance or importance
evidence sufficient to support each cause or effect — or, in an
argument based on a series of causal links, evidence to support
the relationships among the links
a consideration of other plausible causes and effects, and
evidence that you have thought carefully about these alternatives
before offering your own ideas
Getting and Giving Response: Questions for Peer Response
Your instructor may assign you to a group for the purpose of reading
and responding to each other’s drafts. If not, ask for responses from
serious readers or consultants at a writing center. Use the following
questions to evaluate a colleague’s draft. Be sure to illustrate your
comments with examples; specific comments help more than general
observations.
The Claim

Does the claim state a causal argument?
Does the claim identify clearly what causes and effects are being
examined?
What about the claim will make it appeal to readers?
Is the claim too sweeping? Does it need to be qualified? How
might it be narrowed and focused?
How strong is the relationship between the claim and the reasons
given to support it? How could that relationship be made more
explicit?
Evidence for the Claim

488

What’s the strongest evidence offered for the claim? What, if any,
evidence needs to be strengthened?
Is enough evidence offered to show that these causes are
responsible for the identified effect, that these effects result from
the identified cause, or that a series of causes and effects are
linked? If not, what additional evidence is needed? What kinds of
sources might provide this evidence?
How credible will the sources be to potential readers? What other
sources might be more persuasive?
Is evidence in support of the claim analyzed logically? Is more
discussion needed?
Have alternative causes and effects been considered? Have
objections to the claim been carefully considered and presented
fairly? Have these objections been discussed?
Organization and Style

How are the parts of the argument organized? Is this organization
effective?
Will readers understand the relationships among the claims,
supporting reasons, warrants, and evidence? If not, how might
those connections be clearer? Does every visual serve a clear
purpose? Are more transitions needed? Would headings or
graphic devices help?
Are the transitions or links from point to point, sentence to
sentence, and paragraph to paragraph effective? If not, how could
they be improved?
Are all visuals (or other elements such as audio or video clips)
carefully integrated into the text? Is each visual introduced and
commented on to point out its significance? Is each visual labeled
as a figure or a table and given a caption as well as a citation?
Is the style suited to the subject? Is it too formal, casual, or
technical? Can it be improved?
Which sentences seem effective? Which ones seem weaker, and

489

how could they be improved? Should short sentences be
combined, and any longer ones be broken up?
How effective are the paragraphs? Too short or too long? How can
they be improved?
Which words or phrases seem effective? Do any seem vague or
inappropriate for the audience or the writer’s purpose? Are
technical or unfamiliar terms defined?
Spelling, Punctuation, Mechanics, Documentation, and Format

Are there any errors in spelling, punctuation, capitalization, and
the like?
Is the documentation appropriate and consistent? (See Chapter
22.)
Does the paper or project follow an appropriate format? Is it
appropriately designed and attractively presented?

PROJECTS●
1. Develop an argument exploring one of the cause-and-effect
topics mentioned in this chapter. Just a few of those topics are
listed below:
Disappearance of honeybees in the United States
The implications of fracking in the United States on the
global oil market
Increasing numbers of obese children and/or adults
Ramifications of identity politics on efforts to build
consensus

490

Long-term consequences of food or healthcare choices
Psychological influences of smartphones on people who
have grown up with them
How career patterns affect professional achievement and
income
What is lost/gained as paper books disappear
2. Write a causal argument about a subject you know well, even if
the topic does not strike you as particularly “academic”: What
accounts for the popularity of superhero movie franchises or
series on streaming services like Netflix or Hulu? What are the
likely consequences of students living more of their lives via
social media? How are video games changing the way students
you know learn or interact? Why do women love shoes? In this
argument, be sure to separate precipitating or proximate
causes from sufficient or necessary ones. In other words, do a
deep and revealing causal analysis about your subject, giving
readers new insights.
3. In “Forever Alone (and Perfectly Fine)” (see p. 280), Laura
Tarrant argues that remaining single is a valid option many
people choose for many different reasons. In a project of your
own, describe and analyze causally the trends in personal
relationships that you have experienced or seen among your
family, friends, coworkers, or neighbors, including such choices
as remaining single, living with a significant other, getting
married, remaining childless by choice, choosing to have
children, etc. Why are people making these decisions? Clearly,
Tarrant is comfortable being single, but you or those around

491

you may feel differently about your own relationship or family
status.
4. Pascal-Emmanuel Gobry’s essay “America’s Birthrate Is Now a
National Emergency” explores some of the consequences for
societies that produce fewer children. After reading the Gobry
piece, list any comparable situations you know of where a
largely unnoticed change may have long-term consequences.
The changes you list need not be as consequential as the one
Gobry has identified. Choose your most intriguing situation, do
the necessary research, and write or present a causal argument
about it, using whatever media work best to make your point.

Two Sample Causal Arguments

492

493

494

495

496

497

America’s Birthrate Is Now a National Emergency
PASCAL-EMMANUEL GOBRY
August 12, 2016
The new birth rate numbers are out, and they’re a disaster.
There are now only 59.6 births per 1,000 women, the lowest rate
ever recorded in the United States. Some of the decrease is due
498

to good news, which is the continuing decline of teen
pregnancies, but most of it is due to people getting married later
and choosing to have fewer children. And the worst part is,
everyone is treating this news with a shrug.
It wasn’t always this way. It used to be taken for granted that the
best indicator of a nation’s health was its citizens’ desire and
capacity to reproduce. And it should still seem self-evident that
people’s willingness to have children is not only a sign of
confidence in the future, but a sign of cultural health. It’s a
signal that people are willing to commit to the most enduring
responsibility on Earth, which is raising a child.
But reproduction is also a sign of national health in a more
dollars-and-cents way. The more productive people you have in
your society, the healthier your country’s economy. It’s an idea
that was obvious back in the 17th century, when economist Jean
Bodin wrote “the only wealth is people.”
Today we see the problems wrought by the decline in
productive populations all over the industrialized world, where
polities are ripping each other to shreds over how to pay for
various forms of entitlements, especially for old people. The
debates play out in different ways in different countries, but in
other ways they are exactly the same. That’s because they are
ruled by the same ruthless math: The fewer young, productive
people you have to pay for entitlements for old, unproductive
people, the steeper the bill for the entire society becomes. This

499

basic problem is strangling Europe’s economies. And while the
United States is among the least bad of the bunch, it is still
headed in the wrong direction.
It doesn’t have to be this way. While the evidence for
government programs that encourage people to have more
children is mixed, the fact of the matter is that in contemporary
America, 40 percent of women have fewer children than they
want to.
And there are plenty of policies that could help close that gap,
whether from the left or from the right. Not just pro-maternity
policies, but also policies that encourage healthy child-rearing,
like child tax credits, family savings accounts, and tax-free
children savings accounts. Or education reforms that would
make fewer parents feel that they have to pony up for private
school to give their kids a decent shot at life. Perhaps one of the
biggest things we could do is to reduce the countless state and
local regulations that make housing expensive.
But put policy aside for a second. The United States literally
exports more oil than Saudi Arabia and has the world’s top
expertise in both renewable and traditional energy forms. It is
the world’s biggest food producer and a gargantuan country
with very little density. There is no reason for the United States
to have a weak birth rate — and it is a national emergency that it
does.
Yet no one seems worried. And that might be the biggest worry
500

of all.
Pascal-Emmanuel Gobry, who has written for Forbes, the Atlantic, Commentary, and
the National Review, among other publications, is a fellow at the Ethics and Public
Policy Center.

501

CHAPTER 12 Proposals

A student looking forward to spring break proposes to two
friends that they join a group that will spend the vacation
helping to build a school in a Haitian village.
Members of a business club at a community college talk about
their common need to create informative, appealing,
interactive résumés. After much discussion, three members
suggest that the club develop a résumé app designed especially
for students looking for a first job.
A project team at a large architectural firm works for three
months developing a response to an RFP (request for proposal)
to convert a university library into a digital learning center.

502

Understanding and
Categorizing Proposals
We live in an era of big proposals—complex schemes for
reforming health care, bold dreams to privatize space
exploration, multibillion-dollar prototypes for hyperloop
transport systems, serious calls for free post-secondary
education, and so many other such ideas usually shot down to
earth by budget realities. As a result, there’s often more talk
than action because persuading people (or legislatures) to do
something—or anything!—is always hard. But that’s what
proposal arguments do: they provide compelling reasons for
supporting or sometimes resisting change.
Such arguments, whether national or local, formal or casual,
are important not only on the national scene but also in all of
our lives. How many proposals do you make or respond to in
one day to address problems and offer solutions? A neighbor
might suggest that you volunteer to help revitalize a neglected
city park; a campus group might demand more reasonably
priced student/staff parking; a supervisor might ask for
employee suggestions to improve customer satisfaction at a
restaurant; or you might propose to a friend that you both
invest in a vinyl record outlet. In each case, the proposal
implies that there are good reasons for new action or that
you’ve found a solution to a problem.

503

In their simplest form, proposal arguments look something like
this:

Proposals come at us so routinely that it’s not surprising that
they cover a dizzyingly wide range of possibilities. So it may
help to think of proposal arguments as divided roughly into two
kinds—those that focus on specific practices and those that
focus on broad matters of policy. Here are several examples of
each kind:

Proposals about Practices
The college should allow students to pay tuition on a
month-by-month basis.
Conventional businesses should learn to compete with
nontraditional competitors like Airbnb and Uber within the
sharing economy.
College athletes should be paid for the entertainment they
provide.

Proposals about Policies
The college should guarantee that in any disciplinary
hearings students charged with serious misconduct be
504

assured of regular due-process protections.
The United Nations should make saving the oceans from
pollution a global priority.
Major Silicon Valley firms should routinely reveal the
demographic makeup of their workforces.
RESPOND●
People write proposal arguments to address problems and to
change the way things are. But problems aren’t always obvious:
what troubles some people might be no big deal to others. To get an
idea of the range of issues people face at your school (some of which
you may not even have thought of as problems), divide into groups
and brainstorm about things that annoy you about your institution,
including things such as complex or restrictive registration
procedures, poor scheduling of lab courses, and convoluted
paperwork for student aid applications. Ask each group to aim for at
least a half dozen gripes. Then choose three problems and, as a
group, discuss how you’d prepare a proposal to deal with them.

505

Characterizing Proposals
1. They call for change, often in response to a problem.
2. They focus on the future.
3. They center on the audience.
Proposals always call for some kind of action. They aim at
getting something done—or sometimes at preventing something
from being done. Proposals marshal evidence and arguments to
persuade people to choose a course of action: Let’s make the
campus safer for people taking night courses. Let’s create an
organization for first-generation or working-class students.
Let’s ban drones from local airspace, especially at sporting and
entertainment venues. Let’s investigate incentives for
supporting small business start-ups in our community. But you
know the old saying, “You can lead a horse to water, but you
can’t make it drink.” It’s usually easier to convince audiences
what a good course of action is than to persuade them to take it
(or pay for it). Even if you present a cogent proposal, you may
still have work to do.
Proposal arguments must appeal to more than good sense.
Ethos matters, too. It helps if a writer suggesting a change
carries a certain gravitas earned by experience or supported by
knowledge and research. If your word and credentials carry
weight, then an audience is more likely to listen to your
proposal. So when the commanders of three Apollo moon
missions, Neil Armstrong, James Lovell, and Eugene Cernan,
506

wrote an open letter to President Obama in 2010 expressing
their dismay at his administration’s decision to cancel NASA’s
plans for advanced spacecraft and new lunar missions, they
won a wide audience:
For the United States, the leading space faring nation for
nearly half a century, to be without carriage to low Earth
orbit and with no human exploration capability to go
beyond Earth orbit for an indeterminate time into the
future, destines our nation to become one of second or
even third rate stature. While the President’s plan
envisages humans traveling away from Earth and
perhaps toward Mars at some time in the future, the lack
of developed rockets and spacecraft will assure that
ability will not be available for many years.
But even their considerable ethos was not enough to carry the
day with the space agency or the man who made the decision.
Entrepreneurs like Elon Musk and Jeff Bezos have since acted
on their own to privatize (at least partially) what had been a
government monopoly, offering new proposals for innovative
rockets and spacecraft.

507

Who thought this crazy idea could work? A fourteen-story tall SpaceX first-stage
booster rocket successfully lands on a barge at sea after helping to launch a
supply mission to the International Space Station (April 8, 2016).

Yet, as the photo demonstrates, proposal arguments inevitably
focus on the future—what individuals, institutions, or entire
governments should do over the upcoming weeks, months, or
even decades. This orientation toward the future presents
special challenges, since few of us have crystal balls. Proposal
arguments must therefore offer the best evidence available to
suggest that actions we recommend can achieve what they
promise.
Proposals must also be tailored to reach and convince
audiences to support, possibly approve, and quite often pay for
them. Not surprisingly, politicians making public policy
proposals not infrequently exaggerate the benefits and
minimize the costs or disadvantages.
508

It makes sense that proposals aimed at general audiences make
straightforward and relatively simple points, avoid technical
language, and use visuals like charts, graphs, and tables to
make supporting data comprehensible. You can find such
arguments, for example, in newspaper editorials, letters to the
editor, and actual proposal documents. Such appeals to broad
groups make sense when a project—say, to finance new toll
roads or build a sports arena—must surf on waves of
community support.
But just as often, proposals need to win support from specific
groups or individuals (such as bankers, developers, public
officials, and legislators) who have power to make change
actually happen. Arguments to them will usually be far more
technical, detailed, and comprehensive than those aimed at the
general public because such people likely know the subject
already and they may be responsible eventually for
implementing or financing the proposal. You can expect these
experts or professionals—engineers, designers, administrators,
bureaucrats—to have specific questions and, possibly,
formidable objections.
So identifying your potential and most powerful audiences is
critical to the success of any proposal. On your own campus, for
example, a plan to alter admissions policies might be directed
both to students in general and (perhaps in a different form) to
the university president and provost, members of the faculty
council, and admissions officers.

509

An effective proposal also has to be compatible with the values
of the audience. Some ideas sound appealing, but cannot be
enacted immediately—as California legislators discovered when
in 2017 they first tried to implement single-payer, universal
health care for that state. Citizens favored the idea, but
legislators blanched at the considerable costs. Or consider a less
complicated matter: many American towns and suburbs have a
significant problem with expanding deer populations. Without
natural predators, the deer are moving closer to homes, dining
on gardens and shrubbery, and endangering traffic. Yet one
obvious and feasible solution—culling the herds through
hunting—is usually not saleable to communities (perhaps too
many people remember Bambi).

RESPOND●
Work in a group to identify about half a dozen problems on your
campus or in the local community, looking for a wide range of
issues. (Don’t focus on problems in individual academic classes.)
Once you have settled on these issues, then use various resources—
social media, the phone book (if you can find one), a campus
directory—to locate specific people, groups, or offices whom you
might address or influence to deal with the issues you have

510

identified.

511

Developing Proposals
In developing a proposal, you will have to do some or all of the
following:
Define a problem that lacks a good solution or describe a
need that is not currently addressed—and convince
audiences the matter deserves attention.
Make a strong claim that addresses the problem or need.
Your solution should be an action directed at the future.
Show why your proposal will fix the problem or address the
need.
Demonstrate that your proposal is feasible.
This might sound easy, but writing a proposal argument can be
a process of discovery. At the outset, you think you know
exactly what ought to be done, but by the end, you may see (and
even recommend) other options.

Defining a Need or Problem
In compiling their report “Hunger on Campus: The Challenge of
Food Insecurity for College Students,” the researchers used
surveys at thirty-four colleges and universities to identify the
problem of food insecurity. Their study found that 48 percent of
students surveyed were food insecure in the previous month.
LINK TO Dubick et al., “Hunger on Campus,” in Chapter 24

512

To make a proposal, first establish that a need or problem
exists. You’ll typically dramatize the problem that you intend to
fix at the beginning of your project and then lead up to a
specific claim that attempts to solve it. But in some cases, you
could put the need or problem right after your claim as the
major reason for adopting the proposal:
Let’s ban cell phones for students walking (or biking!)
across college property. Why? Because we’ve become
dangerous zombies. The few students not browsing the
Web or chatting have to dodge their clueless and selfabsorbed colleagues. Worse, no one speaks to or even
acknowledges the people they pass on campus. We are
no longer a functional community.
How can you make readers care about the problem you hope to
address? Following are some strategies:
Paint a vivid picture of the need or problem.
Show how the need or problem affects people, both those
in the immediate audience and the general public as well.
Underscore why the need or problem is significant and
pressing.
Explain why previous attempts to address the issue may
have failed.
For example, were you to propose that the military draft be
restored in the United States or that all young men and women
give two years to national service (a tough sell!), you might

513

begin by drawing a picture of a younger generation that is selfabsorbed, demands instant gratification, and doesn’t
understand what it means to participate as a full member of
society. Or you might note how many young people today fail to
develop the life skills they need to strike out on their own. Or
you could define the issue as a matter of fairness, arguing that
the current all-volunteer army shifts the burden of national
service to a small and unrepresentative sample of the American
population. Of course, you would want to cite authorities and
statistics to prove that any problem you’re diagnosing is real
and that it touches your likely audience. Then readers may be
willing to hear your proposal.
In describing a problem that your proposal argument intends to
solve, be sure to review earlier attempts to fix it. Many issues
have a long history that you can’t afford to ignore (or be
ignorant of). Understand too that some problems seem to grow
worse every time someone tinkers with them. You might think
twice before proposing any new attempt to change the current
system of financing federal election campaigns when you
discover that previous reforms have resulted in more
bureaucracy, more restrictions on political expression, and
more unregulated money flowing into the system. “Enough is
enough” can be a potent argument when faced with such a
mess.

RESPOND●
If you review “My Free-Range Kids Manifesto” at the end of this

514

chapter (p. 313), a proposal by blogger and columnist Lenore
Skenazy, you’ll see that she spends quite a bit of time arguing that
American children had more fun and learned more life skills in the
past, when parents were (in general) less protective than she
believes they are today. Chances are, you grew up in the highly
protective environment she describes. If so, do you relate to the
problem she defines in her manifesto? Or does the piece fail to
engage your interest? If so, why?

Making a Strong and Clear Claim
After you’ve described and analyzed a problem, you’re prepared
to offer a fix. Begin with your claim (a proposal of what X or Y
should do), followed by the reason(s) that X or Y should act and
the effects of adopting the proposal:
Claim

Americans should encourage and support more scientists running
for political office.

Reason

Scientists are trained to think more systematically and globally and
may have greater respect for facts than the lifelong politicians who
currently dominate American government.

Effects

Scientists will move our governments at all levels (local, state,
federal) to make decisions based on facts and evidence rather than
on emotions or the politics of the moment.

In “The Power of Words,” the Japanese American Citizens League
advocates using precise, clear terms instead of euphemisms to
describe the experience of Japanese Americans during World War II.
Instead of “relocation,” for instance, they recommend “forced
removal.”

515

LINK TO Japanese American Citizens League, “The Power of
Words,” in Chapter 25

Having established a claim, you can explore its implications by
drawing out the reasons, warrants, and evidence that can
support it most effectively:
Claim

In light of a recent U.S. Supreme Court decision that ruled that
federal drug laws cannot be used to prosecute doctors who
prescribe drugs for use in suicide, our state should immediately
pass a bill legalizing physician-assisted suicide for patients who
are terminally ill.

Reason

Physician-assisted suicide can relieve the suffering of those who
are terminally ill and will die soon.

Warrant

The relief of suffering is desirable.

Evidence

Oregon voters have twice approved the state’s Death with Dignity
Act, which has been in effect since 1997, and to date the suicide
rate has not risen sharply, nor have doctors given out a large
number of prescriptions for death-inducing drugs. At least four
other states, as well as the District of Columbia, have legalized
physician-assisted suicide.

The reason sets up the need for the proposal, whereas the
warrant and evidence demonstrate that the proposal is just and
could meet its objective. Your actual argument would develop
each point in detail.
RESPOND●

For each problem and solution below, make a list of readers’ likely
objections to the solution offered. Then propose a solution of your
own, and explain why you think it’s more workable than the
original.

516

Problem

Future deficits in the Social Security system

Solution

Raise the age of retirement to seventy-two.

Problem

Severe grade inflation in college courses

Solution

Require a prescribed distribution of grades in every class: 10% A;
20% B; 40% C; 20% D; 10% F.

Problem

Increasing rates of obesity in the general population

Solution

Ban the sale of high-fat sandwiches and entrees in fast-food
restaurants.

Problem

Increase in sexual assaults on and around campus

Solution

Establish a 10:00 p.m. curfew on weekends.

517

A proposal argument in four panels

Showing That the Proposal
518

Addresses the Need or Problem
An important but tricky part of making a successful proposal
lies in relating the claim to the need or problem that it
addresses. Facts and probability are your best allies. Take the
time to show precisely how your solution will fix a problem or
at least improve upon the current situation. Sometimes an
emotional appeal is fair play, too. Here, for example, is a
paragraph from a group called YesCalifornia backing a
referendum for that state to secede from the United States, a
proposal that gained traction after the 2016 presidential
election. The group explains what type of government
California might expect after it leaves the United States:
[O]ur referendum is a way to gauge the sense of the
people on whether we Californians prefer the status quo
of statehood, or if we want to see a change towards
nationhood. Voting yes on the referendum is essentially
voting yes to reform our system of government as well as
our political and elections process to guarantee a more
responsible and responsive government; move away
from a two-party system; reduce the influence of big
money in elections; restore the principle of one person,
one vote; establish a system of proportional
representation; and, engage disenfranchised voters.
These are goals Californians and others are currently
fighting for, yet under the corrupt U.S. political system,
they are unlikely to be achieved.

519

The advocacy group seems to be claiming that an independent
California would guarantee a more responsive government and
a more engaged citizenry no longer swayed by big-money
elections and two-party politics. Wishful thinking perhaps, but
powerful rationale for change?
Alternatively, when you oppose an idea, these strategies work
just as well in reverse: if a proposal doesn’t fix a problem, you
have to show exactly why. Perhaps you are skeptical about a
proposal mentioned earlier in this chapter to reinstate a
military draft in the United States. You might ask for proof that
forced military conscription would, in fact, improve the moral
fiber of young Americans. Or you might raise doubts about
whether any new draft could operate without loopholes for
well-connected or favored groups. Or, like Doug Bandow
writing for Forbes, you might focus on the monetary and social
costs of a restored draft: “Better to make people do grunt work
than to pay them to do it? Force poorer young people into
uniform in order to save richer old people tax dollars. . . . It
would be a bad bargain by any measure.”
Finally, if your own experience backs up your claim or
demonstrates the need or problem that your proposal aims to
address, then consider using it to develop your proposal.
Consider the following questions in deciding when to include
your own experiences in showing that a proposal is needed or
will in fact do what it claims:
Is your experience directly related to the need or problem
520

that you seek to address or to your proposal about it?
Will your experience be appropriate and speak
convincingly to the audience? Will the audience
immediately understand its significance, or will it require
explanation?
Does your personal experience fit logically with the other
reasons that you’re using to support your claim?
Be careful. If a proposal seems crafted to serve mainly your own
interests, you won’t get far.

Showing That the Proposal Is
Feasible
To be effective, proposals must be feasible—that is, the action
proposed can be carried out in a reasonable way.
Demonstrating feasibility calls on you to present evidence—
from similar cases, from personal experience, from
observational data, from interview or survey data, from
Internet research, or from any other sources—showing that
what you propose can indeed be done with the resources
available. “Resources available” is key: if the proposal calls for
funds, personnel, or skills beyond reach or reason, your
audience is unlikely to accept it. When that’s the case, it’s time
to reassess your proposal, modify it, and test any new ideas
against these revised criteria. This is also when you can
reconsider proposals that others might suggest are better, more
effective, or more workable than yours. There’s no shame in
admitting that you may have been wrong. When drafting a
521

proposal, ask friends to think of counterproposals. If your own
proposal can stand up to such challenges, it’s likely a strong
one.

Considering Design and Visuals
Because proposals often address specific audiences, they can
take a number of forms—a letter, a memo, a Web page, a
feasibility report, an infographic, a video, a prospectus, or even
an editorial cartoon (see Andy Singer’s “No Exit” item). Each
form has different design requirements. Indeed, the form of a
proposal may determine its effectiveness.
For example, formal reports on paper or slides typically use
straightforward headings to identify the stages of the
presentation, terms such as Introduction, Nature of the
Problem, Current Approaches or Previous Solutions,
Proposal/Recommendations, Advantages, Counterarguments,
Feasibility, Implementation, and so on. Important data may be
arrayed in tables and charts, all of them clearly labeled.
Infographics making proposals will be more visually intense,
with their claims and data presented in ways designed to grab
readers and then hold their attention as they move through
panels or pages. So before you produce a final copy of any
proposal, be sure its overall design complements and enhances
its messages.
Proposal arguments, especially those aimed at wide audiences,
may rely on a wide range of graphic materials that to convey
522

information—photographs, pie charts, scatter charts, timelines,
maps, artist’s renderings, and so on. Such items help readers
visualize problems and then (if need be) imagine solutions. Any
such items you find or create should be carefully designed,
incorporated, and credited when you borrow them: they will
contribute to your ethos.
Images also make proposals more interesting. Architects,
engineers, and government agencies know this. For example,
the rendering below helped viewers imagine what a future
National Museum of African American History & Culture might
look like on the Mall in Washington, D.C.—its structure
suggesting the shape of African baskets. This winning proposal
was offered in 2009 by designer David Adjaye, architect Philip
Freelon, and the Freelon Adjaye Bond/Smith Group.

The proposed design of the National Museum of African American History &
Culture

523

But the building did evolve, gaining a third terrace and a bronze
color to suggest other themes. Here’s how the Smithsonian Web
site describes the ideas evoked by the finished structure, which
opened on September 24, 2016:
From one perspective, the building’s architecture follows
classical Greco-Roman form in its use of a base and shaft,
topped by a capital or corona. For our Museum, the
corona is inspired by the three-tiered crowns used in
Yoruban art from West Africa. Moreover, the building’s
main entrance is a welcoming porch, which has
architectural roots in Africa and throughout the African
Diaspora, especially the American South and Caribbean.
Finally, by wrapping the entire building in an ornamental
bronze-colored metal lattice, Adjaye pays homage to the
intricate ironwork crafted by enslaved African
Americans in Louisiana, South Carolina, and elsewhere.

524

The completed version

GUIDE to writing a proposal

● Finding a Topic or Identifying a Problem
You’re entering a proposal argument when you:
make a claim that supports a change in practice: Bottled water
should carry a warning label describing the environmental impact
of plastic.
make a claim that supports a change in policy: Government
workers, especially legislators and administrative officials, should
never be exempt from laws or programs imposed on other citizens.
make a claim that resists suggested changes in practice or policy:
The surest way to guarantee that HOV lanes on freeways improve
traffic flow is not to build any.

525

explore options for addressing existing issues or investigate
opportunities for change: Urban planners need to examine the
long-term impact digital technologies may have on transportation,
work habits, housing patterns, power usage, and entertainment
opportunities in cities of the future.
Since your everyday experience often calls on you to consider
problems and to make proposals, begin your brainstorming with
practical topics related to your life, education, major, or job. Or make
an informal list of proposals that you would like to explore in broader
academic or cultural areas—problems you see in your field or in the
society around you. Or do some freewriting on a subject of political
concern, and see if it leads to a call for action.
● Researching Your Topic
For many proposals, you can begin your research by consulting the
following types of sources:
newspapers, magazines, reviews, and journals (online and print)
television or radio news reports
online databases
government documents and reports
Web sites, blogs, social media
books
experts in the field, some of whom might be right on your campus
Consider doing some field research, if appropriate—a survey of student
opinions on Internet accessibility, for example, or interviews with
people who have experienced the problem you are trying to fix.
Finally, remember that your proposal’s success can depend on the
credibility of the sources you use to support it, so evaluate each source
carefully (see Chapter 19).

526

● Formulating a Claim
As you think about and explore your topic, begin formulating a claim
about it. To do so, come up with a clear thesis that makes a proposal
and states the reasons that this proposal should be adopted. To start
formulating a claim, explore and respond to the following questions:
What do I know about the proposal that I’m making?
What reasons can I offer to support my proposal?
What evidence do I have that implementing my proposal will lead
to the results I want?
Rather than make a specific proposal, you may sometimes want to
explore the range of possibilities for addressing a particular situation or
circumstance (see, for instance, the last bullet in the following section).
In that case, a set of open-ended questions might be a more productive
starting point than a focused thesis, suggesting, for instance, what
goals any plausible proposal might have to meet.
● Examples of Proposal Claims
Because the one-time costs for a host city/nation staging the
Olympics have become staggering, the International Olympics
Committee should consider moving the summer games to a
permanent site—in Athens, Greece.
Every home should be equipped with a well-stocked emergency
kit that can sustain inhabitants for at least three days in a natural
disaster.
Congress should repeal the Copyright Extension Act, since it
disrupts the balance between incentives for creators and the right
of the public to information as set forth in the U.S. Constitution.
To simplify the lives of the soon-to-be significant number of
people driving electric cars, manufacturers should quickly settle
upon a universal charging system that all e-cars can share rather

527

than the individual systems now in place.
People from different economic classes, age groups, political
philosophies, and power groups (government, Main Street, Wall
Street, blue collar labor, immigrants) all have a stake in reforming
current budget and tax policies. But how do we get them to speak
and to listen to each other? That is the challenge we face if we
hope to solve our national economic problems.
● Preparing a Proposal
If your instructor asks you to prepare a proposal for your project, here’s
a format that may help:
State the thesis of your proposal completely. If you’re having
trouble doing so, try outlining it in Toulmin terms (see Chapter 7
for more on the Toulmin approach):
Claim:
Reason(s):
Warrant(s):
Alternatively, you might describe your intention to explore a
particular problem in your project, with the actual proposal (and
thesis) coming later.
Explain why this issue deserves attention. What’s at stake?
Identify and describe those readers whom you hope to reach
with your proposal. Why is this group of readers appropriate?
Can you identify individuals who can actually fix a problem?
Briefly discuss the major difficulties that you foresee for your
proposal. How will you demonstrate that the action you
propose is necessary and workable? Persuade the audience to
act? Pay for the proposal?

528

Determine what research strategies you’ll use. What sources
do you expect to consult?
● Considering Genre and Media
Your instructor may specify that you use a particular genre and/or
medium. If not, ask yourself these questions to help you make a good
choice:
What genre is most appropriate for your proposal? Does the
problem call for an academic essay, a report, an infographic, a
brochure, or something else?
What medium is most appropriate for your argument? Would it be
best delivered orally to a live audience? Presented as an audio
essay or podcast? Presented in print only or in print with
illustrations?
Will you need visuals, such as moving or still images, maps,
graphs, charts—and what function will they play in your
argument? Make sure they are not just “added on” but are
necessary components of the argument.
● Thinking about Organization
Proposals can take many different forms but generally include the
following elements:
a description of the problem you intend to address or the state of
affairs that leads you to propose the action
a strong and specific proposal, identifying the key reasons for
taking the proposed action and the effects that taking this action
will have
a clear connection between the proposal and a significant need or
problem
a demonstration of ways in which the proposal addresses the

529

need
evidence that the proposal will achieve the desired outcome
a consideration of alternative ways to achieve the desired
outcome and a discussion of why these may not be feasible
a demonstration that the proposal is feasible and an explanation
of how it may be implemented
● Getting and Giving Response: Questions for Peer Response
Your instructor may assign you to a group for the purpose of reading
and responding to each other’s drafts. If not, ask for responses from
serious readers or consultants at a writing center. Use the following
questions to evaluate a colleague’s draft or project. Since specific
comments help more than general observations, be sure to illustrate
your comments with examples. Some of the questions below assume a
conventional, thesis-driven project, but more exploratory, open-ended
proposal arguments in various media also need to be clearly
presented, organized, and supported with evidence.
The Claim

Does the claim clearly call for action? Is the proposal as clear and
specific as possible? Is it realistic or possible to accomplish?
Is the proposal too sweeping? Does it need to be qualified? If so,
how?
Does the proposal clearly address the problem that it intends to
solve? If not, how could the connection be strengthened?
Is the claim likely to get the audience to act rather than just to
agree? If not, how could it be revised to do so?
Evidence for the Claim

Is enough evidence furnished to get the audience to support the
proposal? If not, what kind of additional evidence is needed? Does

530

any of the evidence provided seem inappropriate or otherwise
ineffective? Why?
Is the evidence in support of the claim simply announced, or are
its significance and appropriateness analyzed? Is a more detailed
discussion needed?
Are objections that readers might have to the claim or evidence
adequately and fairly addressed?
What kinds of sources are cited? How credible and persuasive will
they be to readers? What other kinds of sources might work
better?
Are all quotations introduced with appropriate signal phrases
(such as “As Tyson argues, . . .”) and blended smoothly into the
writer’s sentences?
Are all visual sources labeled, introduced, and commented upon?
Organization and Style

How are the parts of the argument organized? Is this organization
or design effective?
Will readers understand the relationships among the claims,
supporting reasons, warrants, and evidence? If not, how might
those connections be clearer? Is the function of every visual clear?
Are more transitions needed? Would headings or graphic devices
help?
Are the transitions or links from point to point, sentence to
sentence, and paragraph to paragraph clear and effective? Are
transitions evident and helpful in oral presentations or speeches,
videos, infographics, or other media? If not, how could they be
improved?
Are all visuals carefully integrated into the text? Is each visual
introduced and commented on to point out its significance? Is
each visual labeled as a figure or a table and given a caption as
well as a citation?
Is the style suited to the subject? Is it too formal, casual, or

531

technical? Can it be improved?
Which sentences seem effective? Which ones seem weaker, and
how could they be improved? Should short sentences be
combined, and any longer ones be broken up?
How effective are the paragraphs or sections? Too short or too
long? How can they be improved?
Which words or phrases seem effective? Do any seem vague or
inappropriate for the audience or the writer’s purpose? Are
technical or unfamiliar terms defined?
Spelling, Punctuation, Mechanics, Documentation, and Format

Are there any errors in spelling, punctuation, capitalization, and
the like?
Is the documentation appropriate and consistent? (See Chapter
22.)
Does the paper or project follow an appropriate format or design?
Is it appropriately formatted and attractively presented?

PROJECTS●
1. Identify a proposal currently in the news or one advocated
unrelentingly by the media that you really don’t like. It may be
a political initiative, a cultural innovation, a transportation
alternative, or a lifestyle change. Spend time studying the idea
more carefully than you have before. And then compose a
proposal argument based on your deeper understanding of the
proposal. You may still explain why you think it’s a bad idea. Or
you may endorse it, using your new information and your
interesting perspective as a former dissenter.
2. As should be evident from readings throughout this book, the
uses and abuses of technology and media—from smartphones

532

and smartwatches to social networks—seem to be on
everyone’s mind. Write a proposal argument about some
pressing dilemma caused by the technological tools and
devices that are changing (ruining? improving?) our lives. You
might want to explain how to bring traditional instructors into
the digital age, or establish etiquette for people installing
surveillance equipment in and around their homes, or make
suggestions for people discovering the self-driving features in
their new cars. Or maybe you want to keep parents off social
networks. Or maybe you have a great idea for separating
professional and private lives online. Make your proposal in
some pertinent medium: print op-ed, cartoon, photo essay,
infographic, set of PowerPoint or Prezi slides, TED talk.
3. Write a proposal to yourself diagnosing some minor issue you
would like to address, odd personal behavior you’d like to
change, or obsession you’d like to curb. Explore the reasons
behind your mania and the problems it causes you and others.
Then come up with a proposal to resolve the issue and prove
that you can do it. Make the paper hilarious.
4. Working in a group initially, come up with a list of problems—
local, national, or international—that seem just about
insoluble, from persuading nations to cut down on their CO2
emissions to figuring out how to keep tuition or textbook costs
in check. After some discussion, focus on just one or two of
these matters and then discuss not the issues themselves but
the general reasons that the problems have proven intractable.
What exactly keeps people from agreeing on solutions? Are
some people content with the status quo? Do some groups
profit from the current arrangements? Are alternatives to the
status quo just too costly or not feasible for other reasons? Do
people find change uncomfortable? Following the discussion,

533

work alone or collaboratively on an argument that examines
the general issue of change: What makes it possible in any
given case? What makes it difficult? Use the problems you have
discussed as examples to illustrate your argument. Your
challenge as a writer may be to make such an open-ended
discussion interesting to general readers.

Two Sample Proposals

534

535

536

537

538

539

540

541

542

My Free-Range Parenting Manifesto

LENORE SKENAZY
July 22, 2015
Back in 2009, the parenting site Babble listed the top 50 “mom”
blogs in America—funniest, most fashionable, etc., and “most
controversial.”
That would be my blog, Free-Range Kids. Then it was voted
most controversial again, a year later.
What crazy idea was I pushing? Don’t vaccinate your kids?
Clobber them when they cry? Teach them to play piano by
threatening to burn their stuffed animals? Actually, my message
was—and is—this: Our kids are just as safe and smart as we were
when we were young. There’s no reason to suddenly be afraid of
everything they do, see, eat, wear, hear, touch, read, watch,
lick, play or hug.
That idea runs smack up against the big, basic belief of our era:
That our kids are in constant danger. It’s an erroneous idea that
is crippling our children and enslaving us parents.
Luckily, there’s new pushback in the Capitol. Last week, Sen.
Mike Lee introduced the first federal legislation in support of
free-range parenting.
***

543

You’ve heard of me. I’m the New York City mom who let her 9year-old ride the subway alone back in 2008. I wrote a column
about it and two days later ended up on The Today Show,
MSNBC, Fox News and (for contrast) NPR, defending myself as
NOT “America’s Worst Mom.” But if you search that phrase
you’ll find me there for 77 Google pages.
I started my blog the weekend after the column ran to explain
that I love safety—helmets, carseats, seatbelts—I just don’t
believe kids need a security detail every time they leave the
house. As people found the site, I started hearing just how little
we let kids do at all.
For instance, thanks to a mistaken belief that “We can’t let our
kids play outside like we did because times have changed!” only
13 percent of kids walk to school. One study found that in a
typical week, only 6 percent of kids 9–13 play outside
unsupervised. And Foreign Policy recently ran a piece about
how army recruits are showing up for basic training not
knowing to skip or do a somersault. It’s like they totally missed
the physical, frolicking part of childhood—along with its
lessons. How are they going to roll away from an explosion, or
skip over a landmine? And then of course there’s the rise in
childhood obesity, diabetes and depression.
That rise does not strike me as a coincidence. But here’s the
killer irony: The crime rate today is actually lower than it was
when we were growing up. (And it’s not lower because of

544

helicopter parenting. We don’t helicopter adults and yet crimes
against them—murder, rape, assault—are all down.) We’re back
to the crime rate of 1963. So if it wasn’t crazy for our parents to
let us play outside, it is even less crazy today. But gripped by the
fear of extremely rare and random tragedies hammered home
by a hyperventilating news cycle, we are actually putting our
kids at risk for increasingly common health risks.
Beyond those, however, there is something even sadder
happening to the kids we keep indoors, or in adult-run activities
“for their safety.” By having their every moment supervised,
kids don’t get a chance to play the way we did—free play,
without a coach or trophy or parents screaming from the
bleachers.
This is catastrophic. Free play turns out to be one of the most
important things a kid can do to develop into the kind of adult
who’s resilient, entrepreneurial—and a pleasure to be around.
You see, when kids play on their own, they first of all have to
come up with something to do. That’s called problem solving:
“We don’t have a ball, so what can we play?” They take matters
into their own hands. Then, if they don’t all agree, they have to
learn to compromise—another good skill to have.
If there are a bunch of kids, someone has to make the teams.
Leadership! If there’s a little kid, the big kids have to throw the
ball more gently. Empathy! For their part, the little kids want to
earn the big kids’ respect. So they act more mature, which is
545

how they become more mature. They rise to the occasion.
Responsibility!
And here’s the most important lesson that kids who are “just”
playing learn. How to lose. Say a kid strikes out. Now he has a
choice. He can throw a tantrum—and look like a baby. He can
storm off—and not get to play anymore. Or he can hold it
together, however hard that is, and go to the back of the line.
Because play is so fun, a kid will usually choose the latter. And
in doing that difficult deed—taking his lumps—the child is
learning to control himself even when things are not going his
way. The term for this is “executive function.”
It’s the crucial skill all parents want their kids to learn, and the
easiest way to learn it is through play. In fact, Penny Wilson, a
thought leader on play in Britain, calls fun the “orgasm” of play.
Kids play because it’s fun—not realizing that really they are
actually ensuring the success of the species by learning how to
function as a society.
Unfortunately, thanks to the belief that kids are in danger any
second we’re not watching them, this kind of play has all but
evaporated. Walk to your local park the next sunny Saturday
and take a look: Is there any child there who isn’t a toddler with
a caregiver, or a kid in uniform with a team?
Instead of letting our kids make their own fun, we enroll them
in programs (fearful they’d otherwise “waste” some teachable
546

time), or we keep them inside (fearful they’d otherwise be
kidnapped). And if we do boldly say, “Go out and play!” often
there’s no one else out there for them to play with.
Can you imagine a country full of people who have been
listening to Mozart since they were in the womb, but have no
idea how to organize a neighborhood ballgame? My friend was
recently telling a high school-age cousin about how he used to
play pick-up basketball in the park, and the cousin couldn’t
understand how this was possible without supervision. “What
happened if someone decided to cheat and fouled all the time?”
the kid asked. “We just wouldn’t play with him anymore,” my
friend replied. Said the cousin: “That’s exclusion!” and that, he
added, was a “form of” bullying.
Agghh! We are crippling kids by convincing them they can’t
solve any issues on their own. And as depressing as all this is,
now there’s another barrier to free play: The government.
You’ve all heard the story of the Alexander and Danielle Meitiv,
the parents investigated by child protective services not once
but twice for letting their kids walk home from the playground
in Silver Spring, Maryland. While they were eventually found
not guilty on both accounts, it seemed to require massive public
outrage before the authorities let them go. Maryland has since
“clarified” its CPS policy, which now states, “It is not the
department’s role to pick and choose among child-rearing
philosophies and practices.”

547

It sure isn’t. But the authorities have a habit of doing just that. A
mom in Austin was visited by the cops for letting her 6-year-old
play within sight of the house. A mom in Chicago is on the child
abuse registry for letting her children 11, 9 and 5 play in the
park literally across the street from her house—even though she
peeked out at them every 10 minutes. And I’ve heard from
parents investigated for letting their kids walk to the library, the
post office and the pizza shop.
Want more tales from the annals of government
overprotection? Last year, four Rhode Island legislators
proposed a bill that would make it illegal for a school bus to let
off any children under 7th grade—that’s age 11—unless there
was an adult waiting there to walk them home from the bus
stop. Naturally this was presented as just another new measure
to keep kids safe. Fortunately—and perhaps just a bit due to
agitation by the “most controversial” blog in America—the bill
ended up shelved.
Another triumph: A library in Boulder, Colorado, had actually
prohibited anyone under age 12 to be there without a guardian,
because, “Children may encounter hazards such as stairs,
elevators, doors, furniture, electrical equipment, or, other
library patrons.” Ah, yes, kids and furniture. What a recipe for
disaster!
But that library regulation was beaten back, too.
The biggest ray of hope to date? Republican Sen. Mike Lee from
548

Utah just added a groundbreaking “Free-Range” provision to the
Every Child Achieves Act. It would permit kids to walk or ride
their bikes to school at an age their parents deem appropriate,
without the threat of criminal or civil action—provided this
doesn’t pre-empt state or local laws. “‘Helicopter parents’
should be free to hover over their own kids, but more ‘FreeRange’ parents have the exact same rights,” the senator told me.
“And government at all levels should trust loving moms and
dads to make those decisions for their own families.”
The Act, including Lee’s amendment, passed the Senate on
Thursday (although in the end Lee could not support the final
version of the bill) and now must be reconciled with the House
version.
Support for Lee’s provision was bi-partisan. So if Free-Range
was once “controversial,” now it is the people’s will. We are sick
of seeing childhood through the kaleidoscope of doom. Sick of
thinking, “A stranger near the school? Abduction!” “A child
waiting in the car while mom returns a book? Instant death!” “A
non-organic grape? That kid’s a goner!”
Enough! It is time to stop making ourselves crazy with fear. All
we need to do is adopt a new skepticism whenever we hear the
words “for the safety of our precious children.”
Those words precede grandstanding and bad laws. They
precede sanctimony and scapegoating. They turn rational
parents into outlaws and exuberant children into gelatinous
549

lumps on the couch.
The way to keep kids safe is not by forbidding them to go
outside. It’s by giving them the freedom we loved when we were
kids, to play, explore, goof up, run around, take responsibility
and get lost in every sense of the expression. Here, then, is The
Free-Range Kids’ and Parents’ Bill of Rights:
“Our kids have the right to some unsupervised time (with our
permission) and parents have the right to give it to them
without getting arrested.”
Take this bill to your local legislators, or Congress, or the
president (or his “Let’s Move!” wife), and remind them: This is
how we grew up. Why are we denying our kids a healthy, allAmerican upbringing?
It’s time to save childhood—and the country. How can we be the
home of the brave when we’re too scared to let our kids go out
and become smart, successful, resilient, resourceful and
independent by doing what we all did at their age?
Playing.
Lenore Skenazy offers a proposal argument with passion, humor, and what used to
be called common sense. Blogger, writer, and columnist, Skenazy became famous in
2008 when she allowed her nine-year-old son to ride by himself in a New York City
subway. He survived.

550

PART 3 STYLE AND
PRESENTATION IN arguments

551

CHAPTER 13 Style in Arguments

The images above all reflect the notable styles of musicians
from different times and musical traditions: Yo-Yo Ma, Count
Basie, Kiss, and Beyoncé. One could argue that these
performers craft images to define their stage personalities, but
how they present themselves also reflects the music they play
and the audiences they perform for. Imagine Yo-Yo Ma
appearing in Kiss makeup at Carnegie Hall. Weird!
Writers, too, create styles that express their ethos and life
experiences. But in persuasive situations, style is also a matter
of the specific choices they make—strategically and selfconsciously—to influence audiences. And today, style is
arguably more important than ever before in getting messages
across. In a time when we are overcome with a veritable firehose of information 24 hours a day, getting and holding an
audience’s attention is often difficult. So what can do the job for
writers today? STYLE.
It’s not surprising, then, that writers take questions of style very
552

seriously, that they adapt their voices to a range of rhetorical
situations, from very formal to very casual. At the formal and
professional end of the scale, consider the opening paragraph
of a dissent by Justice Sonia Sotomayor to a Supreme Court
decision affecting affirmative action in Michigan public
universities. Writing doesn’t get much more consequential than
this, and that earnestness is reflected in the justice’s sober,
authoritative, but utterly clear style:
We are fortunate to live in a democratic society. But
without checks, democratically approved legislation can
oppress minority groups. For that reason, our
Constitution places limits on what a majority of the
people may do. This case implicates one such limit: the
guarantee of equal protection of the laws. Although that
guarantee is traditionally understood to prohibit
intentional discrimination under existing laws, equal
protection does not end there. Another fundamental
strand of our equal protection jurisprudence focuses on
process, securing to all citizens the right to participate
meaningfully and equally in self-government. That right
is the bedrock of our democracy, for it preserves all other
rights.
—Sonia Sotomayor, dissenting opinion, April 22, 2014
Contrast this formal style with the far more casual style in a
blog item by Huffington Post book editor Claire Fallon, arguing
(tongue-in-cheek) that Shakespeare’s Romeo is one of those
553

literary figures readers just love to hate. The range of Fallon’s
vocabulary choices—from “most romantic dude” to “penchant
for wallowing”—suggests the (Beyoncé-like?) playfulness of the
exercise. Style is obviously a big part of Fallon’s game:
Romeo, Romeo, wherefore art thou such a wishy-washy
doofus? . . . [Romeo] spends his first scene in the play
insisting he’s heartbroken over a girl he goes on to
completely forget about the second he catches a glimpse
of Juliet! . . . Romeo’s apparent penchant for wallowing in
the romantic misery of unrequited love finds a new target
in naive Juliet, who then dies for a guy who probably
would have forgotten about her as soon as their
honeymoon ended.
—Claire Fallon, “11 Unlikeable Classical Book Characters
We Love to Hate”
These examples use different styles but are written in standard
English, with a bit of slang mixed into the blog post. In the
multilingual, polyglot world we live in today, however, writers
are also mixing languages (as Gloria Anzaldúa does when she
shifts from English to Spanish to Spanglish in her book
Borderlands: La Frontera) as well as mixing dialects and
languages. This translingual turn recognizes that English itself
exists in many forms (Singaporean English, Canadian English,
New Zealand English, and so on), that many writers of English
speak and write a variety of other languages, and that many if
not most writers “code mesh,” a term scholar Suresh
554

Canagarajah defines as “a strategy for merging local varieties
with standard written Englishes in a move toward more
gradually pluralizing academic writing and developing
multilingual competence for transnational relationships” (“The
Place of World Englishes in Composition,” CCC, June 2006).
Here is an example of code-meshing in an article by Professor
Donald McCrary:
Like my students, I know the value of my native
language, black English, and the significance it has
played in both my public and private life. However, many
would challenge my claim that black English is both a
public and private language. For example, in “Aria: A
Memoir of a Bilingual Childhood,” Richard Rodriguez
argues for the separation of home and school languages
because he believes the former is private while the latter
is public. . . . I, however, view black English as a public
language because it is the language with which I learned
about the world, including the perils of racism, the
importance of education, and the consequences of
improper conduct. When Moms told me, “Don’t go
showin’ your ass when I take you in this store,” I knew
she was telling me to behave respectfully, and I knew
what would happen if I didn’t. The black English I
learned at home is the same black English I used outside
the home. It got black people through slavery, and it
saved my black behind a thousand times.

555

Hold up. I know what you gonna say. Talkin’ that black
English is okay at home and with your friends, but don’t
be speakin’ that foolishness in school or at the j-o-b. And
don’t be tellin’ no students they can speak that mess
either. You want people (read: white) to think they
ignorant? Right.
Right. I hear you. I hear you. But let’s be real. America
loves itself some black English. Half the announcers on
ESPN speak it, and I’m talking about the white dudes, too.
Americans know more black English than they like to
admit. Black English is intelligible and intelligent, and
just because somebody tells you different, don’t
necessarily make it so. And that’s what I want the
academy to understand. My students don’t speak no
broken English. They speak a legitimate dialect that
conveys legitimate meanings.
—Donald McCrary, “Represent, Representin’,
Representation: The Efficacy of Hybrid Texts in the
Writing Classroom”
McCrary, who teaches at Long Island University, “meshes”
elements of African American language with “standard” written
English to create a style that speaks to both academic and
nonacademic audiences. His use of colloquialisms (“I hear
you”), features of spoken English (“at the j-o-b”), and what he
refers to as “black English” establish a connection between

556

speaker and listener (“But let’s be real”) as he argues for a more
pluralistic and inclusive “translingual approach” to language.

RESPOND●
Write a paragraph or two (or three!) about your own use of
languages and dialects. In what ways do you ordinarily “mesh”
features of different dialects and/or languages? What languages did
you grow up speaking and hearing and how do those languages
enter into your writing today? How would you describe your own
style of writing (and speaking)?
As you might guess from these examples, style always involves
making choices about language across a wide range of situations.
Style can be public or personal, conventional or creative, and
everything in between. When you write, you’ll find that you have
innumerable tools and options for expressing yourself exactly as
you need to. This chapter introduces you to some of them.

557

Style and Word Choice
In her essay about the language we use to describe sexual
violence, Roxane Gay presents a compelling example of the impact
of subtle stylistic choices.
LINK TO Gay, “The Careless Language of Sexual Violence,” in
Chapter 25

Words matter—and those you choose will define the style of
your arguments.
In spite of the extensive work on translingualism and code
meshing, many academic arguments today still call for a formal
or professional style using standard written English. Such
language can sound weighty, and it usually is. It often uses
technical terms and conventional vocabulary because that’s
what readers of academic journals or serious magazines and
newspapers generally expect. Formal writing also typically
avoids contractions, phrases that mimic speech, and sometimes
even the pronoun I. (For information about the use of pronouns
in contemporary writing, see the Cultural Contexts for
Argument box in this chapter.) But what may be most
remarkable about the style is how little it draws attention to
itself—and that’s usually deliberate. Here’s a paragraph from
Annette Vee’s Coding Literacy: How Computer Programming Is
Changing Writing, published by MIT Press in 2017:

558

[T]he concept of coding literacy helps to expand access,
or to support “transformative access” to programming in
the words of rhetorician Adam Banks.24 For Banks,
transformative access allows people “to both change the
interfaces of that system and fundamentally change the
codes that determine how the system works.”25 Changing
the “interface” of programming might entail more
widespread education on programming. But changing
“how the system works” would move beyond material
access to education and into a critical examination of the
values and ideologies embedded in that education.
Programming as defined by computer science or
software engineering is bound to echo the values of those
contexts. But a concept of coding literacy suggests
programming is a literacy practice with many
applications beyond a profession defined by a limited set
of values. The webmaster, game maker, tinkerer,
scientist, and citizen activist can benefit from coding as a
means to achieve their goals. As I argue in this book, we
must think of programming more broadly—as coding
literacy—if the ability to program is to become
distributed more broadly. Thinking this way can help
change “how the system works.”
In this passage, Vee uses conventional standard written English,
fairly complex syntax, and abstract terms (transformative
access, interfaces, coding literacy) that she expects her readers
will make sense of, though she draws the line at employing
559

highly technical terms that only computer scientists would be
familiar with. Also note the two footnote markers that identify
her sources, also a staple of formal academic discourse. The
tone is efficient and cool, the style academic and somewhat
distanced.
Colloquial words and phrases, slang, and even first- and secondperson pronouns (I, me, we, you) can create relationships with
audiences that feel much more intimate. When you use
everyday language in arguments, readers are more likely to
identify with you personally and, possibly, with the ideas you
represent or advocate. In effect, such vocabulary choices lessen
the distance between you and readers.
Admittedly, some colloquial terms simply bewilder readers not
tuned in to them. A movie review in Rolling Stone or a music
review in Spin might leave your parents (or some authors)
scratching their heads. Writing for the music Web site
Pitchfork, Meaghan Garvey has this to say about Spanish R&B
singer Bad Gyal’s 2018 release:
On “Blink,” slow-winding dancehall rhythms with pulsing
bass and staccato hand-claps climax in thumping
reggaeton with hypnotic synth washes. Bad Gyal’s voice
stutters and chops along with the dembow drum loops,
her melodies evoking an R-rated lullaby as she sings
sweetly about grinding the club (“Me gusta el perreo”).
—Meaghan Garvey, “Bad Gyal, ‘Blink’”
560

Huh? we say. But you probably get it.

CULTURAL CONTEXTS FOR ARGUMENT

A Note on Pronoun Preference
Conventions about personal pronouns are in flux right now, and
particularly traditional third-person singular pronouns. You may have
been asked what pronouns you prefer, since many people identify with
neither of the traditional personal pronouns, namely he and she. For
this reason, writers and speakers are sensitive to members of their
audiences, realizing that some may prefer the use of singular they as in
“Jamie called me and I called them back.” Others prefer to use an
alternate gender-neutral pronoun such as ze or zir. Linguist Peter
Smagorinsky notes that it was only several decades ago that women,
tired of having to be either Mrs. or Miss, coined the title Ms. It took some
time, but eventually caught on:
It may well be that “ze” and “zir” will replace current pronouns
over time. For those who reject “they” as grammatically improper
while also recognizing that “he” and “she” are inadequate, it may
become a reasonable development.
And of course, still others are just fine with the traditional he or she.
The important point for writers and speakers is to be sensitive to these
differences and to choose terms appropriately.

You will want to be careful, as Annette Vee is, with the use of
jargon, the special vocabulary of members of a profession,
trade, or field. Although jargon serves as shorthand for experts,
it can alienate readers who don’t recognize technical words or
561

acronyms.
Another verbal key to an argument’s style is its control of
connotation, the associations that surround many words.
Consider the straightforward connotative differences among
the following three statements:
Students from the Labor Action Committee (LAC) carried
out a hunger strike to call attention to the belowminimum wages that are being paid to campus
temporary workers, saying, “The university must pay a
living wage to all its workers.”
Left-wing agitators and radicals tried to use self-induced
starvation to stampede the university into caving in to
their demands.
Champions of human rights put their bodies on the line
to protest the university’s tightfisted policy of paying
temporary workers scandalously low wages.
The style of the first sentence is the most neutral, presenting
facts and offering a quotation from one of the students. The
second sentence uses loaded terms like agitators, radicals, and
stampede to create a negative image of this event, while the
final sentence uses other loaded words to create a positive view.
As these examples demonstrate, the words you choose can
change everything about a sentence.

562

Watch how Jason Collins, the first openly gay NBA star (see
image here), uses the connotations of a common sports term to
explain why he decided to come out:
Now I’m a free agent, literally and figuratively. I’ve
reached that enviable state in life in which I can do pretty
much what I want. And what I want is to continue to play
basketball. . . . At the same time, I want to be genuine and
authentic and truthful.
Collins plays on the professional and figurative meanings of
“free agent” to illustrate his desire to be honest about his sexual
orientation.

RESPOND●
Exercise your critical reading muscles by reviewing the excerpts in
this section and choose one or two words or phrases that you think
are admirably selected or unusually interesting choices. Then
explore the meanings and possibly the connotations of the word or
words in a nicely developed paragraph or two.

563

Sentence Structure and
Argument
Writers of effective arguments know that “variety is the spice of
life” when it comes to stylish sentences. A strategy as simple as
varying sentence length can keep readers attentive and
interested. For instance, the paragraph from Coding Literacy in
the preceding section (pp. 324–25) has sentences as short as ten
words and as lengthy as twenty-seven. Now the author almost
certainly didn’t pause as she wrote and think, hmm, I need a
little variation here. Instead, as an experienced writer, she
simply made sure that her sentences complemented the flow of
her ideas and also kept readers engaged.
Sentences, you see, offer you more options and special effects
than you can ever exhaust. To pull examples from selections
earlier in this chapter, just consider how dramatic, punchy, or
even comic short sentences can be:
Hold up. I know what you gonna say.
—Donald McCrary
Longer sentences can explain ideas, build drama, or sweep
readers along:
I, however, view black English as a public language
because it is the language with which I learned about the

564

world, including the perils of racism, the importance of
education, and the consequences of improper conduct.
—Donald McCrary
Bad Gyal’s voice stutters and chops along with the
dembow drum loops, her melodies evoking an R-rated
lullaby as she sings sweetly about grinding the club (“Me
gusta el perreo”).
—Meaghan Garvey, “Bad Gyal, ‘Blink’”
Meanwhile, sentences of medium length handle just about any
task assigned without a fuss. They are whatever you need them
to be: serviceable, discrete, thoughtful, playful. And they pair
up nicely with companions:
But without checks, democratically approved legislation
can oppress minority groups. For that reason, our
Constitution places limits on what a majority of the
people may do.
—Sonia Sotomayor
Balanced or parallel sentences, in which clauses or phrases are
deliberately matched, as highlighted in the following example,
draw attention to ideas and relationships:
Ulysses can be finished . The Internet is never
finished .
565

—Alexis C. Madrigal
And sentences that alternate sentence length can work
especially well in much writing. For example, after one or more
long sentences, the punch of a short sentence can be dramatic:
Previously, Ms. Collins was the first woman at The Times
to hold the post of editorial page editor. The author of six
books, she took time off in 2007—between the editorial
page editor job and her column—and returned to write
about the 2008 presidential election. She’s been at it ever
since.
—Susan Lehman, The New York Times, March 22, 2016
Sentences with complicated structures or interruptions make
you pay attention to their motions and, therefore, their ideas:
As other voting requirements were gradually stripped
away—location of birth, property ownership, race, and
later sex—literacy and education began to stand in for
those qualities in defining what it meant to be an
American citizen.
—Annette Vee
Even sentence fragments—which don’t meet all the
requirements for full sentence status—have their place when
used for a specific effect:

566

Right. Right. —Donald McCrary
You see, then, that there’s much more to the rhetoric of
sentences than just choosing subjects, verbs, and objects—and
far more than we can explain in one section. But you can learn a
lot about the power of sentences simply by observing how the
writers you admire engineer them—and maybe imitating some
of those sentences yourself. You might also make it a habit to
read and re-read your own sentences aloud (or in your head) as
you compose them to gauge whether words and phrases are
meshing with your ideas. And then tinker, tinker, tinker—until
the sentences feel and sound right.

RESPOND●
Working with a classmate, first find a paragraph you both admire,
perhaps in one of the selections in Part 2 of this book, and read it
carefully and critically, making sure you understand its structure,
syntax, and word choice. Then, individually write paragraphs of your
own that imitate the sentences within it—making sure that both
these new items are on subjects different from that of the original
paragraph. When you are done, compare your paragraphs and pick
out a few sentences you think are especially effective.

567

Punctuation and
Argument
In a memorable comment, actor and director Clint Eastwood
said, “You can show a lot with a look. . . . It’s punctuation.” He’s
certainly right about punctuation’s effect, and it is important
that as you read and write arguments, you consider punctuation
closely.

“You can show a lot with a look. . . . It’s punctuation.”

Eastwood may have been talking about the dramatic effect of
568

end punctuation: the finality of periods; the tentativeness of
ellipses (. . .); the query, disbelief, or uncertainty in question
marks; or the jolt in the now-appearing-almost-everywhere
exclamation point! Yet even exclamations can help create tone
if used strategically. In an argument about the treatment of
prisoners at Guantánamo, consider how Jane Mayer evokes the
sense of desperation in some of the suspected terrorists:
As we reached the end of the cell-block, hysterical
shouts, in broken English, erupted from a caged exercise
area nearby. “Come here!” a man screamed. “See here!
They are liars!… No sleep!” he yelled. “No food! No
medicine! No doctor! Everybody sick here!”
—Jane Mayer, “The Experiment”
Punctuation that works within sentences can also do much to
enhance meaning and style. The semicolon, for instance, marks
a pause that is stronger than a comma but not as strong as a
period. Semicolons function like “plus signs”; used correctly,
they join items that are alike in structure, conveying a sense of
balance, similarity, or even contrast. Do you recall Nathaniel
Stein’s parody of grading standards at Harvard University (see
pp. 114–15)? Watch as he uses a semicolon to enhance the
humor in his description of what an A+ paper achieves:
Nearly every single word in the paper is spelled
correctly; those that are not can be reasoned out
phonetically within minutes.
569

—Nathaniel Stein, “Leaked! Harvard’s Grading Rubric”
In many situations, however, semicolons, with their emphasis
on symmetry and balance, can feel stodgy, formal, and maybe
even old-fashioned, and lots of writers avoid them, perhaps
because they are very difficult to get right. Check a writing
handbook before you get too friendly with semicolons.
Much easier to manage are colons, which function like pointers
within sentences: they say pay attention to this. Philip
Womack’s London Telegraph review of Harry Potter and the
Deathly Hallows, Part 2 demonstrates how a colon enables a
writer to introduce a lengthy illustration clearly and elegantly:
The first scene of David Yates’s film picks up where his
previous installment left off: with a shot of the dark lord
Voldemort’s noseless face in triumph as he steals the
most powerful magic wand in the world from the tomb of
Harry’s protector, Professor Dumbledore.
—Philip Womack
And Paul Krugman of the New York Times shows how to use a
colon to catch a reader’s attention:
Recently two research teams, working independently
and using different methods, reached an alarming
conclusion: The West Antarctic ice sheet is doomed.
—Paul Krugman, “Point of No Return”
570

Colons can serve as lead-ins for complete sentences, complex
phrases, or even single words. As such, they are versatile and
potentially dramatic pieces of punctuation.
Like colons, dashes help readers focus on important,
sometimes additional details. But they have even greater
flexibility since they can be used singly or in pairs. Alone,
dashes function much like colons to add information. Here’s the
Washington Post’s Eugene Robinson commenting
pessimistically on a political situation in Iraq, using a single
dash to extend his thoughts:
The aim of U.S. policy at this point should be minimizing
the calamity, not chasing rainbows of a unified,
democratic, pluralistic Iraq—which, sadly, is something
the power brokers in Iraq do not want.
—Eugene Robinson, “The ‘Ungrateful Volcano’ of Iraq”
And here are paired dashes used to insert such information in
the opening of the Philip Womack review of Deathly Hallows 2
cited earlier:
Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, Part 2—the eighth
and final film in the blockbusting series—begins with our
teenage heroes fighting for their lives, and for their
entire world.
As these examples illustrate, punctuation often enhances the

571

rhythm of an argument. Take a look at how Maya Angelou uses
a dash along with another punctuation mark—ellipsis points—to
create a pause or hesitation, in this case one that builds
anticipation:
Then the voice, husky and familiar, came to wash over us
—“The winnah, and still heavyweight champeen of the
world . . . Joe Louis.”
—Maya Angelou, “Champion of the World”
It’s probably worth mentioning that today we are seeing an
upsurge in the use of ellipses on social media—a virtual
onslaught of these little dots. Of course, in the very informal
style of many texts and tweets, writers may be likely to omit end
punctuation entirely. The use of ellipsis dots can signal a
trailing off of a thought, leave open the possibility of further
communication, or mimic conversational-style pauses. But they
can also be a sign of laziness, as Matthew J. X. Malady points
out in “Why Everyone and Your Mother Started Using Ellipses . .
. Everywhere”:
Ellipses, then, . . . can help carefully structure a bit of
written communication so that it mimics some of the
more subtle, meaningful elements of face-to-face
conversation. But when we want to be lazy, they also
allow us to avoid thinking too much while crafting a
message.

572

RESPOND●
First, read several movie reviews carefully and critically. Then try
writing a brief movie review for your campus newspaper,
experimenting with punctuation as one way to create an effective
style. See if using a series of questions might have a strong effect,
whether exclamation points would add or detract from the message
you want to send, and so on. When you’ve finished the review,
compare it to one written by a classmate, and look for similarities
and differences in your choices of punctuation.

573

Special Effects: Figurative
Language
You don’t have to look hard to find examples of figurative
language adding style to arguments. When a writing teacher
suggests you take a weed whacker to your prose, she’s using a
figure of speech (in this case, a metaphor) to suggest you cut the
wordiness. To indicate how little he trusts the testimony of John
Koskinen, head of the Internal Revenue Service, political pundit
Michael Gerson takes the metaphor of a “witch hunt” and flips it
on the bureaucrat, relying on readers to recognize an allusion to
Shakespeare’s Macbeth:
Democrats were left to complain about a Republican
“witch hunt”—while Koskinen set up a caldron, added
some eye of newt and toe of frog and hailed the Thane of
Cawdor.
—Michael Gerson, “An Arrogant and Lawless IRS”

574

The three witches from Macbeth, at their cauldron

Figurative language like this—indispensable to our ability to
communicate effectively—dramatizes ideas, either by clarifying
or enhancing the thoughts themselves or by framing them in
language that makes them stand out. As a result, figurative
language makes arguments attractive, memorable, and
powerful. An apt simile, a timely rhetorical question, or a
wicked understatement might do a better job bringing an
argument home than whole paragraphs of evidence. Figurative
language is not the icing on the cake: it’s the cake itself!
Figures of speech are usually classified into two main types:
tropes, which involve a change in the ordinary meaning of a
word or phrase; and schemes, which involve a special

575

arrangement of words. Here is a brief alphabetical listing—with
examples—of some of the most familiar kinds.

Tropes
To create tropes, you often have to think of one idea or claim in
relationship to others. Some of the most powerful—one might
even say inevitable—tropes involve making purposeful
comparisons between ideas: analogies, metaphors, and similes.
Other tropes such as irony, signifying, and understatement are
tools for expressing attitudes toward ideas: you might use them
to shape the way you want your audience to think about a claim
that you or someone else has made.

Allusion
An allusion is a connection that illuminates one situation by
comparing it to another similar but usually more famous one,
often with historical or literary connections. Allusions work
with events, people, or concepts—expanding and enlarging
them so readers better appreciate their significance. For
example, a person who makes a career-ending blunder might
be said to have met her Waterloo, the famous battle that
terminated Napoleon’s ambitions. Similarly, every impropriety
in Washington brings up mentions of Watergate, the only
scandal to lead to a presidential resignation; any daring venture
becomes a moon shot, paralleling the ambitious program that
led to a lunar landing in 1969. Using allusions can be tricky:
they work only if readers get the connection. But when they do,
they can pack a wallop. Earlier in this section Michael Gerson
576

mentions “eye of newt” and “toe of frog” in the same breath as
IRS chief John Koskinen, he knows what fans of Macbeth are
thinking. But other readers might be left clueless.

Analogy
Analogies compare two things, often point by point, either to
show similarity or to suggest that if two concepts, phenomena,
events, or even people are alike in one way, they are probably
alike in other ways as well. Often extended in length, analogies
can clarify or emphasize points of comparison, thereby
supporting particular claims.
Here’s the first paragraph of an essay in which a writer who is
also a runner thinks deeply about the analogies between the two
tough activities:
When people ask me what running and writing have in
common, I tend to look at the ground and say it might
have something to do with discipline: You do both of
those things when you don’t feel like it, and make them
part of your regular routine. You know some days will be
harder than others, and on some you won’t hit your mark
and will want to quit. But you don’t. You force yourself
into a practice; the practice becomes habit and then
simply part of your identity. A surprising amount of
success, as Woody Allen once said, comes from just
showing up.
—Rachel Toor, “What Writing and Running Have in
577

Common”

This cartoon creates an analogy in the way it depicts the relationship between
North Korea and the United States.

To be effective, an analogy has to make a good point and hold
up to scrutiny. If it doesn’t, it can be criticized as a faulty
analogy, a fallacy of argument (see Faulty Analogy in Chapter
5.)

Antonomasia
Antonomasia is an intriguing trope that simply involves
substituting a descriptive phrase for a proper name. It is
probably most familiar to you from sports or entertainment
figures: “His Airness” still means Michael Jordan; Aretha
Franklin remains “The Queen of Soul”; Cleveland Cavaliers star

578

LeBron James is “the King”; and Superman, of course, is “The
Man of Steel.” In politics, antonomasia is sometimes used
neutrally (Ronald Reagan as “The Gipper”), sometimes as a
backhanded compliment (Margaret Thatcher as “The Iron
Lady”), and occasionally as a crude and racist put-down
(Elizabeth Warren as “Pocahontas”). As you well know if you
have one, nicknames can pack potent arguments into just one
phrase.

Hyperbole
Hyperbole is the use of overstatement for special effect, a kind
of fireworks in prose. The tabloid gossip magazines that scream
at you in the checkout line survive by hyperbole. Everyone has
seen these overstated arguments and perhaps marveled at the
way they sell.
Hyperbole can, however, serve both writers and audiences
when very strong opinions need to be registered. One senses
exasperation in this excerpt from a list of the worst movies of
2017, which ranks Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No
Tales as one of the most boring and worst films of that year:
The (sigh) fifth movie in Disney’s deathless series finds
Johnny Depp and co. dead in the water. Remember when
we loved the star’s loose-and-boozy portrayal of Capt.
Jack Sparrow, so fresh and charismatic 14 years ago? He
was a joy. Now, you just want to smack the tri-cornered
hat off his head and see him stranded on a godforsaken

579

rock somewhere near the Marianas Trench.
—John Serba, mlive.com

Irony
Irony is a complex trope in which words convey meanings that
are in tension with or even opposite to their literal meanings.
Readers who catch the irony realize that a writer is asking them
(or someone else) to think about all the potential connotations
in their language. One of the most famous uses of satiric irony
in literature occurs in Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar when Antony
punctuates his condemnation of Caesar’s assassins with the
repeated word honourable. He begins by admitting, “So are
they all, honourable men” but ends railing against “the
honourable men / Whose daggers have stabb’d Caesar.” Within
just a few lines, Antony’s funeral speech has altered the
meaning of the term.
In popular culture, irony often takes a humorous bent in
publications such as the Onion and the appropriately named
Ironic Times. Yet even serious critics of society and politics use
satiric devices to undercut celebrities and politicians,
particularly when such public figures ignore the irony in their
own positions.

580

Louise Linton, the Scottish actress, made news on
Monday when she posted a photo to her Instagram
account showing her and her husband [Secretary of the
Treasury Steven Mnuchin] deplaning on an official trip to
Kentucky. In her white wide-legged trousers and slim
blouse, handbag held as though being presented in the
crook of her arm, she looked every bit the jet-setting
style-grammer. As any aspiring social media celebrity
would, she took the opportunity to let her followers know
not only what she thought of the bluegrass state, but also
who she was wearing.

581

—Tony Bravo, “Louise Linton’s Fashion Instagram Post
Reveals Her Entitlement”
The ironically negative responses to Linton came instantly:
“Glad we could pay for your little getaway,” Instagram user
@jennimiller29 replied to Linton, ending with the hashtag
“#deplorable.” “Please don’t tag your Hermes scarf,”
@emily.e.dickey responded, calling the hashtagging
“Distasteful.”

Metaphor
A bedrock of our language, metaphor creates or implies a
comparison between two things, illuminating something
unfamiliar by correlating it to something we usually know
much better. For example, to explain the complicated structure
of DNA, scientists Watson and Crick famously used items
people would likely recognize: a helix (spiral) and a zipper.
Metaphors can clarify and enliven arguments. In the following
passage, novelist and poet Benjamin Sáenz uses several
metaphors (highlighted) to describe his relationship to the
southern border of the United States:
It seems obvious to me now that I remained always a son
of the border , a boy never quite comfortable in an
American skin, and certainly not comfortable in a
Mexican one. My entire life, I have lived in a liminal
space, and that space has both defined and confined me.
That liminal space wrote and invented me. It has been

582

my prison , and it has also been my only piece of sky .
—Benjamin Sáenz, “Notes from Another Country”
In an example from Andrew Sullivan’s blog, he quotes an 1896
issue of Munsey’s Magazine that uses a metaphor to explain
what, at that time, the bicycle meant to women and to clarify
the new freedom it gave women who weren’t accustomed to
being able to ride around on their own:
To men, the bicycle in the beginning was merely a new
toy , another machine added to the long list of devices
they knew in their work and play. To women, it was a
steed upon which they rode into a new world .
And here is Kurt Andersen in the Atlantic writing about what he
calls America’s “lurch toward fantasy”:
For all the fun, and all the many salutary effects of the
1960s—the main decade of my childhood—I saw that
those years had also been the big-bang moment for
truthiness . And if the ’60s amounted to a national
nervous breakdown , we are probably mistaken to
consider ourselves over it.

Metonymy
Metonymy is a rhetorical trope in which a writer uses a
particular object to stand for a general concept. You’ll recognize
the move immediately in the expression “The pen is mightier

583

than the sword”—which obviously is not about Bics and sabers.
Metonyms are vivid and concrete ways of compacting big
concepts into expressive packages for argument: the term Wall
Street can embody the nation’s whole complicated banking and
investment system, while all the offices and officials of the U.S.
military become the Pentagon. You can quickly think of dozens
of expressions that represent larger, more complex concepts:
Nashville, Hollywood, Big Pharma, the Press, the Oval Office,
even perhaps the electorate.

It’s not just a street; it’s a metonym!

Oxymoron
Oxymoron is a rhetorical trope that states a paradox or
contradiction. John Milton created a classic example when he
described Hell as a place of “darkness visible.” We may be less
poetic today, but we nevertheless appreciate the creativity (or
584

arrogance) in expressions such as light beer, sports utility
vehicle, expressway gridlock, or negative economic growth.
You might not have much cause to use this figure in your
writing, but you’ll get credit for noting and commenting on
oxymoronic ideas or behaviors.

Rhetorical Question
Rhetorical questions, which we use frequently, are questions
posed by a speaker or writer that don’t really require answers.
Instead, an answer is implied or unimportant. When you say
“Who cares?” or “What difference does it make?” you’re using
such questions.
Rhetorical questions show up in arguments for many reasons,
most often perhaps to direct readers’ attention to the issues a
writer intends to explore. For example, Erin Biba asks a
provocative, open-ended rhetorical question in her analysis of
Facebook “friending”:
So if we’re spending most of our time online talking to
people we don’t even know, how deep can the
conversation ever get?
—Erin Biba, “Friendship Has Its Limits”

Signifying
Signifying, in which a speaker or writer cleverly and often
humorously needles another person, is a distinctive trope found
extensively in African American English. In the following
585

passage, two African American men (Grave Digger and Coffin
Ed) signify on their white supervisor (Anderson), who has
ordered them to discover the originators of a riot:
“I take it you’ve discovered who started the riot,”
Anderson said.
“We knew who he was all along,” Grave Digger said.
“It’s just nothing we can do to him,” Coffin Ed echoed.
“Why not, for God’s sake?”
“He’s dead,” Coffin Ed said.
“Who?”
“Lincoln,” Grave Digger said.
“He hadn’t ought to have freed us if he didn’t want to
make provisions to feed us,” Coffin Ed said. “Anyone
could have told him that.”
—Chester Himes, Hot Day, Hot Night
Coffin Ed and Grave Digger demonstrate the major
characteristics of effective signifying—indirection, ironic
humor, fluid rhythm, and a surprising twist at the end. Rather
than insulting Anderson directly by pointing out that he’s asked
a dumb question, they criticize the question indirectly by

586

ultimately blaming a white man for the riot (and not just any
white man, but one they’re supposed to revere). This twist
leaves the supervisor speechless, teaching him something and
giving Grave Digger and Coffin Ed the last word—and last laugh.
Take a look at the example of signifying from a Boondocks
cartoon (see below). Note how Huey seems to be sympathizing
with Jazmine and then, in two surprising twists, reveals that he
has been needling her all along.

In these Boondocks strips, Huey signifies on Jazmine, using indirection, ironic
humor, and two surprising twists.

Simile
A simile uses like or as to compare two things. Here’s a simile
587

from an essay about visiting Montana in the August 2017
Hemispheres Magazine:
By now we’ve driven the cows to an open pasture. The
wranglers teach me how to cut a cow from the herd, as
real cowboys do. I find it’s a lot like parallel parking ,
except the curb keeps moving to join the other curbs, and
my car has lost respect for me.
—Jacob Baynham, “Three Perfect Days: Montana”
And here is a series of similes, from an excerpt of a Wired
magazine review of a new magazine for women:
Women’s magazines occupy a special niche in the
cluttered infoscape of modern media. Ask any Vogue
junkie: no girl-themed Web site or CNN segment on
women’s health can replace the guilty pleasure of
slipping a glossy fashion rag into your shopping cart.
Smooth as a pint of chocolate Häagen-Dazs, feckless as a
thousand-dollar slip dress, women’s magazines wrap
culture, trends, health, and trash in a single, decadent
package. But like the diet dessert recipes they print,
these slick publications can leave a bad taste in your
mouth.
—Tiffany Lee Brown, “En Vogue”
Here, three similes—smooth as a pint of chocolate Häagen-Dazs

588

and feckless as a thousand-dollar slip dress in the third
sentence, and like the diet dessert recipes in the fourth—add to
the image of women’s magazines as a mishmash of “trash” and
“trends.”

Understatement
Understatement uses a quiet message to make its point. In her
memoir, Rosa Parks—the civil rights activist who made history
in 1955 by refusing to give up her bus seat to a white passenger
—uses understatement so often that it becomes a hallmark of
her style. She refers to her lifelong efforts to advance civil rights
as just a small way of “carrying on.”
Understatement can be particularly effective in arguments that
might seem to call for its opposite. Outraged that New York’s
Metropolitan Opera has decided to stage The Death of
Klinghoffer, a work depicting the murder by terrorists of a
wheelchair-bound Jewish passenger on a cruise ship in 1985,
writer Eve Epstein in particular points to an aria in which a
terrorist named Rambo blames all the world’s problems on
Jews, and then, following an evocative dash, she makes a quiet
observation:
Rambo’s aria echoes the views of Der Stürmer, Julius
Streicher’s Nazi newspaper, without a hint of irony or
condemnation. The leitmotif of the morally and
physically crippled Jew who should be disposed of has
been heard before—and it did not end well.

589

—Eve Epstein, “The Met’s Staging of Klinghoffer Should
Be Scrapped”
“It did not end well” alludes, of course, to the Holocaust.

RESPOND●
Use online sources (such as American Rhetoric’s Top 100 Speeches
at americanrhetoric.com/top100speechesall.html) to find the
text of an essay or a speech by someone who uses figures of speech
liberally. Pick a paragraph that is rich in figures and read it carefully
and critically. Then rewrite it, eliminating every bit of figurative
language. Then read the original and your revised version aloud to
your class. Can you imagine a rhetorical situation in which your
pared-down version would be more appropriate?

Schemes
Schemes are rhetorical figures that manipulate the actual word
order of phrases, sentences, or paragraphs to achieve specific
effects, adding stylistic power or “zing” to arguments. The
variety of such devices is beyond the scope of this work.
Following are schemes that you’re likely to see most often,
again in alphabetical order.

Anaphora
Anaphora, or effective repetition, can act like a drumbeat in an
argument, bringing the point home. Sometimes an anaphora
can be quite obvious, especially when the repeated expressions

590

occur at the beginning of a series of sentences or clauses. Here
is President Lyndon Johnson urging Congress in 1965 to pass
voting rights legislation:
There is no constitutional issue here. The command of
the Constitution is plain.
There is no moral issue. It is wrong—deadly wrong—to
deny any of your fellow Americans the right to vote in
this country.
There is no issue of States rights or national rights. There
is only the struggle for human rights.
I have not the slightest doubt what will be your answer.
Repetitions can occur within sentences or paragraphs as well.
Here, in an argument about the future of Chicago, Lerone
Bennett Jr. uses repetition to link Chicago to innovation and
creativity:
[Chicago]’s the place where organized Black history was
born, where gospel music was born, where jazz and the
blues were reborn, where the Beatles and the Rolling
Stones went up to the mountaintop to get the new
musical commandments from Chuck Berry and the
rock’n’roll apostles.
—Lerone Bennett Jr. “Blacks in Chicago”

591

Antithesis
Antithesis is the use of parallel words or sentence structures to
highlight contrasts or opposition:
Marriage has many pains, but celibacy has no pleasures.
—Samuel Johnson
Those who kill people are called murderers; those who
kill animals, sportsmen.

Inverted Word Order
Inverted word order is a comparatively rare scheme in which
the parts of a sentence or clause are not in the usual subjectverb-object order. It can help make arguments particularly
memorable:
Into this grey lake plopped the thought, I know this man,
don’t I?
—Doris Lessing
Hard to see, the dark side is.
—Yoda

Parallelism
Parallelism involves the use of grammatically similar phrases
or clauses for special effect. Among the most common of
rhetorical effects, parallelism can be used to underscore the
592

relationships between ideas in phrases, clauses, complete
sentences, or even paragraphs. You probably recognize the
famous parallel clauses that open Charles Dickens’s A Tale of
Two Cities:
It was the best of times,
it was the worst of times . . .
The author’s paralleled clauses and sentences go on and on
through more than a half-dozen pairings, their rhythm
unforgettable. Or consider how this unattributed line from the
2008 presidential campaign season resonates because of its
elaborate and sequential parallel structure:
Rosa sat so that Martin could walk. Martin walked so that
Obama could run. Obama ran so that our children could
fly.

RESPOND●
Identify the figurative language used in the following slogans. Note
that some slogans may use more than one device.
“A day without orange juice is like a day without sunshine.”
(Florida Orange Juice)
“Taste the Feeling” (Coca-Cola)
“Be all that you can be.” (U.S. Army)

593

“Breakfast of champions.” (Wheaties)
“America runs on Dunkin’.” (Dunkin’ Donuts)
“Like a rock.” (Chevrolet trucks)

CULTURAL CONTEXTS FOR ARGUMENT

Levels of Formality and Other Issues of Style
At least one important style question needs to be asked when arguing
across cultures: what level of formality is most appropriate? In the
United States, a fairly informal style is often acceptable and even
appreciated. Many cultures, however, tend to value formality. If in
doubt, err on the side of formality:
Take care to use proper titles as appropriate (Ms., Mr., Dr., etc.).
Don’t use first names unless you’ve been invited to do so.
Steer clear of slang and jargon. When you’re communicating with
members of other cultures, slang may not be understood, or it
may be seen as disrespectful.
Avoid potentially puzzling pop cultural allusions, such as sports
analogies or musical references, if your audience might not
understand them.
When arguing across cultures or languages, another stylistic issue
might be clarity. When communicating with people whose native
languages are different from your own, analogies and similes almost
always aid in understanding. Likening something unknown to
something familiar can help make your argument forceful—and
understandable.

594

CHAPTER 14 Visual Rhetoric

During the summer of 2017, protesters and counterprotesters
and counter-counterprotesters gathered across the United
States in attempts to “unite the right,” to “say no to white
supremacy,” to “make fascists afraid again,” to rally for “blood
and soil,” to claim that “you will not replace us.” Often the
protesters carried symbols or flags, including the three depicted
above: the American flag, the Confederate flag, and the flag of
Nazi Germany (others carried a wide range of flags or banners,
from Black Lives Matter and the Anti-Defamation League’s “No
Place for Hate” to the National Socialist Movement flag, the
Southern Nationalist Flag, and the Identity Evropa flag, all three
associated with white nationalism).
These banners and flags are powerful examples of visual
rhetoric and the arguments such images can make. Even so
small a sampling of visual rhetoric underscores what you
doubtless already know: images grab and hold our attention,
stir our emotions, tease our imaginations, provoke intense
responses, and make arguments. In short, they have clout.
595

RESPOND●
Choose a flag or banner that speaks strongly to you and then study
it carefully and critically. What arguments—implicit and explicit—
does the banner or flag make? What are its appeals and who does it
seem to address? How do you respond to the image or symbol, and
why? Are your responses based primarily on emotion, on logic and
reason, on ethical considerations? Then write a paragraph in which
you analyze your connection to this imagery.

596

The Power of Visual
Arguments
Artist Sonny Assu uses the seemingly lighthearted medium and
familiar iconography of breakfast cereals to make a serious claim
about the victimization of Native Americans.
LINK TO Assu, “Breakfast Series,” in Chapter 23

Even in everyday situations, images—from T-shirts to billboards
to animated films and computer screens—influence us. Media
analyst Kevin Kelly ponders the role screens and their images
now play in our lives:
Everywhere we look, we see screens. The other day I
watched clips from a movie as I pumped gas into my car.
The other night I saw a movie on the backseat of a plane.
We will watch anywhere. Screens playing video pop up in
the most unexpected places—like ATM machines and
supermarket checkout lines and tiny phones; some
movie fans watch entire films in between calls. These
ever-present screens have created an audience for very
short moving pictures, as brief as three minutes, while
cheap digital creation tools have empowered a new
generation of filmmakers, who are rapidly filling up
those screens. We are headed toward screen ubiquity.

597

—Kevin Kelly, “Becoming Screen Literate”
Of course, visual arguments weren’t invented by YouTube, and
their power isn’t novel either. The pharaohs of Egypt lined the
banks of the Nile River with statues of themselves to assert their
authority, and there is no shortage of monumental effigies in
Washington, D.C., today.

Not only the high and mighty: sculpture of a Great Depression–era breadline at
the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial in Washington, D.C.

Still, the ease with which all of us make and share images is
unprecedented: people are uploading three billion shots a day
to Snapchat. And most of us have easily adjusted to
instantaneous multichannel, multimedia connectivity (see
Chapter 16). We expect it to be seamless too. The prophet of this
era was Marshall McLuhan, who nearly fifty years ago
proclaimed that “the medium is the massage,” with the play on
message and massage intentional. As McLuhan says, “We shape
598

our tools and afterwards our tools shape us. All media works us
over completely.”
McLuhan was certainly prescient, as legendary filmmaker
Werner Herzog makes clear in his 2016 documentary, Lo and
Behold: Reveries of the Connected World. Herzog conducted
interviews with a range of people— from computer scientists at
UCLA and Carnegie Mellon to Silicon Valley denizens like Elon
Musk and Sebastian Thrun to ordinary citizens caught up in
use, abuse, and overuse—associated with the Internet. Herzog’s
instantly recognizable voice-over narrates the film’s ten
sections: as a reviewer for the New Yorker puts it, “It should be
impossible to sound simultaneously droning and clipped, but
somehow Herzog manages it, and it’s delicious to watch the
expressions on the faces of neuroscientists as he inquires,
‘Could it be that the Internet starts to dream of itself?’”
The poster below aims to capture the complexity of “the
connected world” as well as to suggest that we may well have
lost our minds in the enormously complex, hugely wired world
that now seems to “work us over” perhaps more than even
McLuhan imagined. Take a close look at the poster and do some
critical thinking about it and its effects. Note the four stars at
the top under the heading, the figure dominating the poster
(which appears to be a male wearing a suit and tie), the use of
color to highlight the scramble in our Internet-filled heads, the
change in font in the title, and the bottom caption “The human
side of the digital revolution.” How do image and text work

599

together to create an argument and how would you express that
argument? Certainly the poster intends to entice viewers to take
in Herzog’s film, but what other arguments can you detect
there? Look back to Chapter 6 for more information on
analyzing texts and images.

“Herzog weaves a fantastical tale. For those looking for a ride through our
modern technological world, or indeed a preview of what is to come, this is it.”

RESPOND●
Find an advertisement, poster, or flyer—either print or digital—that
uses both verbal and visual elements. Analyze its argument first by
pointing out the claims the ad makes (or implies) and then by
identifying the ways it supports them verbally and/or visually. (If it

600

helps, go over the questions about multimodal texts offered in
Analyzing Multimodal Arguments in Chapter 16.) Then switch ads
with a classmate and discuss his/her analysis. Compare your
responses to the two ads. If they’re different—and they probably will
be—how might you account for the differences?

601

Using Visuals in Your Own
Arguments
Given the power of images, it’s only natural that you would use
them in your own composing. In fact, many college instructors
now expect projects for their courses to be posted to the Web,
where digital photos, videos, and design elements are native.
Other instructors invite or even require students to do
multimedia reports or to use videos, photo collages, cartoons,
or other media to make arguments. Using visual media in your
academic writing can have all the reach and versatility of more
conventional verbal appeals to pathos, ethos, and logos. Often
even more.

Using Images and Visual Design
to Create Pathos
Many advertisements, YouTube videos, political posters, rallies,
marches, and even church services use visual images to trigger
emotions. You can’t flip through a magazine, watch a video, or
browse the Web without being cajoled or seduced by figures or
design elements of all kinds—most of them fashioned in some
way to attract your eye and attention.
Technology has also made it incredibly easy for you to create
on-the-spot photographs and videos that you can use for making
arguments of your own. With a GoPro camera strapped to your

602

head, you could document transportation problems in and
around campus and then present your visual evidence in a
paper or an oral report. You don’t have to be a professional
these days to produce poignant, stirring, or even satirical visual
texts.
Yet just because images are powerful doesn’t mean they always
work. When you compose visually, you have to be certain to
generate impressions that support your arguments, not weigh
against them.

Shape Visuals to Convey Appropriate
Feelings
Consider the design choices made by the creators of the
information security posters in Chapter 26. Which ones are most
effective?
LINK TO McKenzie, “Getting Personal about Cybersecurity,” in
Chapter 26

To appeal visually to your readers’ emotions, think first of the
goal of your writing: you want every image or use of multimedia
to advance that purpose. Consider, for a moment, the iconic
Apollo 8 “earthrise” photograph of our planet hanging above
the horizon of the moon. You could adapt this image to
introduce an appeal for additional investment in the space
program. Or it might become part of an argument about the

603

need to preserve frail natural environments, or a stirring appeal
against nationalism: From space, we are one world. Any of
these claims might be supported successfully without the
image, but the photograph—like most visuals—will probably
touch members of your audience more strongly than words
alone could.

Still striking almost fifty years later, this 1968 Apollo 8 photograph of the earth
shining over the moon can support many kinds of arguments.

Consider Emotional Responses to Color
As the “earthrise” photo demonstrates, color can have great
power too: the beautiful blue earth floating in deep black space
carries a message of its own. Indeed, our response to color is
part of our biological and cultural makeup. So it makes sense to

604

consider what shades are especially effective with the kinds of
arguments you’re making, whether they occur in images
themselves or in elements such as headings, fonts,
backgrounds, screens, banners, and so on. And remember that
a black-and-white image can also be a memorable design
choice.
Here’s an image of the box cover for one of the iconic Zelda
games for Nintendo. Note its simplicity and the use of vivid
color: red dominates, signaling strength and adventure; the
gold background and the gold-emblazoned shield and sword
suggest fantasy. This particular game (A Link to the Past) was
released in the United States in 1992.

605

Compare the 1992 box cover art with the most recent Zelda
game, Breath of the Wild (2017). Here the cooler green and blue
colors speak of the natural world and the adventures Link will
encounter there.
When you think about using images like these in your writing,
do some critical analysis of the image before you definitely
decide on it. How does the image, and its use of color, help to
support the argument you are making? Is it a good fit?
If you are creating images of your own, let your selection of
colors be guided by
606

your own good taste,
by designs you admire,
or by the advice of
friends or helpful
professionals. Some
design and
presentation software
will even help you
choose colors by
offering dependable
“default” shades or an
array of pre-existing
designs and
compatible colors (for
example, of
presentation slides).
To be emotionally
effective, the colors you choose for a design should follow
certain commonsense principles. If you’re using background
colors on a political poster, Web site, or slide, the contrast
between words and background should be vivid enough to
make reading easy. For example, white letters on a yellow
background are not usually legible. Similarly, bright
background colors should be avoided for long documents
because reading is easiest with dark letters against a light or
white background. Avoid complex patterns; even though they
might look interesting and be easy to create, they often
interfere with other more important elements of a presentation.
607

When you use visuals—either ones you’ve created or those you
have taken from other sources—in your college projects, test
them on prospective readers. That’s what professionals do
because they appreciate how delicate the choices of visual and
multimedia texts can be. These responses will help you analyze
your own arguments and improve your success with them.

Eve Arnold took this powerful black-and-white photograph in 1958 at a party in
Virginia for students being introduced to mixed-race schools. How might a fullcolor image have changed the impact of the scene?

Using Images to Establish Ethos
If you are on Instagram, Twitter, LinkedIn, or other social
networking sites, you no doubt chose photographs for those
sites with an eye to creating a sense of who you are, what you
value, and how you wish to be perceived. You fashioned a selfimage. So it shouldn’t come as a surprise that you can boost
608

your credibility as a writer by using visual design strategically:
we know one person whose Facebook presentation of images
and media so impressed a prospective employer that she got a
job on the spot. So whether you are using photographs, videos,
or other media on your personal pages or in your college work,
it pays to attend to how they construct your ethos.

Understand How Images Enhance Credibility
and Authority
You might have noticed that just about every company,
organization, institution, government agency, or club now
sports a logo or an emblem. Whether it’s the Red Cross, the
Canadian Olympic Committee, or perhaps the school you
attend, such groups use carefully crafted images to signal their
authority and trustworthiness. An emblem or a logo can also
carry a wealth of cultural and historical implications. That’s
why university Web sites typically include the seal of the
institution somewhere on the homepage (and always on its
letterhead) or why the president of the United States travels
with a presidential seal to hang on the speaker’s podium.
What do the following posters, which circulated during the 2016
presidential election, suggest about each candidate’s ethos?
Based on these images, how would you describe each candidate
as a politician?

609

Posters from the 2016 election

Though you probably don’t have a personal logo or trademark,
your personal ethos functions the same way when you make an
argument. You can establish it by offering visual evidence of
your knowledge or competence. In an essay on safety issues in
competitive biking, you might include a photo of yourself in a
key race, embed a video showing how often serious accidents
occur, or include an audio file of an interview with an injured
biker. The photo proves that you have personal experience with
biking, while the video and audio files show that you have done
research and know your subject well, thus helping to affirm
your credibility.
Predictably, your choice of medium also says something
important about you. Making an appeal on a Web site sends
signals about your technical skills, contemporary orientation,
610

and personality. So if you direct people to a Facebook or Flickr
page, be sure that any materials there present you favorably. Be
just as careful in a classroom that any handouts or slides you
use for an oral report demonstrate your competence. And
remember that you don’t always have to be high-tech to be
effective: when reporting on a children’s story that you’re
writing, the most sensible medium of presentation might be
cardboard and paper made into an oversized book and
illustrated by hand.

Take a look at these three government logos, each of which intends to convey
credibility, authority, and maybe more. Do they accomplish their goals? Why or
why not?

You demonstrate your ethos simply by showing an awareness of
the basic design conventions for any kind of writing you’re
doing. It’s no accident that lab reports for science courses are
sober and unembellished. Visually, they reinforce the
professional ethos of scientific work. The same is true of a
college research paper. So whether you’re composing an essay,
a résumé, a film, an animated comic, or a Web site, look for
successful models and follow their design cues.

611

Consider How Details of Design Reflect Your
Ethos
As we have just suggested, almost every design element you use
in a paper or project sends signals about character and ethos.
You might resent the tediousness of placing page numbers in
the appropriate corner, aligning long quotations just so, and
putting footnotes in the right place, but these details prove that
you are paying attention. Gestures as simple as writing on
official stationery (if, for example, you are representing a club
or campus organization) or dressing up for an oral presentation
matter too: suddenly you seem more mature and competent.
Even the type fonts that you select for a document can mark you
as warm and inviting or as efficient and contemporary. The
warm and inviting fonts often belong to a family called serif.
The serifs are those little flourishes at the ends of the strokes
that make the fonts seem handcrafted and artful:

Cleaner, modern fonts go without those little flourishes and are
called sans serif. These fonts are cooler, simpler, and, some
argue, more readable on a computer screen (depending on
screen resolution):

612

Other typographic elements send messages as well. The size of
type can make a difference. If your text or headings are in
boldface and too large, you’ll seem to be shouting:

LOSE WEIGHT! PAY NOTHING!*
Tiny type, on the other hand, might make you seem evasive:
*Excludes the costs of enrollment and required meal purchases.
Minimum contract: 12 months.

Finally, don’t ignore the signals you send through your choice
of illustrations and photographs themselves. Images
communicate your preferences, sensitivities, and inclusiveness
—sometimes inadvertently. Conference planners, for example,
are careful to create brochures that represent all participants,
and they make sure that the brochure photos don’t show only
women, only men, or only members of one racial or ethnic
group.

613

In March 2017, journalist Tim Murphy asked, “Who’s missing from this photo of
politicians deciding the future of women’s health?” Notice anyone other than
white men here?

RESPOND●
Choose a project or an essay you have written recently and read it
critically for how well visually it establishes your credibility and how
well it is designed. Ask a classmate or friend to look at it and
describe the ethos you convey through the item. Then go back to
the drawing board with a memo to yourself about how you might
use images or media to improve it.

Using Visual Images to Support
Logos
To celebrate the Fourth of July in 2017, ancestry.com, the online
company that helps people identify their ancestors through
DNA, aired a commercial called “Declaration Descendants.” A
still from one of the frames appears below.

614

In the commercial, people from a wide range of ethnicities
recite parts of the American Declaration of Independence. At
the conclusion, viewers learn that each of those readers is a
descendent of someone who signed the Declaration. As the CEO
of ancestry.com Vineet Mehra said about the advertisement,
“We’re all much more similar than you think. And we’re using
facts and data to prove it. This is not fluffy marketing. These are
facts.” Thus an online ancestry service uses images, facts, and
data to support its major claim.
As this example shows, we get information from visual images
of all kinds, including commercials we see on television and
online every day. Today, much information comes to us in
graphic presentations that use images along with words. Such
images work well to gather information efficiently and
persuasively. In fact, readers now expect evidence to be
presented graphically, and we are learning to read such graphic
representations more and more critically.

Organize Information Visually
Graphic presentation calls for design that enables readers and
viewers to look at an item and understand what it does. A
brilliant, much-copied example of such an intuitive design is a
seat adjuster invented many years ago by Mercedes-Benz (see
image). It’s shaped like a tiny seat. Push any element of the
control, and the real seat moves in that direction—back and
forth, up and down. No instructions are necessary.

615

Mercedes-Benz’s seat adjuster

Good visual design can work the same way in an argument by
conveying evidence, data, and other information without
elaborate instructions. Titles, headings, subheadings, enlarged
quotations, running heads, and boxes are some common visual
signals:
Use headings to guide your readers through your print or
electronic document. For long and complex pieces, use
subheadings as well, and make sure they are parallel.
Use type font, size, and color to show related information
among headings.
Arrange headings or text on a page to enforce relationships
among comparable items, ideas, or bits of evidence.
Use a list or a box to set off material for emphasis or to
616

show that it differs from the rest of the presentation. You
can also use shading, color, and typography for emphasis.
Place your images and illustrations strategically. What you
position front and center will appear more important than
items in less conspicuous places. Images of comparable
size will be treated as equally important.
Remember, too, that design principles evolve and change from
medium to medium. A printed text or presentation slide, for
example, ordinarily works best when its elements are easy to
read, simply organized, and surrounded by restful white space.
But some electronic texts thrive on visual clutter, packing a grab
bag of data into a limited space (see the “Infographic of
Infographics” below). Look closely, though, and you’ll probably
find the logic in these designs.

617

An infographic

Use Visuals to Convey Data Efficiently
Words are capable of great precision and subtlety, but some
information is conveyed far more effectively by charts, graphs,
drawings, maps, or photos—as several items in Chapter 4
illustrate. When making an argument, especially to a large
group, consider what information might be more persuasive
and memorable in nonverbal form.
A pie chart is an effective way of comparing parts to the whole.
You might use a pie chart to illustrate the ethnic composition of
your school, the percentage of taxes paid by people at different
income levels, or the consumption of energy by different
nations. Pie charts depict such information memorably.
A graph is an efficient device for comparing items over time or
according to other variables. You could use a graph to trace the
rise and fall of test scores over several decades, to show college
enrollment by sex, race, and Hispanic origin, or to track bicycle
usage in the United States, as in the bar graph below.
Diagrams or drawings are useful for attracting attention to
details. Use drawings to illustrate complex physical processes or
designs of all sorts. After the 2001 attack on the World Trade
Center, for example, engineers prepared drawings and
diagrams to help citizens understand precisely what led to the
total collapse of the buildings.
618

A bar graph

You can use maps to illustrate location and spatial relationships
—something as simple as the distribution of office space in your
student union or as complex as poverty in the United States, as
in the map shown below. In fact, scholars in many fields now
use geographic information system (GIS) technology to merge
maps with databases in all fields to offer new kinds of
arguments about everything from traffic patterns and health
care trends to character movements in literary works. Plotting
data this way yields information far different from what might
be offered in words alone. You can find more about GIS
applications online.
619

A map

Timelines allow you to represent the passage of time
graphically, and online tools like Sutori or Our Story or Office
Timeline can help you create them for insertion into your
documents. Similarly, Web pages can make for valuable
illustrations. Programs like ShrinkTheWeb’s Snapito let you
create snapshots of Web sites that can then be inserted easily
into your writing. And when you want to combine a variety of
graphs, charts, and other texts into a single visual argument,
you might create an infographic using free software such as
Canva Infographic Maker, Google Charts, Easel.ly, Venngage,
or Pictochart.
620

Follow Professional Guidelines for
Presenting Visuals
Charts, graphs, tables, illustrations, timelines, snapshots of
Web sites, and video clips play such an important role in many
fields that professional groups have come up with guidelines for
labeling and formatting these items. You need to become
familiar with those conventions as you advance in a field. A
guide such as the Publication Manual of the American
Psychological Association, Sixth Edition, or the MLA Handbook,
Eighth Edition, describes these rules in detail. See also Chapter
15, “Presenting Arguments.”

Remember to Check for Copyrighted Material
You also must be careful to respect copyright rules when using
visual items that were created by someone else. If you do
introduce any borrowed items into academic work, be careful to
document them fully. It’s relatively easy these days to download
visual texts of all kinds from the Web. Some of these items—
such as clip art or government documents—may be in the
public domain, meaning that you’re free to use them without
requesting permission or paying a royalty. But other visual texts
may require permission, especially if you intend to publish your
work or use the item commercially. Remember: anything you
place on a Web site is considered “published.” (See Chapter 21
for more on intellectual property and fair use.)

621

CHAPTER 15 Presenting Arguments

For some arguments you make in college, the format you’ve
used since middle school is still a sensible choice—a traditional
paper with double spacing, correct margins, MLA- or APA-style
notes, and so on. Printed texts like these offer a methodical way
to explain abstract ideas or to set down complicated chains of
reasoning. Even spruced up with images or presented online (to
enable color, media, and Web links), such conventional
arguments—whether presented as essays, newsletters, or
brochures—are cheap to create and easy to reproduce and
share. You will find examples of printed texts throughout this
book and especially in Part 4 on “Research and Arguments.”
But print isn’t your only medium for advancing arguments.
Increasingly, you’ll need to make a case orally, drawing on the
visual or multimedia strategies discussed in previous chapters.
Like Clint Smith, author of How to Raise a Black Son in
America, delivering a TED talk, you might need illustrations or
slides to back up a lecture; or, like Ambassador Nikki Haley,
speaking on North Korea at the United Nations, you may find
622

yourself engaged in serious discussions; or, maybe like college
sophomore Michael Bereket, you might receive an award for
original research presented orally. Knowing how to speak
eloquently to a point is a basic rhetorical skill.

623

Class and Public
Discussions
In “Balancing Classroom Civility and Free Speech,” historian
Catherine Nolan-Ferrell describes the heated political discussions
that her students engage in, both in and out of the classroom.
LINK TO Nolan-Ferrell, “Balancing Classroom Civility and Free
Speech,” in Chapter 27

No doubt you find yourself arguing all the time at school, maybe
over a piece of code with a classmate in a computer science
course, or perhaps with a teaching assistant whose
interpretation of economic trends you’re sure is flat wrong. Or
maybe you spoke up at a campus meeting against the
administration’s latest policy on “free speech zones”—or wish
you had. The fact is, lots of people are shy about joining class
discussions or public debates, even those that interest them:
indeed, the National Institute of Mental Health finds that
Americans dread public speaking more than almost anything
else!

624

Even if you are a little shy about jumping into a discussion or
being part of a spirited debate, you can improve your
participation in such situations by observing both effective and
ineffective speakers. Watch how the participants who enliven a
discussion stay on topic, add new information or ideas, and pay
attention to all members of the group. Notice, too, that less
successful speakers often can’t stop talking, somehow make all
discussions about themselves, or just play the smart aleck when
they don’t know much about a topic. We know you can do better
than that!
You can start just by joining in on conversations whenever you
can. If speaking is a problem, take it slow at first—a comment or
two, something as simple as “That’s a really good idea!” or “I
wonder how accurate this data is?” The more that you hear your
own voice in discussions, the more comfortable you’ll be
offering your opinions in detail. Here are some more tips:

National Public Radio reporter Jorge Encinas sheds light on how
Spanish-speaking baseball players are often depicted negatively
in the press because of their lack of native English skills.
LINK TO Encinas, “How Latino Players Are Helping Major League
Baseball Learn Spanish,” in Chapter 25

Do the required reading in a class so that you know what
you’re talking about. That alone will give you a leg up in
most groups.
Listen carefully, purposefully, and respectfully, and jot
625

down important points.
Speak briefly to the point under discussion so that your
comments are relevant. Don’t do all the talking.
Ask questions about issues that bother you: others probably
have the same thoughts.
Occasionally, summarize points that have already been
made to make sure that everyone is “on the same page.”
Keep the summary brief.
Respond to questions or comments by others in specific
rather than vague terms.
Try to learn the names of people in a discussion, and then
use them.
When you’re already a player in a discussion, invite others
to join in.

CULTURAL CONTEXTS FOR ARGUMENT

Speaking Up in Class
Speaking up in class is viewed as inappropriate or even rude in some
cultures. In North America, however, doing so is expected and
encouraged. Some instructors even assign credit for such class
participation.

Reconsidering Confrontation
Be aware that while North Americans often like to get straight to the
point, even if it means being confrontational, a number of cultures find
such tactics aggressive, rude, and ineffective. East Asians, for example,
generally prefer working behind the scenes to reach accord, if possible.
Rather than employing direct confrontation with such an audience,

626

experts on cross-cultural communication suggest drawing attention to
issues or concerns through the use of stories, analogies, or metaphors.

627

Preparing a Presentation
You’ve probably already been asked to deliver a presentation in
one or more of your college classes. That’s partly because the
ability to explain material clearly to an audience is a skill much
admired by potential employers and partly because so much
information today is shared orally, online or off. Unfortunately,
instructors sometimes give little practical advice about how to
hone that talent, which is not a natural gift for most of us. While
it’s hard to generalize here, capable presenters attribute their
success to the following strategies and perceptions:
They make sure they know their subjects thoroughly.
They pay attention to the values, ideas, and needs of their
listeners.
They use language, patterns, gestures, eye contact, and
style to make their spoken arguments easy to follow.
They realize that oral arguments are interactive. (Live
audiences can argue back!)
They appreciate that most oral presentations involve
visuals, and they plan accordingly. (We’ll address
multimedia presentations in the next chapter.)
They practice, practice—and then practice some more.
We suggest a few additional moves for when you are specifically
required to make a formal argument or presentation in class (or
on the job): assess the rhetorical situation you face, nail down
the details of the presentation, fashion a script or plan, choose
media to fit your subject, and then deliver a good show.
628

Assess the Rhetorical Situation
Whether asked to make a formal oral report in class, to speak to
the general public, or to join a panel discussion, ask yourself the
same questions about rhetorical choices that you face whenever
you make an argument.

Understanding Purpose
Figure out the major purpose of the assignment or situation. Is
it to inform and enlighten your audience? To convince or
persuade them? To explore a concept or principle? To stimulate
discussion? To encourage a decision? Something else? Very
important in school, will you be speaking to share your
expertise or to prove that you have it (as you might in a class
report)?

Assessing the Audience
Rob Greenfield pays careful attention to the different audiences of
his blog post, “An Argument against Veganism … from a Vegan,”
addressing the needs and values of both vegans and meat eaters.
LINK TO Greenfield, “An Argument against Veganism . . . from a
Vegan,” in Chapter 24

Determine who will be listening to your talk. Just an instructor
and classmates? Interested observers at a public meeting?
People who know more about the subject than you do—or less?
Or will you be a peer of the audience members—typically, a
629

classmate? What mix of age groups, of gender, of political and
religious affiliation, of rank, etc., will be in the group? What
expectations will listeners bring to the talk, and what opinions
are they likely to hold? Will this audience be invited to ask
questions after the event?

Deciding on Content
What exactly is the topic for the presentation? What is its
general scope? Are you expected to make a narrow and specific
argument drawn from a research assignment? Are you expected
to argue facts, definitions, causes and effects? Will you be
offering an evaluation or perhaps a proposal? What degree of
detail is necessary, and how much evidence should you provide
for your claims?

Choosing Structure and Style
Nancy Duarte, who consults with and coaches speakers, did an
extensive study of great presentations—hundreds and hundreds
of them. After analyzing their structures, she found that most of
the very successful presenters used a basic two-part structure,
beginning with describing the current problem or situation (the
status quo), and then moving to what the solution(s) might be,
going back and forth between the status quo and what could
and should be the case. She also found that successful speakers
embedded this structure in a story or stories and that they
concluded with a call to action. You might keep these findings
in mind, especially if your instructor does not specify a
particular structure or type of presentation. Or perhaps your
630

instructor will tell you that your talk should include an
introduction, background information, thesis, evidence,
refutation, discussion, conclusion. If so, look for other
presentations you have heard or public events you have
attended to look for models. What tone will your audience
expect? Serious? Friendly and colloquial? Perhaps even funny?
And finally, what are the standards by which your presentation
will be evaluated?

Here are students who are attending a House of Representatives session of the
Mississippi State legislature and who look pretty darned bored: what might
some of the speakers do to re-engage them?

Following are three excerpts from a detailed, three-page outline
that sophomore George Chidiac worked up to prepare for a
fifteen-minute oral presentation on Thomas More’s “Petition for
Free Speech” (1523)—an important document on the path to
establishing free speech as a natural right. Chidiac’s outline of
631

rhetorical issues and concerns prepped him well enough to
deliver the entire presentation without notes. His thesis is
highlighted, but also notice the question Chidiac asks at the very
end: So what? He recognizes an obligation to explain why his
report should matter to his audience.
Oral Presentation Outline
Requirements: 15 minutes; share what I’ve
learned in my research; help colleagues
appreciate the research I’ve done
Introduction: Introduce myself and my agenda;
define free speech: the right to express any
opinions without censorship or restraint
Set the stage: From history of free speech,
we are going to micro-focus: Renaissance >
16th-century England > April 18, 1523, in
the House of Commons
Present a dilemma: The king called all his
advisers and those able to enact legislation
to raise funds to go to war. You are the
intermediary between the main legislative
body and the king. You have three
obligations: one to truth, one to the king,
and one to the body you’re representing. The
king wants money, the legislative body
632

cannot object, and you want truth and the
best outcome to win out. How do you
reconcile this?
What:
What’s my message? What’s the focal point of my
presentation?
To provide a snapshot in time of the
evolution of free speech:
Thomas More, in his Petition for Free
Speech, incrementally advanced free speech
as a duty and a right.
Who:
Who made this happen? Who was involved?
Thomas More: (before he became Speaker →
Chancellor of England, friend of King Henry
VIII, theologian, poet, father)
Henry VIII
William Roper (minor role—son-in-law and
chief biographer)
Why:

633

Why was More’s Petition “successful”? Why did
Henry VIII accept the petition?
Henry VIII’s character as a humanist; spirit
of amicitia—friendship with counsel
Parliamentary expectations; relationship
between king and Parliament; by accepting
the petition, Henry acknowledged that while
not all parliamentary speech should be
permitted, not all speech critical of
monarchy is slanderous
SO WHAT?
What do I want my colleagues to take away from
this?
Freedom of speech we have today wasn’t
always enjoyed.

Nail Down the Specific Details
Big-picture rhetorical considerations are obviously important in
an oral presentation, but so are the details. Pay attention to
exactly how much time you have to prepare for an event, a
lecture, or a panel session, and how long the actual
presentation should be: never infringe on the time of other
speakers. Determine what visual aids, slides, or handouts might
make the presentation successful. Will you need a laptop and
634

“clicker” to move between slides, an overhead projector, a flip
chart, a whiteboard? Decide whether presentation software,
such as PowerPoint, Keynote, or Prezi, will help you make a
stronger presentation. Then figure out where to acquire the
equipment as well as the expertise to use it. If you run into
problems, especially with classroom presentations, ask your
instructor and fellow students for help. If possible, check out
where your presentation will take place. In a classroom with
fixed chairs? A lecture or assembly hall? An informal sitting
area? Will you have a lectern? Other equipment? Will you sit or
stand (research shows that standing makes for a stronger
performance)? Remain in one place or move around? What will
the lighting be, and can you adjust it? Take nothing for granted,
and if you plan to use media equipment, be ready with a backup
strategy if a projector bulb dies or a Web site won’t load.
Not infrequently, oral presentations are group efforts. When
that’s the case, plan and practice accordingly. The work should
be divvied up according to the strengths of the participants: you
will need to figure out who speaks when, who handles the
equipment, who takes the questions, and so on.

Fashion a Script Designed to Be
Heard by an Audience
Unless you are presenting a formal lecture (pretty rare in
college), most oral presentations are delivered from notes. But
even if you do deliver a live presentation from a printed text, be

635

sure to compose a script that is designed to be heard rather than
read. Such a text—whether in the form of note cards, an
overhead list, or a fully written-out paper—should feature a
strong introduction and conclusion, an unambiguous structure
with helpful transitions and signposts, concrete diction, and
straightforward syntax.

Strong Introductions and Conclusions
Like readers, listeners remember beginnings and endings best.
Work hard, therefore, to make these elements of your spoken
argument memorable and personable. Consider including a
provocative or puzzling statement, opinion, or question; a
memorable anecdote; a powerful quotation; or a strong visual
image. If you can connect your report directly to the interests or
experiences of your listeners in the introduction or conclusion,
then do so.
Meet Juliana Chang, who provides a strong opening to her
research-based presentation. She opens her talk with a slide
announcing the title and occasion, then plunges into her topic
with a vivid second slide showing a photo of her mother holding
her:

636

The title slide of Juliana’s presentation

Baby Juliana and her mother

This is a photo of my mother and me at our very first
home in America. My family immigrated to the U.S. when
I was six months old. My mother was 36. Even though she
spoke no English when she first arrived, she dedicated
the next two decades of her life to raising my brother and
me as Americans. Although Mandarin was my first
637

language growing up, by the time I got to high school, I
had forgotten almost everything. My mother and I could
still communicate, but it was on a basic level. I could tell
her what I wanted for dinner but not what I wanted to do
with my life. She could tell me how messy my room was
but not how devastated she felt after the 2016 election. I
had lost my language and in turn lost an invaluable part
of our relationship.
My name is Juliana Chang and today I’d like to talk with
you about Heritage Language Loss in Second Generation
East Asian Americans.
Speaking to a group of instructors and peers, Juliana begins
with a vivid photo and a personal anecdote that aims to pull the
audience into her talk and keep their attention. Note that she
uses straightforward vocabulary, simple syntax, and concrete
examples to lead up to her title and suggest her (at this point
implied) thesis: East Asian Americans should do everything
they can to hold onto their heritage language while also
becoming totally fluent in English.
Like Juliana, be sure that your introduction clearly explains
what your presentation will cover, what your focus will be, and
perhaps even how the presentation will be arranged. Give
listeners a mental map of where you are taking them. If you are
using presentation software, a bare-bones outline sometimes
makes sense, especially when the argument is a straightforward

638

academic presentation: thesis + evidence.
The conclusion should drive home and reinforce your main
point. You can summarize the key arguments you have made
(again, a simple slide could do some of the work), but you don’t
want to end with just a rehash, especially when the presentation
is short. Instead, conclude by underscoring the implications of
your report: what do you want your audience to be thinking and
feeling at the end?
In her conclusion,
Juliana Chang says
she wants to “close
the way I opened,
with a story,” and
shows another
photo of her as an
infant, this time
with her beloved
grandmother in
Juliana ends her presentation with a treasured photo.

Taiwan.

She then recites a poem written for the occasion, called “This is
What Language Loss Looks Like,” part of which says
How could I have known what I was giving up? She holds
my hand and asks me a question I can no longer
understand. When I shake my head and offer her a blank
smile, she falters. Here is the part when I wish I knew
639

how to say I’m sorry. Remember the street with the Taro
and thick, thick rain? Remember how we got lost?
Remember how I talked all the way home?
The body of Juliana’s presentation was full of evidence drawn
from her extensive research—lots of logical proof in the form of
facts and figures—all of which contributes to and supports her
thesis. But for her opening and closing, she leans in on pathos
and emotional appeals, painting a picture of her young self with
her mother and grandmother—and what losing her first
language has meant. The contrast she paints with the words of
her conclusion, of her recently standing mute by her
grandmother’s side but of her “talking all the way home” as a
child tells us “what language loss looks like.”

Juliana’s presentation ends with her cited sources.

Clear Structures and Signposts
For a spoken argument, you want your organizational structure
to be crystal clear. So make sure that you have a sharply

640

delineated beginning, middle, and end and share the structure
with listeners. You can do that by remembering to pause
between major points of your presentation and to offer
signposts marking your movement from one topic to the next.
They can be transitions as obvious as next, on the contrary, or
finally. Such words act as memory points in your spoken
argument and thus should be explicit and concrete: The second
crisis point in the breakup of the Soviet Union occurred hard on
the heels of the first, rather than just The breakup of the Soviet
Union led to another crisis. You can also keep listeners on track
by repeating key words and concepts and by using
unambiguous topic sentences to introduce each new idea.
These transitions can also be highlighted as you come to them
on a whiteboard or on presentation slides.

Straightforward Syntax and Concrete
Diction
Avoid long, complicated sentences in an oral presentation and
use straightforward syntax (subject-verb-object, for instance,
rather than an inversion of that order). Remember, too, that
listeners can grasp concrete verbs and nouns more easily than
they can mentally process a steady stream of abstractions.
When you need to deal with abstract ideas, illustrate them with
concrete examples.
Take a look at the following text that student Ben McCorkle
wrote about The Simpsons, first as he prepared it for an essay
and then as he adapted it for a live oral and multimedia
641

presentation:

Print Version
The Simpson family has occasionally been described as a
nuclear family, which obviously has a double meaning:
first, the family consists of two parents and three
children, and, second, Homer works at a nuclear power
plant with very relaxed safety codes. The overused label
“dysfunctional,” when applied to the Simpsons, suddenly
takes on new meaning. Every episode seems to include a
scene in which son Bart is being choked by his father, the
baby is being neglected, or Homer is sitting in a drunken
stupor transfixed by the television screen. The comedy in
these scenes comes from the exaggeration of
commonplace household events (although some talk
shows and news programs would have us believe that
these exaggerations are not confined to the madcap
world of cartoons).
—Ben McCorkle, “The Simpsons: A Mirror of Society”

Oral Version (with a visual illustration)
What does it mean to describe the Simpsons as a nuclear
family? Clearly, a double meaning is at work. First, the
Simpsons fit the dictionary meaning—a family unit
consisting of two parents and some children. The second
meaning, however, packs more of a punch. You see,
642

Homer works at a nuclear power plant [pause here] with
very relaxed safety codes!
Still another overused family label describes the
Simpsons. Did everyone guess I was going to say
dysfunctional? And like nuclear, when it comes to the
Simpsons, dysfunctional takes on a whole new meaning.
Remember the scene when Bart is being choked by his
father?
How about the many times the baby is being neglected?
Or the classic view—Homer sitting in a stupor transfixed
by the TV screen!
My point here is that the comedy in these scenes often
comes from double meanings—and from a lot of
exaggeration of everyday household events.

643

Homer Simpson in a typical pose

Note that the second version presents the same information as
the first, but this time it’s written to be heard. The revision uses
simpler syntax, so the argument is easy to listen to, and
employs signposts, repetition, a list, and italicized words to
prompt the speaker to give special emphasis where needed.
RESPOND●

Take three or four paragraphs from an essay that you’ve recently
written. Then, following the guidelines in this chapter, rewrite the
passage to be heard by a live audience. Finally, make a list of every
change that you made.

The Power of Silence
644

Emma Gonzalez’s moment of silence at March of Our Lives made a powerful
statement.

As you work on your delivery, consider the role that pauses, or
silences, may play in helping to get your point across. In her
oral presentation on language loss, Juliana Chang paused
dramatically during her conclusion, marking off the closing
questions with a pause before each one. These silent moments
held her audience’s attention and created anticipation for what
was coming next. During the March for Our Lives in the spring
of 2018, following the killing of seventeen Florida high school
students and staff members, high school senior Emma Gonzalez
stood before the huge rally in Washington, D.C., called out the
names of the seventeen who died, and then stood, in silence, for
the length of time it had taken the shooter to take those lives.
Broadcast on national television, it was a riveting, moving, and
silent call to action.

645

Repetition, Parallelism, and Climactic Order
Whether they’re used alone or in combination, repetition,
parallelism, and climactic order are especially appropriate for
spoken arguments that sound a call to arms or that seek to
rouse the emotions of an audience. Perhaps no person in the
twentieth century used them more effectively than Martin
Luther King Jr., whose sermons and speeches helped to
spearhead the civil rights movement. Standing on the steps of
the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C., on August 23, 1963,
with hundreds of thousands of marchers before him, King
called on the nation to make good on the “promissory note”
represented by the Emancipation Proclamation.

Look at the way that King uses repetition, parallelism, and

646

climactic order in the following paragraph to invoke a nation to
action:
It is obvious today that America has defaulted on this
promissory note insofar as her citizens of color are
concerned. Instead of honoring this sacred obligation,
America has given the Negro people a bad check which
has come back marked “insufficient funds.” But we
refuse to believe that the bank of justice is bankrupt. We
refuse to believe that there are insufficient funds in the
great vaults of opportunity of this nation. So we have
come to cash this check—a check that will give us upon
demand the riches of freedom and the security of justice.
We have also come to this hallowed spot to remind
America of the fierce urgency of now. There is no time to
engage in the luxury of cooling off or to take the
tranquillizing drug of gradualism. Now is the time to rise
from the dark and desolate valley of segregation to the
sunlit path of racial justice. Now is the time to open the
doors of opportunity to all of God’s children. Now is the
time to lift our nation from the quicksands of racial
injustice to the solid rock of brotherhood.
—Martin Luther King Jr., “I Have a Dream” (emphasis
added)
The italicized words highlight the way that King uses repetition
to drum home his theme and a series of powerful verb phrases
(to rise, to open, to lift) to build to a strong climax. These
647

stylistic choices, together with the vivid image of the “bad
check,” help to make King’s speech powerful, persuasive—and
memorable.
You don’t have to be as highly skilled and as eloquent as King to
take advantage of the power of repetition and parallelism.
Simply repeating a key word in your argument can impress it on
your audience (as Juliana Chang does at the end of her
presentation when she repeats “remember”), as can arranging
parts of sentences or items in a list in parallel order.

Choose Media to Fit Your Subject
Visual materials—charts, graphs, posters, and presentation
slides—are major tools for conveying your message and
supporting your claims. People are so accustomed to visual (and
aural) texts that they genuinely expect to see them in most oral
presentations. And, in many cases, a picture, video, or graph
can truly be worth a thousand words. (For more about visual
argument, see Chapter 14.)

Successful Use of Visuals
Be certain that any visuals that you use are large enough to be
seen by all members of your audience. If you use slides or
overhead projections, the information on each frame should be
simple, clear, and easy to process. For slides, use 24-point type
for major headings, 18 point for subheadings, and at least 14
point for other text. Remember, too, to limit the number of
words per slide. The same rules of clarity and simplicity hold
648

true for posters, flip charts, and whiteboards. (Note that if your
presentation is based on source materials—either text or images
—remember to include a slide that lists all those sources at the
end of the presentation.)

Use appropriate software to furnish an overview for a
presentation or lecture and to give visual information and
signposts to listeners. Audiences will be grateful to see the
people you are discussing, the key data points you are
649

addressing, the movement of your argument as it develops. But
if you’ve watched many oral presentations, you’re sure to have
seen some bad ones. Perhaps nothing is deadlier than a speaker
who stands up and just reads from each screen—and we’ve all
heard those jokes about “death by PowerPoint.” Do this and
you’ll just put people to sleep. Also remember not to turn your
back on your audience when you refer to these visuals. And if
you prepare supplementary materials (such as bibliographies or
other handouts), don’t distribute them until the audience
actually needs them, or wait until the end of the presentation so
that they don’t distract listeners from your spoken arguments.
(For advice on creating multimodal arguments, see Chapter 16.)
The best way to test the effectiveness of any images, slides, or
other visuals is to try them out on friends, family members,
classmates, or roommates. If they don’t get the meaning of the
visuals right away, revise and try again.

Accommodations for Everyone
Remember that visuals and accompanying media tools can help
make your presentation accessible but that some members of
your audience may not be able to see your presentation or may
have trouble seeing or hearing them. Here are a few key rules to
remember:
Use words to describe projected images. Something as
simple as “That’s Eleanor Roosevelt in 1944” can help
audience members who have impaired vision appreciate
what’s on a screen.
650

Use large print on slides so that people in the last row will
be able to read it.
Try to determine whether anyone in your audience will
need some accommodation, such as an interpreter who can
sign for people who are hearing impaired or who can
describe visuals to anyone who can’t see them.
If you use video, take the time to label sounds that might
not be audible to audience members who are hearing
impaired. (Be sure your equipment is caption capable and
use the captions; they can be helpful to everyone when
audio quality is poor.)
For a lecture, consider providing a written handout that
summarizes your argument or putting the text on an
overhead projector—for those who learn better by reading
and listening.

Deliver a Good Show
When asked to identify the most important part of rhetoric, the
ancient Greek orator Demosthenes replied that there are three
most important parts: “Delivery, delivery, and delivery.” This
insight is as appropriate today as it was in the fourth century
BCE—perhaps even more so. Experienced speakers have
strategies for making sure they deliver a good show, starting
with very careful preparation and lots of practice. (They also
note that a little nervousness can be a good thing by keeping
you on your toes.)
The most effective strategy, however, seems to be simply
knowing your topic and material thoroughly. The more
651

confident you are in your own knowledge, the more easily and
naturally you will speak. And eloquence can be developed, and
practice can make perfect. In addition to being well prepared,
you may want to try some of the following strategies:
Practice a number of times, running through every part of
the presentation. Leave nothing out, even audio or video
clips. Work with the equipment you intend to use so that
you are familiar with it. It also may help to visualize your
presentation, imagining the scene in your mind as you go
through your materials.
Time your presentation to make sure you stay within your
allotted slot.
Tape yourself (video, if possible) at least once so that you
can listen to your voice. Tone of voice and body language
can dispose audiences for—or against—speakers. For most
oral arguments, you want to develop a tone that conveys
commitment to your position as well as respect for your
audience.
Think about how you’ll dress for your presentation,
remembering that audience members notice how a speaker
looks. Dressing for a presentation depends on what’s
appropriate for your topic, audience, and setting, but
experienced speakers choose clothes that are comfortable,
allow easy movement, and aren’t overly casual or overly
dressy: moderation is the key here. Looking your best
indicates that you take pride in your appearance, have
confidence in your argument, and respect your audience.
Get some rest before the presentation, and avoid
consuming too much caffeine.
652

Relax! Consider doing some deep-breathing exercises. Then
pause just before you begin, concentrating on your opening
lines.
Maintain eye contact with members of your audience.
Speak to them, not to your text or to the floor.
Interact with the audience whenever possible; doing so will
often help you relax and even have some fun.
Most speakers make a stronger impression standing than
sitting, so stand if you have that option. Moving around a
bit may help you maintain good eye contact.
Remember to allow time for audience responses and
questions. Keep your answers brief so that others may join
the conversation.
Finally, at the very end of your presentation, thank the
audience for its attention to your arguments.

A Note about Webcasts: Live
Presentations over the Web
This discussion of live oral presentations has assumed that
you’ll be speaking before an audience in the same room with
you. Increasingly, though—especially in business, industry, and
science—the presentations you make will be live, but you won’t
occupy the same physical space as the audience. Instead, you
might be in front of a camera that will capture your voice and
image and relay them via the Web to attendees who might be
anywhere in the world. In another type of Webcast, participants
can see only your slides or the software that you’re
demonstrating, using a screen-capture relay without cameras:
653

you’re not visible but still speaking live.
In either case, most of the strategies that work well for oral
presentations with an in-house audience will continue to serve
in Webcast environments. But there are some significant
differences:
Practice is even more important in Webcasts, since you
need to be able to access online any slides, documents,
video clips, names, dates, and sources that you provide
during the Webcast.
Because you can’t make eye contact with audience
members, it’s important to remember to look into the
camera (if you are using one), at least from time to time. If
you’re using a stationary Webcam, perhaps one mounted
on your computer, practice standing or sitting without
moving out of the frame and yet without looking stiff.
Even though your audience may not be visible to you,
assume that if you’re on camera, the Web-based audience
can see you. If you slouch, they’ll notice. Assume too that
your microphone is always live. Don’t mutter under your
breath, for example, when someone else is speaking or
asking a question.
RESPOND●
Attend a presentation on your campus, and observe the speaker’s
delivery. Note the strategies that the speaker uses to capture and
hold your attention (or not). What signpost language and other
guides to listening can you detect? How well are visuals integrated

654

into the presentation? What aspects of the speaker’s tone, dress,
eye contact, and movement affect your understanding and your
appreciation (or lack of it)? What’s most memorable about the
presentation, and why? Finally, write up an analysis of this
presentation’s effectiveness.

655

CHAPTER 16 Multimodal Arguments

The very first paragraph in this edition of Everything’s an
Argument features a tweet by actor and activist Alyssa Milano
focusing on sexual harassment and assault. And throughout this
book we draw on examples from a wide range of media and
genres, including online news sources, blog posts and
comments, cartoons, ads, maps, memes, posters, comics, video
games, infographics, bumper stickers, even a selfie—of the
pope, no less. In one way or another, all of these items illustrate
principles of persuasion. And while this book is also about more
conventional forms of argument—essays, extended articles, and
academic papers—the fact is that many arguments are now
shaped, distributed, and connected in ways that no one
imagined a generation ago. In fact, we know that many collegeage students today prefer visual communication and are on
their smartphones a great deal of the time: 82 percent of these
writers use Facebook (Twitter, at about 32 percent, seems to be
waning); Snapchat users view over 7 million videos every single
day; and savvy college-age entrepreneurs are vlogging, starting
their own YouTube channels—and making money in the
656

process.
These social networks, and many others, have virtually
redefined the nature of influence and persuasion. The cascade
of information, the 24-hour news cycle, the incessant
connectivity of screens—all are now the new normal. More to
the point for the purposes of this book: all this online and
onscreen activity is deeply rhetorical in both its aims and its
methods. We want to spend a chapter exploring new media,
teasing out some connections between traditional modes of
persuasion and those currently reshaping our social and
political lives.

657

Old Media Transformed
by New Media
Civic arguments and opinions used to be delivered orally,
typically in speeches, debates, and dialogues and often at public
forums. Later, especially after the development of printing,
they arrived via paper, and then through other media such as
film and over-the-air broadcasting. Some of these traditional
channels of communication were actual physical objects
distributed one by one: books, journals, newspapers, fliers,
photographs. Other “old media” such as movies, TV news, or
radio shows were more like performances that could not be
distributed or shared readily, at least not until audio- and
videotape became cheap. Yet these media were all-powerful,
handy, and relatively inexpensive shapers of opinion: books
and serious magazines appealed to readers accustomed to
intellectual challenges; well-staffed newspapers provided
professional (if sometimes sensational) coverage of local and
world affairs; nightly, the three national TV networks reached
large and relatively undistracted audiences, establishing some
degree of cultural consensus.
At least that’s the romantic side of old media. We all recognize
today the remarkable limitations of paper books and journals or
celluloid film and print photographs. But we didn’t appreciate
quite how clumsy, hard to locate, hard to distribute, hard to
search, and hard to archive analog objects could be until they

658

went digital.
Fortunately, to one degree or another, electronic media have
made peace with all these genres and formats and “remediated”
them, to use a term coined by media scholars Jay Bolter and
Richard Grusin—though almost always with some
compromises. Books on e-readers have become like ancient
scrolls again, handy for sequential reading, but not so great for
moving back and forth or browsing. Magazine articles or
newspaper editorials (when not blocked by paywalls) can be
found instantly online (or in databases), complete with updates
and corrections, links that help establish their context, and,
usually, lots and lots of comments. The downside? Lots and lots
of inane, offensive, and bitter comments. And of course films
and music are now accessible everywhere. You can experience
Lawrence of Arabia—with its awesome horizons and desert
landscapes—on your iPhone while in line at McDonald’s.

659

When NBA star Kevin Durant decided to move from the Oklahoma Thunder to
the Golden State Warriors in 2016, he published a brief personal essay titled “My
Next Chapter” online and in print in the Players’ Tribune, hoping to reach the
widest possible audience as he explained his decision.

The bigger point is that the serious, attentive, and carefully
researched arguments that represent the best of old media are
still in no danger of disappearing. Books, research articles, and
serious pieces of journalism are still being ground out—and
read attentively—in the new media world because they play an
essential role there. They provide the logos (see Chapter 4) for
innumerable Web sites, the full-bodied arguments, research
studies, and no-nonsense science propping up all those links in
tighter, punchier new media features. They give clout and
credibility to the quick blog post, the Facebook status, even the
trending Twitter hashtag.

READING IN PRINT VS. ONLINE
Studies on reading continue to confirm that when the stakes are high—
when you really need to comprehend something difficult—reading in
print is still the way to go. As researchers note, reading print text tends
to help us slow down and take in what we are reading, and it’s a snap
to make notes, highlight, and use other techniques to reinforce our
memories. Online readers are still very easily distracted (“oh, look at
that irresistible link!”). Yet these same studies all acknowledge that
readers are changing and adapting: perhaps in another decade we will
be able to exercise more self-discipline and read as efficiently and
effectively online as in print. But for now, if the information is very
important to you, or if your grade depends on your thorough

660

understanding of an argument, you may be wise to stick to print.

661

New Content in New
Media
As you well know, new media represent a vast array of
interconnected, electronic platforms where ideas and
arguments (and a great deal else) can be introduced and shared.
In these environments, the content is almost anything that can
be delivered digitally—words, pictures, movement, and sounds.
Perhaps the first Web capability that writers and thinkers
appreciated was the distribution of traditional printed texts via
online databases; it made possible huge advances in speed,
accuracy, and efficiency. (Consider, for a moment, the
professional databases in every field and discipline that are
available through your school library.)
Online content quickly evolved once it became apparent that
just about anyone could create a Web site—and they did. Soon
valuable sites emerged, covering every imaginable topic, many
of them focusing on serious social and political concerns.
Today, such sites range from those that collect short items and
links to promote a topic or point of view (Instapundit, The Daily
Kos) to slick, full-featured magazines with original content and
extensive commentary (Salon, Jezebel). Social, political, and
cultural sites such as Slate, Drudge, and Politico have become
powerful shapers of opinion by showcasing a wide variety of
writers and arguments. Right from the beginning, blogs
demonstrated that interactive online sites could create virtual

662

communities and audiences, enabling people (sometimes
acting as citizen journalists) to find allies for their causes and
concerns.
Enter social media and the wildly diverse worlds they now
represent. Consider the vast difference among platforms and
environments such as Facebook, YouTube, Reddit, Tumblr,
Instagram Stories, WhatsApp, Yelp, and Twitter. Reviews on
Yelp are by nature evaluative arguments, and many Facebook
postings have a persuasive bent, though they may not go much
beyond observations, claims, or complaints supported by links
or images. Indeed, the frameworks of these self-selected
environments encourage posting and, to varying degrees,
opinion making and sharing. And what gets posted in social
media? Everything allowed—especially stuff already available in
digital form on other online sites: cool pictures, funny people
and pets, outrageous videos, trendy performers, and, yes, lots of
links to serious talk about politics, culture, and social issues.

663

“Like” is easy; contributing is hard. (See Chapter 1 on the difference between
convincing and persuading.)

Re-tweeting and forwarding is easy, but ensuring the accuracy
of what you are sending on is hard. You know that there are
trolls out there harassing, bullying, and pouring out
misinformation: it’s one of the responsibilities of a critical user
of media not only to acknowledge this fact but to actively work
to delegitimize such harmful and dishonest actions and to
support the truth.

664

New Audiences in New
Media
Amanda Hess analyzes how the digital age has ushered in a loss of
privacy—for all but the very wealthy.
LINK TO Hess, “How Privacy Became a Commodity for the Rich
and Powerful,” in Chapter 26

When it comes to making arguments, perhaps the most
innovative aspect of new media is its ability to summon
audiences. Since ancient times (see p. 26), rhetoricians have
emphasized the need to frame arguments to influence people,
but new media and social networks now create places for
specific audiences to emerge and make the arguments
themselves, assembling them in bits and pieces, one comment
or supporting link at a time. Audiences gather around sites that
represent their perspectives on politics or mirror their social
conditions and interests.

665

Here’s what Twitter’s audience looked like when the government of Turkey tried
to ban the service in 2014.

It seems natural. Democrats engage with different Web sites
than do Republicans or Libertarians; champions (and foes) of
immigration or gun rights have their favored places too. Within
social networks themselves, supporters of causes can join
existing activist communities or create new alliances among
people with compatible views. And then all those individuals
contribute to the never-ending newsfeeds: links, favorite books
and authors, preferred images or slogans, illustrative videos,
and so on. They stir the pot and generate still more energy,
concern, and emotion. All this talking and arguing can be
generative and exciting—or begin to sound like an echo
chamber. And today, this echo chamber effect seems
particularly pronounced, as lots of people don’t even want to
666

talk with someone who disagrees with their points of view and
instead band together in online niches—sometimes in secret
groups not visible to the public—where participants simply
reinforce each other’s biases. Doing so is not good for rhetorical
argumentation, which depends on listening carefully to others,
really hearing them, and then presenting alternate ideas in
clear, logical, and respectful ways. Rhetorical argumentation
and persuasion aren’t about shouting and screaming and
pushing, but about listening and reasoning and searching for
common ground that can help move ideas forward.

The ubiquitous hashtag is liable to turn up anywhere.

Still, social media platforms like Twitter allow writers and
speakers to reach enormous audiences. Celebrities and political
667

figures alike, for a wide variety of reasons, attract “followers”
cued into their 140- (or 280-) character musings (as of March
2018 President Trump’s main Twitter handle listed 48.8 million
followers; Pope Francis: 40 million; Taylor Swift: 85 million). In
some respects, “following” is simply a popularity contest or a
bandwagon (see Bandwagon Appeals in Chapter 5) that pulls
people in by the millions. And, as a 2018 New York Times
investigation found, some of those “followers” are actually fake
accounts, known as bots. But the number of followers can also
be a measure of ethos, the trust and connection people have in
the person offering a point of view (see Chapter 3). Sometimes
that ethos is largely just about media fame, narcissism, and selfaggrandizement, one reason some pundits refer to President
Trump as the “Tweeter-in-Chief,” but in other cases it may
measure genuine influence that public figures have earned by
virtue of their serious ideas or opinions. Logos would seem to
have little chance of emerging in a platform like Twitter: can
you do much more than make a bare claim or two in the few
words and symbols allowed? That’s where hashtags (signaled by
the prefix #) come in, allowing people to identify a topic and
place around which an audience may gather. You’re probably
using hashtags to gather information and to post your own
messages. The swift rise of the #metoo hashtag (see Chapter 1,
Understanding Arguments and Reading Them Critically) shows
how Hollywood actors, directors, and writers used their ethos to
attract an even larger audience to the issue of sexual
harassment. At the end of 2016, Twitter announced the most
often used hashtags of that year: #Rio2016; #Election 2016;
668

#Pokemongo; #Oscars; #Brexit; #BlackLivesMatter. In all these
cases, the audience for these topics showed its power in the
sheer number of people weighing in on the topic, expressing
their sentiments succinctly, but also accumulating a sense of
direction, solidarity, and gravity—or engaging in attacks and
counterattacks. It’s also why political journalists or print
publications now routinely identify trending hashtags in their
reporting or even direct audiences to Twitter to track breaking
stories or social movements as they unfold there.

Do social media platforms help inform—or merely distract—us?

669

670

Analyzing Multimodal
Arguments
As the previous section suggests, a multimodal argument can be
complex. But you can figure it out by giving careful attention to
its key components: the creators and distributors; the medium
it uses; the viewers and readers it hopes to reach; its content
and purpose; its design. Following are some questions to ask
when you want to understand the rhetorical strategies in
arguments and interactions you encounter in social media or on
blogs, vlogs, Web sites, podcasts, or other nontraditional media.
It’s worth noting that the questions here don’t differ entirely
from those you might ask about books, journal articles, news
stories, or print ads when composing a rhetorical analysis (see
Chapter 6).

Questions about Creators and Distributors
Who is responsible for this multimodal text? Experts? Bots?
Trolls? Did someone else distribute, repurpose, or retweet
the item?
What can you find out about these people and any other
work they might have done?
What does the creator’s attitude seem to be toward the
content: serious, ironic, emotionally charged, satiric,
comic? What is the attitude of the distributor, if different
from the creator?
What do the creator and the distributor expect the effects of
671

the text or posting to be? Do they share the same
intentions? (Consider, for example, that someone might
post an item in order to mock or criticize it.)

Questions about the Medium
Which media are used by this text? Images only? Words and
images? Sound, video, animation, graphs, charts? Does the
site or environment where the text appears suggest a
metaphor: photo album, pin-up board, message board, chat
room?
In what ways is this text or its online environment
interactive? Who can contribute to or comment on it?
Where can an item be sent or redirected? How did it get to
where you encountered it?
How do various texts work together on the site? Do they
make arguments? Accumulate evidence? Provide readers
with examples and illustrations?
What effect does the medium have on messages or items
within it? How would a message, text, or item be altered if
different media were used?
Do claims or arguments play an explicit role in the
medium? How are they presented, clarified, reinforced,
connected, constrained, or commented upon?

Questions about Audience and Viewers
What are the likely audiences for the text or medium? How
are people invited into the text or site? Who might avoid the
experience?

672

How does the audience participate in the site or platform?
Does the audience respond to content, create it, or
something else? What audience interactions or connections
occur there? Can participants interact with each other?
How does the text or media site evoke or reward
participation? Are audience members texted or emailed
about events or interactions in the site?

Questions about Content and Purpose
What purpose does the multimodal text achieve? What is it
designed to convey?
What social, cultural, or political values does the text or site
support? Cultural interaction? Power? Resistance?
Freedom?
Does the text, alone or in reaction to others, reinforce these
values or question them? Does the text constitute an
argument in itself or contribute to another claim in some
way—as an illustration, example, exception, metaphor,
analogy?
What emotions does the multimodal site or text evoke? Are
these the emotions that it intends to raise? How does it do
it?

Questions about Design
Jess Kapadia’s Web article on cultural appropriation of food was
first published on Medium.com, an online publishing platform.
Had she chosen to create a video or podcast about this topic, how

673

might the content of her essay differed?
LINK TO Kapadia, “I Still Don’t Understand the Cultural
Appropriation of Food,” in Chapter 24

How does the site present itself? What draws you to it? How
easy is the environment to learn, use, or subscribe to?
How is the multimodal text or environment structured?
Does the structure enhance its purpose or functionality? If
it presents data, is the information easy to understand? (See
also Chapter 14, “Visual Rhetoric.”)
How are arguments, concepts, or ideas presented or
framed within the multimodal text or environment? How
are ideas identified? How are these ideas amplified or
connected to other supporting texts and ideas?
What details are emphasized in the text or media
environment? What details are omitted or de-emphasized?
To what effect? Is anything downplayed, ambiguous,
confusing, distracting, or obviously omitted? Why?
What, if anything, is surprising about the design of the text
or environment? What do you think is the purpose of that
surprise?
How are you directed to move within the text or site? Are
you encouraged to read further? Click on links? Contribute
links and information?

RESPOND●
Using the discussion of multimodal arguments in this chapter and
the questions about multimodal texts and platforms above, find a
multimodal text that makes an intriguing argument or a social

674

media platform where you sometimes encounter debates about
political and social issues. Then read carefully and critically in order
to write a brief rhetorical analysis of the text or the site, focusing
more on the way the messages are conveyed than on the messages
that are in play. (See Chapter 6 for more on rhetorical analysis.)

This is the central image on the homepage of Wikipedia, a collaborative
nonprofit encyclopedia project. Since its launch (as Nupedia) in 2000, Wikipedia
has grown to include 42 million articles in 295 languages (5.5 million articles in
English), all of them authored by volunteers around the world. This central
image acts as a logo, a portal to access the site’s content, and, in a way, a
mission statement for the organization. How does your eye construct this logo?
What do you notice first, and how do your eyes move around the page? Do the
parts make sense when you put them together?

675

Making Multimodal
Arguments
Though it may feel like you have been active in new media
platforms forever—browsing Web sites, checking Facebook,
sending text messages, following “Texas Humor” on Twitter—
you may not have thought of these activities as rhetorical. But
they certainly can be, especially those that might have
classroom or extracurricular connections. Here we discuss just
a few such situations. In other chapters in this section, we talk
in more detail about visual rhetoric (often a component in new
media) and oral presentations, which now almost always have a
digital component.

Web Sites
It’s likely you have already created Web sites for a class or for
an organization to which you belong. In planning any Web site,
pay careful attention to your rhetorical situation (see Chapter 1)
—the purpose of your site, its intended audience, and the
overall impression that you want to make. To get started, you
may want to study several sites that you admire, looking for
effective design ideas or ways of organizing navigation and
information. Creating a map or storyboard for your site will
help you to think through the links from page to page.
Experienced Web designers such as Robin Williams cite several
important principles for Web-based presentations. The first of
676

these is contrast, which is achieved through the use of color,
icons, boldface, and so on; contrast helps guide readers through
the site (see also Chapter 14). The second principle, proximity,
calls on you to keep together the parts of a page that are closely
related, again for ease of reading. Repetition means using a
consistent design throughout the site for the elements (such as
headings and links) that help readers move smoothly through
the environment. Finally, designers concentrate on an overall
impression or mood for the site, which means that the colors
and visuals on the pages should help to create that impression
rather than challenge or undermine it.
The homepage for Vermont’s Middlebury College Web site
appears below. Designed by White Whale Web Services, it
features a line of colorful vertical bars: when you hover the
mouse over a bar, you can see where it will take you—to “faculty
stories,” for example, or “service learning in Japan,” or
“homecoming highlights”—an intuitive and efficient navigation
system. The page also highlights a photo you can click on to see
various stories about current events and programs at the
college. And below the bars and photo are key links: to
admissions, academics, student life, and so forth. Finally, note
the simple, uncluttered, clean design, which is easy on the eyes
and welcoming.

677

An interactive and appealing design encourages users to explore a Web site.

The articles by Lauren Salm and Deanna Hartley on employers’ use
of social media are featured on the job searching site
Careerbuilder, making it easy for them to reach their intended
audience.
LINK TO Salm, “70% of Employers Are Snooping Candidates’
Social Media Profiles,” and Hartley, “Creative Ways to Get Noticed
by Employers on Social Media,” in Chapter 26

Here are some additional tips that may help you design your
site:
The homepage should be informative, eye-catching, and
inviting (see Chapter 14)—especially when making an
argument. Use titles and illustrations to make clear what
the site is about.
Think carefully about two parts of every page—the
navigation menus or links and the content areas. You want
to make these two areas distinct from one another. And

678

make sure you have a navigation area for every page,
including links to the key sections of the site and to the
homepage. Easy navigation is one key to a successful Web
site.
Either choose a design template that is provided by Webbuilding tools (such as SquareSpace or Wix) or create a
template of your own that ensures that the elements of each
page are consistent.
Consider how to balance claims and evidence on a page.
Claims might be connected to supporting links, or they can
be enhanced by images or videos that dramatize a position
you want to champion.
Remember to include Web contact information on every
page, but not your personal address or phone number.

Videos and Video Essays
Given the ease with which competent digital films can be
produced, a video may be the best medium for delivering your
message. Videos are ubiquitous, for example, on college and
university sites, showcasing distinguished students and faculty
or explaining programs. It is an effective way to enhance the
ethos of a group or institution. Videos can also document public
events or show how to do practical things such as registering to
vote or navigating an unfamiliar campus. So whenever a video
fits well with the purpose of the message, consider creating
one.
You can, of course, shoot a video with your smartphone. But
more sophisticated software might be needed to edit your film
679

and get it ready for prime time: iMovie, Final Cut Pro, Movie
Maker, Blender (for animation), or Animoto, Camtasia, and
Soundslides (for combining media such as digital video, photos,
music, and text).

A video essay analyzing a Beatles’ album cover

The Nerdwriter, aka Evan Puschak, is very well known for his
remarkable video essays, including one tracing the evolution of
music album covers. Entitled How the Beatles Changed Album
Covers, it includes several images from what Puschak calls “the
holy grail of album covers”—Sergeant Pepper’s Lonely Hearts
Club Band—and discusses its power. After surveying the
evolution of Beatles album covers, the essay focuses on how this
particular cover invites viewers to ask questions, to try to figure
out who all these people are, and to highlight the mixing of high
680

culture (Marx, Dylan Thomas) with low (Marilyn Monroe,
Johnny Weissmueller [Tarzan]), something the Beatles
perfected in their own art. For the full video essay, see
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_st4diqjpis.
If you decide on a video or video essay for your argument, these
tips may be of help:
Present most of the evidence in support of your argument
visually, using voiceover to link the images together.
Choose color palettes carefully to match the tone you want
to create.
Make a scratch outline or storyboard to map out your video
essay.
Draft a script for words that are spoken or used as
voiceover.
Experiment with camera angles and camera movement—
and get feedback from your classmates or friends.
List credits at the end, just as you would add a bibliography
to a written text or a list of sources to a final slide in an oral
presentation.

Wikis
To make working on group projects easier, many classes use
wikis—Web-based sites that enable writers to collaborate in the
creation of a single project or database. The most famous group
effort of this kind is, of course, Wikipedia, but software such as
DokuWiki, MediaWiki, or Tiki helps people to manage similar,
if less ambitious, efforts of their own, whether it be exploring
681

questions raised in academic courses or examining and
supporting needs within a community. Wiki projects can be
argumentative in themselves, or they might furnish raw data
and evidence for subsequent projects.
If asked to participate in a wiki, make sure you know how to use
the assigned software and follow course or project guidelines
for entering and documenting the material you contribute. Just
as you will expect your colleagues to use reliable sources or
make accurate observations, they will depend on you to do your
part in shaping the project. Within the wiki, participants will be
able to draw upon each other’s strengths and, ideally, to
compensate for any weaknesses. So take your responsibilities
seriously:
Make sure that your contributions are based on reliable and
credible sources: no fake news here, please!
Listen to (or read) what others contribute very carefully,
making sure you understand them and that you are being
fair and respectful at all times, especially when editing
what others have contributed.
Think about how your contributions can move the project
forward: suggest links, references, and sources you think
will be helpful and credible.
Remember to explain any technical terms that might be
unfamiliar or confusing to a broad audience.

Blogs
Perhaps no Web texts have been more instrumental in
682

advancing political, social, and cultural issues than blogs, which
are now too numerous to count. Blogs open an ideal space for
building interactive communities, engaging in arguments, and
giving voice to views and opinions of ordinary citizens. Today,
just about all major news media, including the most prestigious
newspapers and journals, feature the functionality of blogs or
sponsor blogs themselves as part of their electronic versions.
Like everything else, blogs have downsides: they are
idiosyncratic, can be self-indulgent and egoistic, and can distort
issues by spreading misinformation very quickly. If you’re a fan
of blogs, be sure to keep your critical reading hat on at all times,
remembering that information on blogs hasn’t been critically
reviewed in the way that traditional print sources edit their
stories. But also remember that blogs have reported many
instances of the mainstream news sources failing to live up to
their own standards.
Activist blogs of all kinds get plenty of attention, and you can
easily join in on the conversation there, sharing your arguments
in the comments section. If you do blog yourself, or comment
on others’ postings, remember to follow commonsense good
manners: be respectful and think carefully about what you are
saying and about the impression you want to leave with those
who read you. The following tips may be of help as you get
started:
Aim for an eye-catching title for your blog post, one that
includes key words that will help readers find you. And
683

keep the title brief. In an article on Hubspot, writer Corey
Wainwright gives an example of a blog post in its original
and revised state:
Before: Think Social Media Is Just for Kids? Here Are
10 Statistics Guaranteed to Prove You Wrong
After: 10 Stats That Prove Social Media Isn’t Just for
Kids
Choose easy-to-use blogging software, such as Blogger,
Tumblr, and WordPress.
Keep your posts fairly brief and to the point since most
readers come to blogs looking for information, not longwinded musings. Keep the point you want to make (your
argument!) in the front of your mind as you write.
Consider using headings and subheadings or other
elements to help orient and guide your readers.
Embed audio and video clips and visual images that will
help make your point clear and compelling for all kinds of
learners.

Social Media
You are no doubt already a practiced user of social media and
understand the strengths and weaknesses, the pros and cons, of
platforms like Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Snapchat, Tumblr,
and more. Many arguments mounted on social media today
come in the form of memes, a term coined by evolutionary
biologist Richard Dawkins. Once thought of as a source of jokes

684

and cute cats (Nyan cat was around forever!), memes can offer
serious commentary via an image and short text. With a Twitter
account and a hashtag, they seem to circle the globe in an
instant. According to journalists Angela Watercutter and Emma
Grey Ellis, memes today are used to declare and argue for
political positions, cultural identities, and so on:
The success of memes like the alt-right’s Pepe the Frog . .
. points to political memes’ probable future function:
spreading propaganda. . . . That space between truth and
truthiness is where both memes and propaganda live. (If
you’re thinking that you’d never share propaganda,
remember this: thanks to Russia, you probably already
have.)
—“The Wired Guide to Memes,” April 1, 2018
Creating and responding to memes, not to mention the
networks that distribute them, takes up a lot of metaphorical
and literal space and time. As a result, many people benefit
from “unplugging” every once in a while to make sure they are
still in touch with real people in the real world. But everyone
needs to be especially aware of how these networks influence
our views on everything from what to eat to where (or if) to
worship to who to vote for. That’s because the Internet is
pulsing with arguments being presented to us twenty-four
hours a day, yet many of these arguments have nothing more
than an uninformed opinion to back them up. So take a break
from the social media scene and think carefully and critically
685

about how the arguments we encounter online are supported—
or not. Think about how these arguments draw us in and shape
our thinking, even our beliefs. And make sure you are a critical
as well as an ethical user of social media and that the causes you
follow or champion are worthy of you.
And remember that in with the trash and the junk on social
media, you can find serious and credible information,
information you may well use in your academic work. Social
media can lead you, for instance, to experts across a range of
fields, who can help you gather reliable information on almost
any topic or in any field. So social media provide powerful tools
for expanding your knowledge base and your experience, if you
approach information on such networks very carefully.

Posters
Perhaps you’ve been asked to make a poster presentation in one
of your classes, or maybe you have created a poster for an
organization you belong to. Poster sessions are increasingly
popular at conferences, and a number of universities award
prizes for the best and most informative poster presentations.
Above, you can see an award-winning poster made for a public
policy class. It was created by Anna Shickele and demonstrates
how much useful information can be conveyed in this format.
Note the simple, uncluttered arrangement of this poster, from
the title that runs in a banner across the top; to the three text
columns that provide background information, state the
686

research question, and describe methods; to the maps and
photographs, including the photo of the author at the research
site.

A well-designed poster presentation can pack an awful lot of information into a
limited space.

If you are making a poster, remember this example that is easy
to look at and to take in at a glance. In addition:
Do some brainstorming about how best to grab and hold
your audience’s attention: A central photo? A jaw-dropping
question in bold font? Try these ideas out on classmates or
friends.
Make sure you understand the requirements for the poster:

687

Is it to be of a certain size? Using certain materials? How
will it be displayed?
Lay out your poster either in a word processing document
or with pencil and paper. Allot the most space to the most
important information and do not crowd text or images.
Choose colors that will be easy to see: dark colors with text
in them won’t be readable, for example, so choose white or
light colors as background for text and primary colors for
images.
Finally, if you will be speaking to people who are looking at
your poster, write out and practice a brief introduction to
the project, telling viewers what your assignment was and
what argument you are making in the poster. And be
prepared to answer questions! (See Chapter 15 for more on
giving presentations.)

Comics
Judging by the immense popularity of Comic Cons (in 2017,
scores of them were scheduled from Seattle, Portland, San
Francisco, and Los Angeles to all points east—Minneapolis, Salt
Lake City, Santa Fe, Austin, Dallas, Nashville, Durham, Atlanta,
Baltimore, and New York—and lots of spots in between), comics
are experiencing a renaissance. Besides appearing in print,
comics have found new life on television, on the big screen,
even on the Broadway stage. Comics artist and speaker Lynda
Barry believes that there is an artist lurking in every single one
of us, as her standing-room-only workshops attest. On college
campuses, comics are also finding a place in the curriculum: at

688

Stanford University, for instance, the Graphic Novel Project is a
twenty-week course in which undergraduate students do
research in order to propose real-life stories that might be told
in graphic form. The goal of the course is to “teach nonfiction
research, visual storytelling, and long-form narrative structure .
. . through the collaborative production of a graphic novel.”
Students direct every part of the project, from choosing the
topic to conducting all of the research, and carrying out the
storyboarding and drawing, the lettering and inking, and the
full preparation of the text for the printer. In 2017, the student
group published their seventh collaborative graphic novel,
Luisa, about early twentieth-century Puerto Rican feminist and
labor organizer Luisa Capetillo, known for her toughness, her
perseverance—and her wearing of suits and ties.

Here’s the cover of the comic and its first page. Note the simple,
689

clean design and bright colors of the cover, which draws our
eyes to the central figure of Luisa (in one of her signature white
suits) standing in front of Spanish-style buildings, with
mountains in the background. The lower right box announces
the authorship of the book. The panels on the first page are
likewise simple: two page-wide rectangles stacked one above
the other, with a smaller rectangle and a square at the bottom of
the page. The words in a small banner at the top left (where a
reader would first look) set the scene: Havana, Cuba, 1914. We
see Luisa walking toward a building in the top panel, passing by
a horse and vegetable/fruit cart in the second, and then
approaching two officers of some kind in the third and fourth
panels. These four panels plunge us into the story and invite us
to read further. These artists and writers could have written a
research essay about Luisa Capetillo, but their decision to
render her story in graphic form makes for a much more
memorable presentation.
Luisa is a major research project, one that took a whole group
twenty weeks to put together. But you don’t have to take a full
course to use comics in your academic writing. Henry Tsai did
just that in a history research project he conducted about a
group of Vietnamese Americans who were triply displaced—
first from their homeland after the Vietnam War, then from
their arrival cities in the U.S. to New Orleans, and then from
there to Houston during the Hurricane Katrina disaster. Based
on extensive interviews with a dozen people, Tsai used their
stories to illustrate his history project, drawing panels that
690

brought them and their experiences to life. You can do the same
kind of thing in your own academic writing.
If you do, a few tips may come in handy in getting started.
Choose the topic of your comic or panels carefully, making
sure it lends itself to visual depiction. The more actionfilled and concrete the better.
Decide what layout you will use: square panels,
rectangular, triangular? Simpler will be better, especially
for an early attempt. Pay attention to where the space
between panels (the gutters) will be: they guide readers and
give them a visual pause as they move from panel to panel.
Remember that English speakers will expect to read these
panels left to right, top to bottom.
Check out free software for creating comics (such as
EasyComic for PCs or ComicLife for Macs).
Remember that comics panels could help you illustrate a
research essay, such as one focusing on the events of
Hurricane Harvey: in this case a picture you draw might be
worth more than a thousand words.
Don’t forget to check out comics that you find particularly
compelling: put your critical reading and viewing skills to
work in analyzing what makes the panels in these comics so
effective. See if you can learn how to emulate them.
Create a series of actions you want to include—a verbal
script for your panel(s).
Rough out a storyboard, turning words into pictures—stick
figures at this point will be fine.
Put in the speech bubbles and work to make them succinct
691

and to the point.
For a final product, you’ll have to carry out many additional
steps, including the final drawing, lettering, and inking. But
the steps in this list can help you get started.

A Final Note on Time
The projects illustrated in this chapter—from blog posts and
Web sites to presentation posters and comics—are all timeconsuming endeavors. Keep this in mind when you take on a
multimodal project and manage your time and effort and
resources accordingly.

RESPOND●
Go to a blog or a video essay that you admire and read/view it
carefully and critically, taking note of what makes it especially
effective and what appeals it uses to engage you. Then answer the
following questions:
Why is the blog—a digital presentation—or the video essay the
best way to present this material?
What advantages over a print text or a live oral and multimodal
presentation does the blog or video essay have?
How could you “translate” the argument(s) of this blog or video
essay into print format, oral format, or social media platform?
What might be gained or lost in the process?

692

PART 4 RESEARCH AND
arguments

693

CHAPTER 17 Academic Arguments

Much of the writing you will do in college (and some of what
you will no doubt do later in your professional work) is
generally referred to as academic discourse or academic
argument. Although this kind of writing has many distinctive
features, in general it shares these characteristics:
It is based on research and uses evidence that can be
documented.
It is written for a professional, academic, or school
audience likely to know something about its topic.
It makes a clear and compelling point in a fairly formal,
clear, and sometimes technical style.
It follows agreed-upon conventions of format, usage, and
punctuation.
It is documented, using some professional citation style.
Academic writing is serious work, the kind you are expected to
do whenever you are assigned an essay, research paper, or
capstone project. You will find two examples of such work at

694

the end of this chapter.

695

Understanding What
Academic Argument Is
Academic argument covers a wide range of writing, but its
hallmarks are an appeal to reason and a reliance on research.
As a consequence, such arguments cannot be composed
quickly, casually, or off the top of one’s head. They require
careful reading, accurate reporting, and a conscientious
commitment to truth. But academic pieces do not tune out all
appeals to ethos or emotion: today, we know that these
arguments often convey power and authority through their
impressive lists of sources and their immediacy. But an
academic argument crumbles if its facts are skewed or its
content proves to be unreliable.
Look, for example, how systematically Susannah Fox and Lee
Rainie, director and codirector of the Pew Internet Project,
present facts and evidence in arguing (in 2014) that the Internet
has been, overall, a big plus for society and individuals alike.
[Today,] 87% of American adults now use the Internet,
with near-saturation usage among those living in
households earning $75,000 or more (99%), young adults
ages 18–29 (97%), and those with college degrees (97%).
Fully 68% of adults connect to the Internet with mobile
devices like smartphones or tablet computers.
The adoption of related technologies has also been
696

extraordinary: Over the course of Pew Research Center
polling, adult ownership of cell phones has risen from
53% in our first survey in 2000 to 90% now. Ownership of
smartphones has grown from 35% when we first asked in
2011 to 58% now.
Impact: Asked for their overall judgment about the
impact of the Internet, toting up all the pluses and
minuses of connected life, the public’s verdict is
overwhelmingly positive: 90% of Internet users say the
Internet has been a good thing for them personally and
only 6% say it has been a bad thing, while 3% volunteer
that it has been some of both. 76% of Internet users say
the Internet has been a good thing for society, while 15%
say it has been a bad thing and 8% say it has been equally
good and bad.
—Susannah Fox and Lee Rainie, “The Web at 25 in the
U.S.”
Note, too, that these writers draw their material from research
and polls conducted by the Pew Research Center, a well-known
and respected organization. Chances are you immediately
recognize that this paragraph is an example of a research-based
academic argument.
You can also identify academic argument by the way it
addresses its audiences. Some academic writing is clearly aimed
at specialists in a field who are familiar with both the subject
697

and the terminology that surrounds it. As a result, the
researchers make few concessions to general readers unlikely
to encounter or appreciate their work. You see that singlemindedness in this abstract of an article about migraine
headaches in a scientific journal: it quickly becomes unreadable
to nonspecialists.
Abstract
Migraine is a complex, disabling disorder of the brain
that manifests itself as attacks of often severe, throbbing
head pain with sensory sensitivity to light, sound and
head movement. There is a clear familial tendency to
migraine, which has been well defined in a rare
autosomal dominant form of familial hemiplegic
migraine (FHM). FHM mutations so far identified include
those in CACNA1A (P/Q voltage-gated Ca(2+) channel),
ATP1A2 (N(+)-K(+)-ATPase) and SCN1A (Na(+) channel)
genes. Physiological studies in humans and studies of the
experimental correlate—cortical spreading depression
(CSD)—provide understanding of aura, and have explored
in recent years the effect of migraine preventives in CSD.
...
—Peter J. Goadsby, “Recent Advances in Understanding
Migraine Mechanisms, Molecules, and Therapeutics,”
Trends in Molecular Medicine (January 2007)

698

“Playing with Prejudice: The Prevalence and Consequences of
Racial Prejudice in Video Games” meets the criteria described here
for academic argument. It begins with an abstract that
summarizes the research performed and its findings.
LINK TO Burgess et al., “Playing with Prejudice,” in Chapter 23

Yet this very article might later provide data for a more
accessible argument in a magazine such as Scientific American,
which addresses a broader (though no less serious) readership.
Here’s a selection from an article on migraine headaches from
that more widely read journal (see also the infographic below):
At the moment, only a few drugs can prevent migraine.
All of them were developed for other diseases, including
hypertension, depression and epilepsy. Because they are
not specific to migraine, it will come as no surprise that
they work in only 50 percent of patients—and, in them,
only 50 percent of the time—and induce a range of side
effects, some potentially serious.
Recent research on the mechanism of these
antihypertensive, antiepileptic and antidepressant drugs
has demonstrated that one of their effects is to inhibit
cortical spreading depression. The drugs’ ability to
prevent migraine with and without aura therefore
supports the school of thought that cortical spreading
depression contributes to both kinds of attacks. Using
this observation as a starting point, investigators have

699

come up with novel drugs that specifically inhibit cortical
spreading depression. Those drugs are now being tested
in migraine sufferers with and without aura. They work
by preventing gap junctions, a form of ion channel, from
opening, thereby halting the flow of calcium between
brain cells.
—David W. Dodick and J. Jay Gargus, “Why Migraines
Strike,” Scientific American (August 2008)
Such writing still requires attention, but it delivers important
and comprehensible information to any reader seriously
interested in the subject and the latest research on it.

700

Infographic: The Root of Migraine Pain

Even when academic writing is less technical and demanding,
its style will retain a degree of formality. In academic
arguments, the focus is on the subject or topic rather than the
authors, the tone is straightforward, the language is largely
unadorned, and all the i’s are dotted and t’s crossed. Here’s an
abstract for an academic paper written by a scholar of
communications on the Burning Man phenomenon,
demonstrating those qualities:
701

Every August for more than a decade, thousands of
information technologists and other knowledge workers
have trekked out into a barren stretch of alkali desert and
built a temporary city devoted to art, technology, and
communal living: Burning Man. Drawing on extensive
archival research, participant observation, and
interviews, this paper explores the ways that Burning
Man’s bohemian ethos supports new forms of production
emerging in Silicon Valley and especially at Google. It
shows how elements of the Burning Man world—
including the building of a socio-technical commons,
participation in project-based artistic labor, and the
fusion of social and professional interaction—help shape
and legitimate the collaborative manufacturing
processes driving the growth of Google and other firms.
The paper thus develops the notion that Burning Man
serves as a key cultural infrastructure for the Bay Area’s
new media industries.
—Fred Turner, “Burning Man at Google: A Cultural
Infrastructure for New Media Production”
You might imagine a different and far livelier way to tell a story
about the annual Burning Man gathering in Nevada, but this
piece respects the conventions of its academic field.

702

A scene from Burning Man

Another way you likely identify academic writing—especially in
term papers or research projects—is by the way it draws upon
sources and builds arguments from research done by experts
and reported in journal articles and books. Using an
evenhanded tone and dealing with all points of view fairly, such
writing brings together multiple voices and intriguing ideas.
You can see these moves in just one paragraph from a heavily
documented student essay examining the comedy of Chris
Rock:
The breadth of passionate debate that [Chris] Rock’s
comedy elicits from intellectuals is evidence enough that
he is advancing discussion of the foibles of black
America, but Rock continually insists that he has no
political aims: “Really, really at the end of the day, the
703

only important thing is being funny. I don’t go out of my
way to be political” (qtd. in Bogosian 58). His
unwillingness to view himself as a black leader triggers
Justin Driver to say, “[Rock] wants to be caustic and he
wants to be loved” (32). Even supporters wistfully sigh,
“One wishes Rock would own up to the fact that he’s a
damned astute social critic” (Kamp 7).
—Jack Chung, “The Burden of Laughter: Chris Rock
Fights Ignorance His Way”
Readers can quickly tell that author Jack Chung has read widely
and thought carefully about how to support his argument.
As you can see even from these brief examples, academic
arguments cover a broad range of topics and appear in a variety
of media—as a brief note in a journal like Nature, for example, a
poster session at a conference on linguistics, a short paper in
Physical Review Letters, a full research report in microbiology,
or an undergraduate honors thesis in history. What do all these
projects have in common? One professor we know defines
academic argument as “carefully structured research,” and that
seems to us to be a pretty good definition.

Conventions in Academic
Argument Are Not Static
Far from it. In fact, the rise of new technologies and the role
that blogs, wikis, social media, and other digital discourses play
704

in all our lives are affecting academic writing as well. Thus,
scholars today are pushing the envelope of traditional academic
writing in some fields. Physicians, for example, are using
narrative (rather than charts) more often in medicine to
communicate effectively with other medical personnel.
Professional journals now sometimes feature serious scholarly
work in new formats—such as comics (as in legal scholar Jamie
Boyle’s work on intellectual property, or Nick Sousanis’s
Columbia University PhD dissertation, which is entirely in
comic form). And student writers are increasingly producing
serious academic arguments using a wide variety of modalities,
including sound, still and moving images, and more. Obviously,
the “research paper” need not be a paper at all: most academic
research these days is available online—though, because of pay
walls, not everyone can access it.

705

Developing an Academic
Argument
In your first years of college, the academic arguments you make
will probably include the features and qualities we’ve discussed
above—and which you see demonstrated in the sample
academic arguments at the end of this chapter. In addition, you
can make a strong academic argument by following some timetested techniques.

Choose a topic you want to explore in depth
Even if you are assigned a topic, look for an issue that intrigues
you—one you want to learn more about. One of the hardest
parts of producing an academic argument is finding a topic
narrow enough to be manageable in the time you have to work
on it but also rich enough to sustain your interest over the same
period. Talk with friends about possible topics and explain to
them why you’d like to pursue research on this issue. Look
through your Twitter feeds and social media postings to identify
themes or topics that leap out as compelling. Browse through
books and articles that interest you, make a list of potential
subjects, and then zero in on one or two top choices.

Get to know the conversation surrounding your
topic
Once you’ve chosen a topic, expect to do even more reading and
browsing—a lot more. Familiarize yourself with what’s been

706

said about your subject and especially with the controversies
that currently surround it. Where do scholars agree, and where
do they disagree? What key issues seem to be at stake? You can
start by exploring online, using key terms that are associated
with your topic. But you may be better off searching the more
specialized databases at your library with the assistance of a
librarian who can help you narrow your search and make it
more efficient. Library databases will also give you access to
materials not available via Google or other online search
engines—including, for example, full-text versions of journal
articles. For much more on identifying appropriate sources, see
Chapter 18, “Finding Evidence.”

Assess what you know and what you need to know
As you read about your topic and discuss it with others, take
notes on what you have learned, including what you already
know about it. Such notes should soon reveal where the gaps
are in your knowledge. For instance, you may discover a need
to learn about legal issues and thus end up doing research in a
law school library. Or perhaps talking with experts about your
topic might be helpful. Instructors on your campus may have
the knowledge you need or be able to point you in the right
direction, so explore your school’s Web site to find faculty or
staff to talk with. Make an appointment to visit them during
office hours and bring the sorts of questions to your meeting
that show you’ve done basic work on the subject. And
remember that experts are now only a click away: a student we
know, working on Internet privacy concerns, wrote a brief
707

message to one of the top scholars in the field asking for help
with two particular questions—and got a response within two
days!

Come up with a claim about your topic
The chapters in Part 2, “Writing Arguments,” offer instruction
in formulating thesis statements, which most academic
arguments must have. Chapters 8–12, in particular, explain how
to craft claims tailored to individual projects ranging from
arguments of fact to proposals. Remember here, though, that
good claims are controversial. After all, you don’t want to
debate something that everyone already agrees upon or accepts.
In addition, your claim needs to say something consequential
about that important or controversial topic and be supported
with strong evidence and good reasons (see Chapter 20). Here,
for example, is the claim that student Charlotte GeaghanBreiner makes after observing the alienation of today’s children
from the natural world and arguing for the redesign of
schoolyards that invite children to interact with nature: “As a
formative geography of childhood, the schoolyard serves as the
perfect place to address nature deficit disorder.” Charlotte
develops her claim and supports it with evidence about the
physical, psychological, academic, and social benefits of
interacting with the natural world. She includes images
illustrating the contrast between traditional schoolyards and
“biophilic” (nature-oriented) schoolyards and establishes
guidelines for creating natural play landscapes. (See Charlotte’s

708

complete essay, reprinted at the end of this chapter.)

Consider your rhetorical stance and purpose
Once you have a claim, ask yourself where you stand with
respect to your topic and how you want to represent yourself to
those reading your argument:
You may take the stance of a reporter: you review what has
been said about the topic; analyze and evaluate
contributions to the conversation surrounding it;
synthesize the most important strands of that conversation;
and finally draw conclusions based on them.
You may see yourself primarily as a critic: you intend to
point out the problems and mistakes associated with some
view of your topic.
You may prefer the role of an advocate: you present
research that strongly supports a particular view on your
topic.
Whatever your perspective, remember that in academic
arguments you want to come across as fair and evenhanded,
especially when you play the advocate. For instance, in her
essay about the effects of the phrase “thank you for your
service” (or TYFYS) on veterans, sociology doctoral student
Sidra Montgomery takes care to consider the feelings of both
the civilians expressing gratitude and the veterans who receive
it (see Montgomery, “The Emotion Work of ‘Thank You for Your
Service’” in Chapter 17. Your stance, of course, will always be
closely tied to your purpose, which in most of your college

709

writing will be at least twofold: to do the best job in fulfilling an
assignment for a course and to support the claim you are
making to the fullest extent possible. Luckily, these two
purposes work well together.

Think about your audience(s)
Here again, you will often find that you have at least two
audiences—and maybe more. First, you will be writing to your
instructor, so pay close attention to the assignment and, if
possible, set up a conference to nail down your teacher’s
expectations: what will it take to convince this audience that
you have done a terrific job of writing an academic argument?
Beyond your instructor, you should also think of your
classmates as an audience—informed, intelligent peers who will
be interested in what you have to say. Again, what do you know
about these readers, and what will they expect from your
project?
Finally, consider yet another important audience—people who
are already discussing your topic. These will include the authors
whose work you have read and the larger academic community
of which they are now a part. If your work appears online or in
some other medium, you will reach more people than you
initially expect, and most if not all of them will be unknown to
you. As a result, you need to think carefully about the various
ways your argument could be read—or misread—and plan
accordingly.

710

Concentrate on the material you are gathering
Any academic argument is only as good as the evidence it
presents to support its claims. Give each major piece of
evidence (say, a lengthy article that addresses your subject
directly) careful scrutiny:
Summarize its main points.
Analyze how those points are pertinent.
Evaluate the quality of the supporting evidence.
Synthesize the results of your analysis and evaluation.
Summarize what you think about the article.
In other words, test each piece of evidence and then decide
which to keep—and which to throw out. But do not gather only
materials that favor your take on the topic. You want, instead, to
look at all legitimate perspectives on your claim, and in doing
so, you may even change your mind. That’s what good research
for an academic argument can do: remember the
“conscientious commitment to truth” we mentioned earlier?
Keep yourself open to discovery and change. (See Chapter 19,
“Evaluating Sources,” and Chapter 20, “Using Sources.”)
Give visual materials and other media the same scrutiny you
would to print sources, since you will likely be gathering or
creating such materials in many academic disciplines.
Remember that representing data visually always involves
interpreting that material: numbers can lie and pictures distort.
(For more information on evaluating and creating visuals, see
Chapter 14.) In addition, infographics today often make
711

complex academic arguments in a visual form. (See p. 179 for
one such example.)

Take special care with documentation
As you gather materials for your academic argument, record
where you found each source so that you can cite it accurately.
For all sources, whether print or digital, develop a working
bibliography either on your computer or in a notebook you can
carry with you. For each book, write the name of the author, the
title of the book, the city of publication, the publisher, the date
of publication, and the place that you found it (the section of the
library, for example, and the call number for the book). For an
e-book, note the format (Nook, Kindle, etc.) or the URL where
you accessed it. For each newspaper, magazine, or journal
article, write the name of the author, the title of the article, the
title of the periodical, and the volume, issue, publication date,
and exact page numbers. If you accessed the article online,
include the name of the Web site or database where you found
the source, the full URL, the date it was published on the Web
or most recently updated, and the date you accessed and
examined it. Include any other information you may later need
in preparing a works cited list or references list. The simplest
way to ensure that you have this information is to print a copy
of the source, highlight source information, and write down any
other pertinent information.
Remember, too, that different academic fields use different
systems of documentation, so if your instructor has not

712

recommended a style of documentation to you, ask in class
about it. Scholars have developed these systems over long
periods of time to make research in an area reliable and
routine. Using documentation responsibly shows that you
understand and respect the conventions of your field or major,
thereby establishing your position as a member of the academic
community. (For more detailed information, see Chapter 22,
“Documenting Sources.”)

Think about organization
As you review the research materials you have gathered, you
are actually beginning the work of drafting and designing your
project. Study the way those materials are organized, especially
any from professional journals, whether print or digital. You
may need to include in your own argument some of the sections
or features you find in professional research:
Does the article open with an abstract, summarizing its
content?
Does the article give any information about the author or
authors and their credentials?
Is there a formal introduction to the subject or a clear
statement of a thesis or hypothesis?
Does the article begin with a “review of literature,”
summarizing recent research on its topic?
Does the piece describe its methods of research?
How does the article report its results and findings?
Does the article use charts and graphs or other visuals to
report data?
713

Does the piece use headings and subheadings?
How does the work summarize its findings or how does it
make recommendations?
Does the essay offer a list of works cited or references?
Anticipate some variance in the way materials are presented
from one academic field to another.
As you organize your own project, check with your instructor to
see if there is a recommended pattern for you to follow. If not,
create a scratch outline or storyboard to describe how your
essay will proceed. In reviewing your evidence, decide which
pieces support specific points in the argument. Then try to
position your strongest pieces of evidence in key places—near
the beginning of paragraphs, at the end of the introduction, or
toward a powerful conclusion. In addition, strive to achieve a
balance between, on the one hand, your own words and
argument and, on the other hand, the sources that you use or
quote in support of the argument. The sources of evidence are
important supports, but they shouldn’t overpower the structure
of your argument itself. Finally, remember that your
organization needs to take into account the placement of visuals
—charts, tables, photographs, and so on. (For specific advice on
structuring arguments, review the “Thinking about
Organization” sections in the “Guides to Writing” for Chapters
8–12.)

Consider style and tone
Most academic argument adopts the voice of a reasonable, fair714

minded, and careful thinker who is interested in coming as
close to the truth about a topic as possible. An essay that
achieves that tone may have some of the following features:
It strives for clarity and directness, though it may use
jargon appropriate to a particular field.
It favors denotative rather than connotative language.
It is usually impersonal, using first person (I) sparingly.
In some fields, such as the sciences, it may use the passive
voice routinely.
It uses technical language, symbols, and abbreviations for
efficiency.
It avoids colloquialisms, slang, and sometimes even
contractions.
The examples at the end of this chapter demonstrate traditional
academic style, though there is, as always, a range of
possibilities in its manner of expression.

Consider genre, design, and visuals
Safe Spaces, Brave Spaces by John Palfrey exemplifies a clear and
direct academic style. Even though the author makes a complex
argument, addressing a broad and difficult set of issues, his
writing remains straightforward and readable.
LINK TO Palfrey, “Safe Spaces, Brave Spaces,” in Chapter 27

Most college academic arguments look more like articles in
professional journals than like those one might find in a
715

glossier periodical like Scientific American—that is, they are
still usually black on white, use a traditional font size and type
(like 11-point Times New Roman), and lack any conscious
design other than inserted tables or figures. But such
conventions are changing.
Indeed, student writers today can go well beyond print, creating
digital documents that integrate a variety of media and array
data in strikingly original ways. But always consider what
genres best suit your topic, purpose, and audience and then act
accordingly. As you think about the design possibilities for your
academic argument, you may want to consult your instructor—
and to test your ideas and innovations on friends or classmates.
In choosing visuals to include in your argument, be sure each
one makes a strong contribution to your message and is
appropriate and fair to your topic and your audience. Treat
visuals as you would any other sources and integrate them into
your text. Like quotations, paraphrases, and summaries, visuals
need to be introduced and commented on in some way. In
addition, label and number (“Figure 1,” “Table 2,” and so on)
each visual, provide a caption that includes source information
and describes the visual, and cite the source in your references
page or works cited list. Even if you create a visual (such as a
bar graph) by using information from a source (the results, say,
of a Gallup poll), you must cite the source of the data. If you use
a photograph you took yourself, cite it as a personal
photograph.

716

This bar chart, based on data from a Sandler Training survey of 1,053 adults,
would be listed in your works cited or references under the authors’ names.

Reflect on your draft and get responses
As with any important piece of writing, an academic argument
calls for careful reflection on your draft. You may want to do a
“reverse outline” to test whether a reader can pull a logical and
consistent pattern out of the paragraphs or sections you have
written. In addition, you can also judge the effectiveness of your
overall argument, assessing what each paragraph contributes
and what may be missing. Turning a critical eye to your own
work at the draft stage can save much grief in the long run. Be
sure to get some response from classmates and friends too:

717

come up with a set of questions to ask them about your draft
and push them for honest responses. Find out what in your
draft is confusing or unclear to others, what needs further
evidence, what feels unconvincing, and so on.

Edit and proofread your text
Proofread an academic argument at least three times. First
review it for ideas, making sure that all your main points and
supporting evidence make sense and fit nicely together. Give
special attention to transitions and paragraph structure and the
way you have arranged information, positioned headings, and
captioned graphic items. Make sure the big picture is in focus.
Then read the text word by word to check spelling, punctuation,
quotation marks, apostrophes, abbreviations—in short, all the
details that can go wrong simply because of a slip in attention.
To keep their focus at this level, some readers will even read an
entire text backwards. Notice too where your computer’s
spelling and grammar checkers may be underlining particular
words and phrases. Don’t ignore these clear signals (and don’t
rely solely on them to spot errors, since such automated tools
are not perfectly accurate).
Finally, check that every source mentioned in the academic
argument appears in the works cited or references list and that
every citation is correct. This is also the time to make any final
touchups to your overall design. Remember that how the
document looks is part of what establishes its credibility.

718

RESPOND●
1. Look closely at the following five passages, each of which is
from an opening of a published work, and decide which ones
provide examples of academic argument. How would you
describe each one, and what are its key features? Which is the
most formal and academic? Which is the least? How might you
revise them to make them more—or less—academic?
During the Old Stone Age, between thirty-seven thousand
and eleven thousand years ago, some of the most
remarkable art ever conceived was etched or painted on
the walls of caves in southern France and northern Spain.
After a visit to Lascaux, in the Dordogne, which was
discovered in 1940, Picasso reportedly said to his guide,
“They’ve invented everything.” What those first artists
invented was a language of signs for which there will never
be a Rosetta stone; perspective, a technique that was not
rediscovered until the Athenian Golden Age; and a bestiary
of such vitality and finesse that, by the flicker of torchlight,
the animals seem to surge from the walls, and move
across them like figures in a magic-lantern show (in that
sense, the artists invented animation). They also thought
up the grease lamp—a lump of fat, with a plant wick,
placed in a hollow stone—to light their workplace;
scaffolds to reach high places; the principles of stenciling
and Pointillism; powdered colors, brushes, and stumping
cloths; and, more to the point of Picasso’s insight, the very
concept of an image. A true artist reimagines that concept

719

with every blank canvas—but not from a void.
—Judith Thurman, “First Impressions,” New Yorker
I stepped over the curb and into the street to hitchhike. At
the age of ten I’d put some pretty serious mileage on my
thumb. And I knew how it was done. Hold your thumb up,
not down by your hip as though you didn’t much give a
damn whether you got a ride or not. Always hitch at a
place where a driver could pull out of traffic and give you
time to get in without risking somebody tailgating him.
—Harry Crews, “On Hitchhiking,” Harper’s
Coral reef ecosystems are essential marine environments
around the world. Host to thousands (and perhaps
millions) of diverse organisms, they are also vital to the
economic well-being of an estimated 0.5 billion people, or
8% of the world’s population who live on tropical coasts
(Hoegh-Guldberg 1999). Income from tourism and fishing
industries, for instance, is essential to the economic
prosperity of many countries, and the various plant and
animal species present in reef ecosystems are sources for
different natural products and medicines. The degradation
of coral reefs can therefore have a devastating impact on
coastal populations, and it is estimated that between 50%
and 70% of all reefs around the world are currently
threatened (Hoegh-Guldberg). Anthropogenic influences
are cited as the major cause of this degradation, including

720

sewage, sedimentation, direct trampling of reefs, overfishing of herbivorous fish, and even global warming
(Umezawa et al. 2002; Jones et al. 2001; Smith et al. 2001).
—Elizabeth Derse, “Identifying the Sources of Nitrogen to
Hanalei Bay, Kauai, Utilizing the Nitrogen Isotope
Signature of Macroalgae,” Stanford Undergraduate
Research Journal
While there’s a good deal known about invertebrate
neurobiology, these facts alone haven’t settled questions
of their sentience. On the one hand, invertebrates lack a
cortex, amygdala, as well as many of the other major brain
structures routinely implicated in human emotion. And
unsurprisingly, their nervous systems are quite minimalist
compared to ours: we have roughly a hundred thousand
bee brains worth of neurons in our heads. On the other
hand, some invertebrates, including insects, do possess
the rudiments of our stress response system. So the
question is still on the table: do they experience emotion
in a way that we would recognize, or just react to the
world with a set of glorified reflexes?
—Jason Castro, “Do Bees Have Feelings?” Scientific
American
Bambi’s mother, shot. Nemo’s mother, eaten by a
barracuda. Lilo’s mother, killed in a car crash. Koda’s
mother in Brother Bear, speared. Po’s mother in Kung Fu

721

Panda 2, done in by a power-crazed peacock. Ariel’s
mother in the third Little Mermaid, crushed by a pirate
ship. Human baby’s mother in Ice Age, chased by a sabertoothed tiger over a waterfall. . . . The mothers in these
movies are either gone or useless. And the father figures?
To die for!
—Sarah Boxer, “Why Are All the Cartoon Mothers Dead?”
Atlantic
2. Working with another student in your class, find examples from
two or three different fields of academic arguments that strike
you as being well written and effective. If possible, examine at
least one from an online academic database so you can see
what features periodical articles tend to offer. Then spend time
looking at them closely. Do they exemplify the key features of
academic arguments discussed in this chapter? What other
features do they use? How are they organized? What kind of
tone do the writers use? What use do they make of visuals?
Draw up a brief report on your findings (a list will do), and bring
it to class for discussion.
3. Read the following paragraphs about one writer’s experience
with anorexia, taken from a recent memoir, and then list
changes that the writer might make to convert them into an
argument for an academic journal, considering everything from
tone and style to paragraphing and format.
It began when I was at the start of my sophomore year in
college, sleeping on my lofted bed and rising before dawn.
Initially I was not focused on losing weight; I simply
became . . . obsessed with asceticism and determined to

722

get by on less. I mused on the phonetic similarity between
“ascetic” and “aesthetic,” believing that through selfdenial I could achieve a sort of delicate beauty. Even
words like “svelte” and “petite” began to assume, in my
mind, a positive valence. Soon I would begin to think of
anorexia in this way as well, conjuring a snow-white
princess who glided along in a winter fairyland, leaving no
footprints.
Although I never stopped eating three meals a day, I
severely restricted my diet and the range of foods I would
eat. As the number of calories I consumed decreased with
each passing week, food assumed more and more a
central role in my life. I drove myself to extremes of hunger
so that during class I’d be fantasizing about a green apple
in my backpack, counting down the minutes until the
lecture would end and I would savor that first juicy bite.
—Ilana Kurshan, If All the Seas Were Ink: A Memoir
4. Choose two pieces of your college writing, and examine them
closely. Are they examples of strong academic writing? How do
they use the key features that this chapter identifies as
characteristic of academic arguments? How do they use and
document sources? What kind of tone do you establish in each?
After studying the examples in this chapter, what might you
change about these pieces of writing, and why?
5. Go to a blog that you follow, or check out one on the Huffington
Post or Ricochet. Spend some time reading the articles or
postings on the blog, and look for ones that you think are the

723

best written and the most interesting. What features or
characteristics of academic argument do they use, and which
ones do they avoid?

Two Sample Academic Arguments

724

725

726

727

728

729

730

731

732

733

734

735

736

737

738

739

740

741

The Emotion Work of “Thank You for Your Service”

SIDRA MONTGOMERY
In the post-9/11 era, “thank you for your service” (TYFYS) has
become the new mantra of public support bestowed upon the
veteran community. In the early 2000s, as the wars in
Afghanistan and Iraq began escalating, “Support Our Troops”
car magnets increasingly appeared on the trunks of cars across
America. After well over 15 years of war, public gratitude is now
most commonly expressed in small interactions between
veterans and the public they’ve served—with strangers saying
TYFYS or offering to pay for a coffee or meal. If you ask any
recent servicemember or veteran how they feel when someone
says TYFYS, you’ll probably hear them express a strong opinion
about the phrase. While some view it positively and enjoy these
interactions, most find it awkward, uncomfortable or irritating.
The message of support and gratitude that well-meaning
742

Americans are attempting to express is often lost in translation
with veterans.
A collection of op-ed pieces have addressed why
servicemembers find TYFYS to be a point of disconnection
rather than connection. James Kelly, an active-duty Marine,
says that he hears the phrase so often it has become an “empty
platitude,” something people say only because it is “politically
correct.” Matt Richtel, a New York Times reporter, highlights
how veterans feel the phrase can be self-serving; civilians get to
pat themselves on the back because they are doing something
for veterans, alleviating any sense of guilt in the era of an allvolunteer service. Another common complaint is that TYFYS
doesn’t start the conversation between veterans and civilians—it
stunts it—leaving veterans feeling more isolated and less
connected to the America they served. Veterans commonly
remark that civilians don’t even know what they are saying
“thank you” for. Elizabeth Samet, a professor at West Point,
argues that we’ve come to the other “unthinking extreme” with
TYFYS as an attempt for atonement after the poor treatment of
Vietnam veterans.
While many have tried to explain why veterans find TYFYS to be
lacking, few have examined how these interactions affect
veterans. Having interviewed servicemembers and veterans for
the past 3 years in my professional life, and being a military
spouse for the past 5 years, I have always been intrigued by how
veterans handle these moments and interactions. I watch the

743

discomfort when strangers approach my interview subjects or
friends and say TYFYS—it becomes an awkward stumble for the
veteran to find a way to muster their appreciation for a gesture
that doesn’t necessarily square with its intent.

EMOTION WORK
As I analyzed the data I collected for my dissertation, a total of
39 interviews with wounded, injured, and ill post–9/11 veterans,
I realized these interactions require veterans to engage in
emotion work, a sociological concept defined by Arlie
Hochschild. Emotion work is defined by Hochschild as “trying
to change, in degree or quality, an emotion or feeling”
(1979:561). It is an active attempt to shape and direct one’s
feelings to match the appropriate emotions for a given
situation. For example, when someone thanks you for
something you’ve done, you’re supposed to feel good, right?
Gratitude should give you that warm, fuzzy feeling inside. This
is called “feeling rules”; it’s how we know what we should be
feeling in any given moment. . . .
For veterans who genuinely appreciate and enjoy hearing
TYFYS and other acts of gratitude, there is no “work” necessary
because their feelings are appropriate given the situation. For
Alex, a wounded Marine veteran, TYFYS makes him feel as
though he is “seen” and that his service is validated:
I like it. I really like it when people acknowledge my
service. I’m not out there trying to get someone to do it, but
744

when someone takes time out of their day to shake my
hand and say, “Thank you for your service.” It’s like, “Wow.
You know this country—it was worth it. You know it’s—
proud of your service to the country”. . . That’s something
special.
Alex’s emotions are in line with what we expect to feel when
someone says thank you and acknowledges something that we
have done. He doesn’t have to control or wrangle his emotions
because they already align with the socially prescribed “feeling
rules” and expectations.
My dissertation data suggests that 15 to 20% of veterans share
Alex’s feelings; they enjoy and appreciate when people thank
them for their service or demonstrate their gratitude through
other acts and gestures. Personally and anecdotally, I’ve found
about the same split: 10–20% find TYFYS gratifying and
associate it with positive feelings, and 80–90% of
servicemembers and veterans feel uncomfortable or upset
about the phrase.
For the majority of wounded veterans I interviewed, who don’t
have positive associations with TYFYS, these interactions
necessitate emotion work. As they go about their day-to-day life,
they are thrust into situations where they must acknowledge
and negotiate the gratitude of total strangers through their own
emotional response: emotions that do not match their true
feelings in the situation. Luis, a young Marine Corps veteran

745

with visible injuries, describes how he wrestles with having to
do emotion work in these interactions:
When people say thank you for your service, thank you for
what you did . . . it’s kind of lost its shock value or
something. I’ve heard it so much that I’m embarrassed that
I can’t give them . . . like that first time when someone said
thank you for your service . . . I feel like I don’t give them
enough sincerity, I feel bad . . . I feel embarrassed for
myself because I can’t do that, you know? . . . I just hear it
sooooo much.
Luis wants to give others a genuine emotional reaction each
time they thank him for his service, but he feels he can’t
because of the overwhelming number of times this happens to
him. From this quote it’s clear he is blaming himself for even
having to perform emotion work in the first place. Connor, an
Army veteran with invisible injuries, discusses how he handles
TYFYS:
I give the standard, thanks, appreciate it or happy to do it.
Or I don’t get into it. Even if I know it’s totally fake I’m like,
yeah, appreciate it. And I’ll give just a fake answer. As fake
as I got [from them], that’s how much I’ll give back . . . It’ll
be like . . . “oh, thanks” with the plastic smile. You know
what I mean?
Connor attempts to mirror the level of sincerity in the
interaction, aligning his own response with it. His comment
746

about how he puts on a “plastic smile” describes how he
engages in surface acting: a way to present the necessary
emotion to others even though his own feelings haven’t
changed.
Another common strategy for veterans, especially wounded
veterans who are frequently thanked for their service, is the use
of predetermined responses. Having a rolodex of appropriate
responses minimizes impromptu emotion work. Jackson, a
Marine Corps veteran who has visible injuries, says that hearing
TYFYS “just gets old” because he hears it so much. When I
asked him how he usually responds, he said:
[I will say] “. . . no, thank you.” Another one is like some
people [say] “thank you guys for what you do . . . you guys
made coming home so much easier and so much more
worth it.” So make them feel just as adequate in a way.
Jackson reveals the set of responses that he (and others)
normally give. These prepackaged responses increase the
efficiency of Jackson’s emotion work by creating sentiments
that acknowledge and reciprocate the gratitude—an intentional
move on Jackson’s part.
Several years after her Marine Corps service, Susan, an invisibly
injured veteran, has gained a new perspective on the TYFYS
issue. She is now able to see it from another point of view:
You get to finally a point—I finally went, you know, these

747

people are very sincere, and you’ve got to let them just say
the thing. Because they generally want to thank you. And
this is so not your experience. You don’t have to have it
with them. And then it became okay going, you know what,
they’re really caring, lovely people most of the time . . .
Susan describes taking away her own investment in these
interactions as a way to distance herself from constantly
engaging in emotion work whenever someone says “thank you.”
She understands the moment to be more about the other person
than herself. She also describes her engagement with deep
acting: working to change the way she truly feels about these
interactions; trying to bring her own emotions in line with
what’s expected.

THE CUMULATIVE EFFECT FOR VISIBLY INJURED VETERANS
For current servicemembers, veterans, and invisibly injured
veterans, these moments of invited gratitude from strangers
happen occasionally or in concentrated environments where
they know they may be thanked or approached. For visibly
injured veterans, these interactions happen every day. Visibly
injured veterans are disproportionately burdened with doing
the emotional work surrounding public gratitude because their
status as wounded veterans can’t be hidden or “taken off” like a
uniform. And their visible injury only amplifies feelings of
gratitude among the public, causing them to experience more
of these moments and interactions.

748

Thomas, an Army veteran with visible injuries, describes:
[Civilians] . . . they just all want to do the right things. And I
mean, to that person they have one chance to make a
difference to one person. But if it’s you, they’re the 100th
person today to say “thank you for your service.”
The cumulative effect of these interactions wears on Thomas
and other visibly injured veterans:
And what if everybody did that to me? Like, everywhere I
went, what if every single person thought they were doing
me a favor and said “thank you for your service.” I would
spend my whole life giving to other people. I could literally
go every five feet and just be doling out good feelings to
everybody. And I’m sorry, I’m an emotional bank account,
we’re all just emotional bank accounts.
Thomas’s comments clearly reveal how visibly injured veterans
can quickly become exhausted from the emotion work of
receiving TYFYS and other gestures of gratitude. What seems
like a small interaction in the moment is continually repeated
for wounded veterans like Thomas.
The treatment of U.S. veterans has significantly changed over
time, from the prosperous return of World War II veterans to
the protests and mistreatment of Vietnam veterans to the new
era of the all-volunteer force. It is important that as a nation, we
engage in a constant reflection process of how we treat our

749

veterans, from the largest of government programs to the
smallest interpersonal interactions. The well-meaning intent
behind TYFYS isn’t always received by post–9/11 veterans in the
same way.

PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS: WHAT SHOULD WE BE DOING TO SHOW OUR
GRATITUDE AND APPRECIATION?
Inevitably, after presenting these issues with TYFYS I get asked:
“well, what should we be doing?” This is both a prudent and
complicated question, and there is no one-size-fits-all answer.
We all have our own personal preferences of what is
meaningful to us based on our personality, life experiences, and
our thoughts. I’m not here to say that I have the answer, but I
have a couple suggestions based on my work with veterans:
1. Judge whether the military member or veteran seems
open to conversation with a stranger. You know how you
can tell whether the person next to you on a plane wants to
talk or wants to be left alone? The same should go for your
interactions with veterans, servicemembers, and wounded
veterans. Do they appear willing to engage with others (i.e.,
making eye contact or already engaging in a friendly
conversation with you), or do they look like they just want
to grab their coffee and go about their day? If the latter—let
them go about their day and reflect privately on your
gratitude for their willingness to lay their life on the line for
our freedom.
2. If you want to show your support for veterans, find a local
organization that helps veterans in your community. Do
750

your research, find out what organizations are doing to
serve veterans and improve their lives. Give your financial
support or your time (through volunteering).
3. Go beyond “thank you for your service.” Ask them why
they served, ask them when and where they served, ask
them what they most enjoyed about their service. Dig
deeper; cultivate gratitude for their service by learning
more about it.
Sidra Montgomery received her PhD in sociology in 2017 from the University of
Maryland–College Park. Her work focuses specifically on the military and veterans.
The piece appeared on March 21, 2017, on the Veterans Scholars Web site.

751

CHAPTER 18 Finding Evidence

In making and supporting claims for academic arguments,
writers use all kinds of evidence: data from journal articles;
scholarly books; historical records from archives; blogs, wikis,
social media sites, and other digital sources; personal
observations and fieldwork; surveys; and even DNA. But such
evidence doesn’t exist in a vacuum. Instead, the quality of
evidence—how and when it was collected, by whom, and for
what purposes—may become part of the argument itself.
Evidence may be persuasive in one time and place but not in
another; it may convince one kind of audience but not another;
it may work with one type of argument but not with the kind
you are writing. The point is that finding “good” evidence for a
research project is rarely a simple matter.

752

Considering the
Rhetorical Situation
To be most persuasive, evidence should match the time and
place in which you make your argument—that is to say, your
rhetorical situation. For example, arguing that government
officials in the twenty-first century should use the same policies
to deal with economic troubles that were employed in the
middle of the twentieth might not be convincing on its own.
After all, almost every aspect of the world economy has
changed in the past fifty years. In the same way, a writer may
achieve excellent results by citing a detailed survey of local
teenagers as evidence for education reform in her small rural
hometown, but she may have less success using the same
evidence to argue for similar reforms in a large urban
community.
College writers also need to consider the fields that they’re
working in. In disciplines such as experimental psychology or
economics, quantitative data—the sort that can be observed,
collected and counted—may be the best evidence. In many
historical, literary, or philosophical studies, however, the same
kind of data may be less appropriate or persuasive, or even
impossible to come by. As you become more familiar with a
discipline, you’ll gain a sense of what it takes to support a claim.
The following questions will help you understand the rhetorical
situation of a particular field:

753

What kinds of data are preferred as evidence? How are such
data gathered, tabulated, and verified?
How are definitions, causal analyses, evaluations,
analogies, and examples used as evidence?
How are statistics or other numerical information used and
presented as evidence? Are tables, charts, or graphs
commonly used? How much weight do they carry?
What or who counts as an authority in this field? How are
the credentials of authorities established? How are research
publications reviewed and research journals refereed?
What weight do writers in the field give to precedence—
that is, to examples of similar actions or decisions made in
the past?
Is personal experience allowed as evidence? When?
How are quotations used as part of evidence?
How are still or moving images or sound(s) used as part of
evidence, and how closely are they related to the verbal
parts of the argument being presented? Are other kinds of
media commonly used to present evidence?

In “Getting Personal about Cybersecurity,” Lindsay McKenzie cites
research from surveys as well as quotations by experts to
establish the difficulties of cybersecurity education on campus.
LINK TO McKenzie, “Getting Personal about Cybersecurity,” in
Chapter 26

As these questions suggest, evidence may not always travel well
from one field to another. Nor does it always travel easily from

754

culture to culture. Differing notions of evidence can lead to
arguments that go nowhere fast. For instance, when Italian
journalist Oriana Fallaci interviewed Ayatollah Khomeini, Iran’s
supreme leader, in 1979, she argued in a way that’s common in
North American and Western European cultures: she presented
claims that she considered to be adequately backed up with
facts (“Iran denies freedom to people. . . . Many people have
been put in prison and even executed, just for speaking out in
opposition”). In response, Khomeini relied on very different
kinds of evidence—analogies (“Just as a finger with gangrene
should be cut off so that it will not destroy the whole body, so
should people who corrupt others be pulled out like weeds so
they will not infect the whole field”) and, above all, the
authority of the Qur’an. Partly because of these differing beliefs
about what counts as evidence, the interview ended
unsuccessfully.

755

The need for evidence depends a lot on the rhetorical situation.

CULTURAL CONTEXTS FOR ARGUMENT

The Rhetorical Situation
To take another example, a Harvard Business Review blog post from
December 4, 2013, on “How to Argue across Cultures” recounts the
story of a Western businessperson who was selling bicycles produced
in China to a buyer in Germany. When the business owner went to pick
up the bicycles, he noticed that they rattled. In considering how to
bring up this defect with the Chinese supplier, the businessperson
could have confronted him directly, relying on physical evidence to

756

support his claim. He rejected this form of evidence, however, because
he knew that such a confrontation would result in loss of face for the
supplier and very likely lead to an undesirable outcome. So instead, he
suggested that he and the Chinese supplier take a couple of bikes out
for a ride, during which the bikes rattled away. At the end of the ride,
the Western businessperson quietly mentioned that he “thought his
bike had rattled” and then departed, leaving the Chinese supplier to
consider his subtle presentation of evidence. And it worked: when the
Germans received the bicycle delivery, the rattle had been repaired.
It’s always good to remember, then, that when arguing across cultural
divides, whether international or more local, you need to think
carefully about how you’re accustomed to using evidence—and about
what counts as evidence to other people (without surrendering your
own intellectual principles).

757

Searching Effectively
The evidence you will use in most academic arguments—books,
articles, videos, documents, photographs and other images—
will likely come from sources you locate in libraries, in
databases, or online. How well you can navigate these complex
territories will determine the success of many of your academic
and professional projects. Research suggests that most students
overestimate their ability to manage these tools and, perhaps
more important, don’t seek the help they need to find the best
materials for their projects. In this chapter, we aim to point you
in the right direction for successful academic research.

Explore library resources: printed works and
databases
Your college library has printed materials (books, periodicals,
reference works) as well as computers that provide access to its
electronic catalogs, other libraries’ catalogs, and numerous
proprietary databases (such as Academic Search Complete,
Academic OneFile, JSTOR) not available publicly on the Web.
Crucially, libraries also have librarians whose job it is to guide
you through these resources, help you identify reputable
materials, and show you how to search for materials efficiently.
The best way to begin a serious academic argument then is
often with a trip to the library or a discussion with your
professor or a research librarian.
Also be certain that you know your way around the library. If

758

not, ask the staff there to help you locate the following tools:
general and specialized encyclopedias; biographical resources;
almanacs, yearbooks, and atlases; book and periodical indexes;
specialized indexes and abstracts; the circulation computer or
library catalog; special collections; audio, video, and art
collections; and the interlibrary loan office, for requesting
materials not available at your own library.
At the outset of a project, determine what kinds of sources you
will need to support your project. (You might also review your
assignment to see whether you’re required to consult particular
types or a specific number of sources.) If you’ll use print
sources, find out whether they’re readily available in your
library or whether you must make special arrangements (such
as an interlibrary loan) to acquire them. For example, your
argument for a senior thesis might benefit from material
available mostly in old newspapers and magazines: access to
them might require time and ingenuity. If you need to locate
other nonprint sources (such as audiotapes, videotapes,
artwork, or photos), find out where those are kept and whether
you need special permission to examine them.
Most academic resources, however, will be on the shelves or
available electronically through databases. Here’s when it’s
important to understand the distinction between library
databases and the Web. Your library’s computers hold
important resources that aren’t on the Web or aren’t available to
you except through the library’s system. The most important of

759

these resources may be your library’s catalog of its own
holdings (mostly books). But college libraries also pay to
subscribe to scholarly databases that you can use for free by
logging in through your school library—for example, guides to
journal and magazine articles, the Academic Search Complete
database (which holds the largest collection of multidisciplinary
journals), the LexisNexis database of news stories and legal
cases, and various compilations of statistics.
Though many of these Web and database resources may be
searchable through your own computer, consider exploring
them initially at your college library. That’s because these
professional databases aren’t always easy to use or intuitive: you
may need to learn to focus and narrow your searches (by date,
field, types of material, and so on) so that your results are
manageable and full of relevant items. That’s when librarians or
your instructor can help, so ask them for assistance. They
expect your questions.
Librarians may, for example, draw your attention to the
distinction between subject headings and keywords. The
Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH) are standardized
words and phrases that are used to classify the subject matter of
books and articles. Library catalogs and databases routinely use
these subject headings to index their contents by author, title,
publication date, and subject headings. When you do a subject
search of the library’s catalog, you need to use the exact
wording of the subject headings. On the other hand, searches

760

with keywords use the computer’s ability to look for any term in
any field of the electronic record. So keyword searching is less
restrictive, but you’ll still have to think hard about your search
terms to get usable results and to learn how to limit or expand
your search.
Determine, too, early on, how current your sources need to be.
If you must investigate the latest findings about, say, a new
treatment for malaria, check very recent periodicals, medical
journals, and the Web. If you want broader coverage with more
context and background information, look for reference
materials or scholarly books. If your argument deals with a
specific time period, newspapers, magazines, and books written
during that period may be your best assets.
How many sources should you consult for an academic
argument? Expect to examine many more sources than you’ll
end up using, and be sure to cover all major perspectives on
your subject. Read enough sources to feel comfortable
discussing it with someone with more knowledge than you. You
don’t have to be an expert, but your readers should sense that
you are well informed.

Explore online resources
Chances are your first instinct when you need to find
information is to do a quick keyword search on the Web, which
in many instances will take you to a site such as Wikipedia, the
free encyclopedia launched by Jimmy Wales in 2001. For years,

761

many teachers and institutions argued that the information on
Wikipedia was suspect and could not be used as a reliable
source, particularly since anyone can edit and change the
content on a Wikipedia page. Times have changed, however,
and many serious research efforts now include a stop at
Wikipedia. As always, however, let the buyer beware: you need
to verify the credibility of all of your sources! If you intend to
support a serious academic argument, remember to approach
the Web carefully and professionally.
Web search engines such as Google or Bing make searching for
material seem very easy—perhaps too easy. For an argument
about the fate of the antihero in contemporary films, for
example, typing in film and antihero produces far too many
possible matches, or hits. Some of those hits might be generic
and geared to current moviegoers rather than someone
thinking about an analytical essay. You could further narrow
the search by adding a third or fourth keyword—say, French or
current—or you could simply type in a specific question. Google
will always offer pages of links. But you need to be a critical
user too, pushing yourself well beyond any initial items you
turn up or using those sources to find more authoritative,
diverse, or academic materials.
Google does have resources to help you refine your results or
direct you to works better suited to academic research. When
you search for any term, you can click “Help” at the bottom of
the results page, which takes you to the Google Help Center.

762

Click on “Filter and refine your results” and then “Advanced
search,” which will bring more options to narrow your focus in
important ways.
But that’s not the end of your choices. With an academic
argument, you might want to explore your topic in either
Google Books or Google Scholar. Both resources direct you to
the type and quality of materials (scholarly journal articles,
academic books) that you probably need for a term paper or
professional project. And Google offers multimodal options as
well: it can help you find images, photographs, videos, blogs,
and so on. The lesson is simple. If your current Web searches
typically don’t go much beyond the first items a search engine
offers, you aren’t close to using all the power available to you.
Explore the search tools you routinely use and learn what they
can really do.
You should work just as deliberately with the academic
databases you may have access to in a library or online—such as
Academic Search Complete or Business Source Complete,
among many others. As noted earlier, searching these
professional tools often requires more deliberate choices and
specific combinations of search terms and keywords. In doing
such searches, you’ll need to observe the search logic followed
by the particular database—usually explained on a search page.
For example, using Boolean operators such as and between
keywords (movies and heroes) may indicate that both terms
must appear in a file for it to be called up. Using or between

763

keywords usually instructs the computer to locate every file in
which either one word or the other shows up, and using not
tells the computer to exclude files containing a particular word
from the search results (movies not heroes).

Most search engines offer many kinds of research tools like this “Advanced
Search” page from Google.

SEARCHING ONLINE OR IN DATABASES

Don’t rely on simple Web searches only.
Find library databases targeted to your subject.
Use advanced search techniques to focus your search.
Learn the difference between subject heading and keyword
searches.

764

Understand the differences between academic and popular
sources.
Admit when you don’t know how to find material—you won’t be
alone!
Routinely ask for help from librarians and instructors.

765

Collecting Data on Your
Own
Not all your supporting materials for an academic argument
must come from print or online sources. You can present
research that you have carried out yourself or been closely
involved with, often called field research; such research usually
requires that you collect and examine data. Here, we discuss the
kinds of firsthand research that student writers do most often.

Perform experiments
Academic arguments can be supported by evidence you gather
through experiments. In the sciences, data from experiments
conducted under rigorously controlled conditions is highly
valued. In other fields, more informal experiments may be
acceptable, especially if they’re intended to provide only part of
the support for an argument.
If you want to argue, for instance, that the recipes in Bon
Appétit magazine are impossibly tedious to follow and take far
more time than the average person wishes to spend preparing
food, you might ask five or six people to conduct an experiment
—following two recipes from a recent issue and recording and
timing every step. The evidence that you gather from this
informal experiment could provide some concrete support—by
way of specific examples—for your contention.
But such experiments should be taken with a grain of salt
766

(maybe organic in this case). They may not convince or impress
certain audiences. And if your experiments can easily be
attacked as skewed or sloppily done (“The people you asked to
make these recipes couldn’t cook a Pop-Tart”), then they may do
more harm than good.

Make observations
“What,” you may wonder, “could be easier than observing
something?” You just choose a subject, look at it closely, and
record what you see and hear. But trained observers say that
recording an observation accurately requires intense
concentration and mental agility. If observing were easy, all
eyewitnesses would provide reliable stories. Yet experience
shows that when several people observe the same
phenomenon, they generally offer different, sometimes even
contradictory, accounts of those observations.
Before you begin an observation yourself, decide exactly what
you want to find out, and anticipate what you’re likely to see. Do
you want to observe an action that is repeated by many people—
perhaps how people behave at the checkout line in a grocery
store? Or maybe you want to study a sequence of actions—for
instance, the stages involved in student registration, which you
expect to argue is far too complicated. Or maybe you are
motivated to examine the interactions of a notoriously
contentious political group. Once you have a clear sense of what
you’ll analyze and what questions you’ll try to answer through
the observation, use the following guidelines to achieve the best

767

results:
Make sure that the observation relates directly to your
claim.
Brainstorm about what you’re looking for, but don’t be
rigidly bound to your expectations.
Develop an appropriate system for collecting data. Consider
using a split notebook page or screen: on one side, record
the minute details of your observations; on the other,
record your thoughts or impressions.
Be aware that how you record data will affect the outcome,
if only in respect to what you decide to include in your
observational notes and what you leave out.
Record the precise date, time, and place of the
observation(s).
If the location you want to focus on is not a public one (for
instance, an elementary school playground), ask for
permission to conduct your observation.
You may be asked to prepare systematic observations in various
science courses, including anthropology or psychology, where
you would follow a methodology and receive precise directions.
But observation can play a role in other kinds of arguments and
use various media: a photo essay or audio/video clips, for
example, might serve as academic arguments in some
situations.

Conduct interviews
Some evidence is best obtained through direct interviews. If you

768

can talk with an expert—in person, on the phone, or online—
you might obtain information you couldn’t have gotten through
any other type of research. In addition to an expert opinion, you
might ask for firsthand accounts, biographical information, or
suggestions of other places to look or other people to consult.
The following guidelines will help you conduct effective
interviews:
Determine the exact purpose of the interview, and be sure
it’s directly related to your claim.
Set up the interview well in advance—preferably by a
written communication. (An email is more polite than a
text message.) Explain who you are, the purpose of the
interview, and what you expect to cover. Specify, too, how
much time it will take, and if you wish to record the
session, ask permission to do so.
Prepare a written list of both factual and open-ended
questions. (Brainstorming with friends can help you come
up with good questions.) Leave plenty of space for notes
after each question. If the interview proceeds in a direction
that you hadn’t expected but that seems promising, don’t
feel that you have to cover every one of your questions.
Record the subject’s full name and title, as well as the date,
time, and place of the interview.
Be sure to thank those people whom you interview, either
in person or with a follow-up letter or email message.
A serious interview can be eye-opening when the questions get
a subject to reveal important experiences or demonstrate his or

769

her knowledge or wisdom.

Use questionnaires to conduct surveys
Surveys usually require the use of questionnaires distributed to
a number of people. Questions should be clear, easy to
understand, and designed so that respondents’ answers can be
easily analyzed. Questions that ask respondents to say “yes” or
“no” or to rank items on a scale (1 to 5, for example, or “most
helpful” to “least helpful”) are particularly easy to tabulate.
Because tabulation can take time and effort, limit the number of
questions you ask. Note also that people often resent being
asked to answer more than about twenty questions, especially
online.
Here are some other guidelines to help you prepare for and
carry out a survey:
Ask your instructor if your college or university requires
that you get approval from the local Institutional Review
Board (IRB) to conduct survey research. Many schools
waive this requirement if students are doing such research
as part of a required course, but you should check to make
sure. Securing IRB permission usually requires filling out a
series of online forms, submitting all of your questions for
approval, and asking those you are surveying to sign a
consent form saying they agree to participate in the
research.
Write out your purpose in conducting the survey, and make
sure that its results will be directly related to your purpose.

770

Brainstorm potential questions to include in the survey,
and ask how each relates to your purpose and claim.
Figure out how many people you want to contact, what the
demographics of your sample should be (for example, men
in their twenties or an equal number of men and women),
and how you plan to reach these people.
Draft questions that are as free of bias as possible, making
sure that each calls for a short, specific answer. Avoid
open-ended questions, whose responses will be harder to
tabulate.
Think about possible ways that respondents could
misunderstand you or your questions, and revise with these
points in mind.
Test the questions in advance on several people, and revise
those questions that are ambiguous, hard to answer, or too
time-consuming to answer.
If your questionnaire is to be sent by mail or email or
posted on the Web, draft a cover letter explaining your
purpose and giving a clear deadline. For mail, provide an
addressed, stamped return envelope.
On the final draft of the questionnaire, leave plenty of space
for answers.
Proofread the final draft carefully. Typos will make a bad
impression on those whose help you’re seeking.
After you’ve done your tabulations, set out your findings in
clear and easily readable form, using a chart or spreadsheet
if possible.

771

A key requirement of survey questions is that they be easy to understand.

Draw upon personal experience
Personal experience can serve as powerful evidence when it’s
appropriate to the subject, to your purpose, and to the
audience. If it’s your only evidence, however, personal
772

experience usually won’t suffice to carry the argument. Your
experiences may be regarded as merely “anecdotal,” which is to
say possibly exceptional, unrepresentative, or even unreliable.
Nevertheless, personal experience can be effective for drawing
in listeners or readers, as James Parker does in the following
example. His full article goes on to argue that—in spite of his
personal experience with it—the “Twee revolution” has some
good things going for it, including an “actual moral
application”:
Eight years ago or so, the alternative paper I was working
for sent me out to review a couple of folk-noise-psychindie-beardie-weirdie bands. I had a dreadful night. The
bands were bad enough—“fumbling,” I scratched in my
notebook, “infantile”—but what really did me in was the
audience. Instead of baying for the blood of these
lightweights . . . the gathered young people—behatted,
bebearded, besmiling—obliged them with patters of
validating applause. I had seen it before, this fond
curiosity, this acclamation of the undercooked, but never
so much of it in one place: the whole event seemed to
exult in its own half-bakedness. Be as crap as you like
was the message to the performers. The crapper, the
better. We’re here for you. I tottered home, wrote a
homicidally nasty nervous breakdown of a review, and
decided I should take myself out of circulation for a
while. No more live reviews until I calmed down. A wave
of Twee—as I now realize—had just broken over my head.
773

—James Parker, Atlantic, July/August 2014, p. 36

Moonrise Kingdom, directed by Wes Anderson, film’s primary advocate of Twee

RESPOND●
1. The following general topic ideas once appeared on Yahoo!
Groups’s “Issues and Causes” page. Narrow one or two of the
items down to a more specific subject by using research tools
in the library or online such as scholarly books, journal articles,
encyclopedias, magazine pieces, and/or informational Web
sites. Be prepared to explain how the particular research
resources influenced your choice of a more specific subject

774

within the general subject area. Also consider what you might
have to do to turn your specific subject into a full-blown topic
proposal for a research paper assignment.
Abortion debate
Affirmative action
Civil rights
Community service and volunteerism
Confederate flag debate
Current events
Drunk driving
Environment
Food safety
Gender wars
Housing
Human rights
Immigration reform
Media ethics and accountability
Multiculturalism
Overpopulation
Peace and nonviolence
Poverty

775

Race relations
Ranting
Road rage
Voluntary simplicity
2. Go to your school or local library’s online catalog page and
locate its list of research databases. You may find them
presented in various ways: by subject, by field, by academic
major, by type—even alphabetically. Try to identify three or
four databases that might be helpful to you either generally in
college or when working on a specific project, perhaps one you
identified in the previous exercise. Then explore the library
catalog to see how much you can learn about each of these
resources: What fields do they report on? What kinds of data do
they offer (newspaper articles, journal articles, historical
records)? How do they present the content of their materials
(by abstract, by full text)? What years do they cover? What
search strategies do they support (keyword, advanced search)?
To find such information, you might look for a help menu or an
“About” link on the catalog or database homepages. Write a
one-paragraph description of each database you explore and, if
possible, share your findings via a class discussion board or
wiki.
3. What counts as evidence depends in large part on the
rhetorical situation. One audience might find personal
testimony compelling in a given case, whereas another might
require data that only experimental studies can provide.
Imagine that you want to argue that advertisements should not
include demeaning representations of chimpanzees and that
the use of primates in advertising should be banned. You’re

776

encouraged to find out that a number of companies such as
Honda and Puma have already agreed to such a ban, so you
decide to present your argument to other companies’ CEOs and
advertising officials. What kind of evidence would be most
compelling to this group? How would you rethink your use of
evidence if you were writing for the campus newspaper, for
middle-schoolers, or for animal-rights group members? What
can you learn about what sort of evidence each of these groups
might value—and why?
4. Finding evidence for an argument is often a discovery process.
Sometimes you’re concerned not only with digging up support
for an already established claim but also with creating and
revising tentative claims. Surveys and interviews can help you
figure out what to argue, as well as provide evidence for a
claim.
Interview a classmate with the goal of writing a brief proposal
argument about the career that he/she should pursue. The
claim should be something like My classmate should be doing X
five years from now. Limit yourself to ten questions. Write them
ahead of time, and don’t deviate from them. Record the results
of the interview (written notes are fine; you don’t need to tape
the interview). Then interview another classmate with the same
goal in mind. Ask the same first question, but this time let the
answer dictate the next nine questions. You still get only ten
questions.
Which interview gave you more information? Which one helped
you learn more about your classmate’s goals? Which one better
helped you develop claims about his/her future?

777

CHAPTER 19 Evaluating Sources

All the attention paid to “fake news” in our current political
culture only underscores the point of this chapter: the
effectiveness of an argument often depends on the quality of
the sources that support or prove it. It goes without saying then,
that you’ll need to carefully evaluate and assess all the sources
you use in your academic or professional work, including those
that you gather in libraries, from other print sources, in online
searches, or in your own field research.
Remember that different sources can contribute in different
ways to your work. In most cases, you’ll be looking for reliable
sources that provide accurate information or that clearly and
persuasively express opinions that might serve as evidence for a
case you’re making. At other times, you may be seeking
material that expresses ideas or attitudes—how people are
thinking and feeling at a given time. You might need to use a
graphic image, a sample of avant-garde music, or a
controversial YouTube clip that doesn’t fit neatly into categories

778

such as “reliable” or “accurate” yet is central to your argument.
With any and all such sources and evidence, your goals are to
be as knowledgeable about them and as responsible in their use
as you can be and to share honestly what you learn about them
with readers.

No writer wants to be naïve in the use of source material,
especially since most of the evidence that is used in arguments
on public issues—even material from influential and wellknown sources—comes with considerable baggage. Scientists
and humanists alike have axes to grind, corporations have
products to sell, politicians have issues to promote, journalists
have reputations to make, publishers and media companies
have readers, listeners, viewers, and advertisers to attract and
to avoid offending. All of these groups produce and use
information to their own benefit, and it’s not (usually) a bad
779

thing that they do so. You just have to be aware that when you
take information from a given source, it will almost inevitably
carry with it at least some of the preferences, assumptions, and
biases—conscious or not—of the people who produce and
disseminate it. Teachers and librarians are not exempted from
this caution: even when we make every effort to be clear and
comprehensive in reporting information, we cannot possibly
see that information from every angle. So even the most honest
and open observer can deliver only a partial account of an
event.
It’s worth noting, however, that some sources—especially those
you might encounter on social media—have no other motive but
to deceive readers or to garner clicks that generate revenue.
Material this deliberately deceptive has no place in academic
work, unless you are looking for examples of manipulation,
deception, or exploitation. If you cite such materials, even
unwittingly, your research will be undermined and may be
discredited. (See the section on “crap detection” later in this
chapter.)
To correct for biases, draw on as many reliable sources as you
can handle when you’re preparing to write. Don’t assume that
all arguments are equally good or that all the sides in a
controversy can be supported by the same weight of evidence
and good reasons. But you want to avoid choosing sources so
selectively that you miss essential issues and perspectives.
That’s easy to do when you read only sources that agree with

780

you or when the sources that you read all seem to carry the
same message. In addition, make sure that you read each
source thoroughly enough that you understand its overall
points: national research conducted for the Citation Project
indicates that student writers often draw from the first
paragraph or page of a source and then simply drop it, without
seeing what the rest of the source has to say about the topic at
hand. Doing so could leave you with an incomplete or
inaccurate sense of what the source is saying.

Consider that sources may sometimes have motives for slanting or selecting the
news.

781

Assessing Print Sources
Since you want information to be reliable and persuasive, it
pays to evaluate each potential source thoroughly. The
following principles can help you evaluate print materials:
Relevance. Begin by asking what a particular source will
add to your argument and how closely the source is related
to your argumentative claim. For a book, the table of
contents and the index may help you decide. For an article,
look for an abstract that summarizes its content. If you
can’t identify what the source will add to your research, set
it aside. You can almost certainly find something better.
Credentials of the author. Sometimes the author’s
credentials are set forth in an article, in a book, or on a Web
site, so be sure to look for them. Is the author an expert on
the topic? To find out, you can gather information about the
person on the Web easily enough—although you should
check and cross-check what you discover. Another way to
learn about the credibility of an author is to search Google
Groups for postings that mention the author or to check a
Citation Index to find out how other writers refer to this
author. (If necessary, ask a librarian for assistance.) If you
see your source mentioned by other sources you’re using,
look at how they cite it and what they say about it, which
could provide clues to the author’s credibility.
Stance of the author. What’s the author’s position on the
issue(s) involved, and how does this stance influence the
information in the source? Does the author’s stance support
or challenge your own views?
782

What stance does the Japanese American Citizens League
take on the issue of what terminology to use in describing the
experiences of Japanese Americans during World War II?
LINK TO Japanese American Citizens League, “The Power of
Words,” in Chapter 25

Credentials of the publisher or sponsor. If your source is
from a newspaper, is it a major one (such as the Wall Street
Journal or the Washington Post) that has historical
credentials in reporting, or is it a tabloid? Is it a popular
magazine like O: The Oprah Magazine or a journal
sponsored by a professional group, such as the Journal of
the American Medical Association? If your source is a book,
is the publisher one you recognize or that has its own Web
site? When you don’t know the reputation of a source, ask
several people with more expertise: a librarian, an
instructor, or a professional in the field.
Stance of the publisher or sponsor. Sometimes this stance
will be obvious: a magazine called Save the Planet! will take
a pro-environmental position, whereas one called America
First! will probably take a populist stance. But other times,
you need to read carefully between the lines to identify
particular positions and see how the stance affects the
message the source presents. Start by asking what the
source’s goals are: what does the publisher or sponsoring
group want to make happen?
Currency. Check the date of publication of every book and
article. Recent sources are often more useful than older
783

ones, particularly in the sciences. However, in some fields
(such as history and literature), the most authoritative
works may well be the older ones.
Accuracy. Check to see whether the author cites any
sources for the information or opinions in the article and, if
so, how credible and current they are.
Level of specialization. General sources can be helpful as
you begin your research, but later in the project you may
need the authority or currency of more focused sources.
Keep in mind that highly specialized works on your topic
may be difficult for your audience to understand.
Documentation. Purely academic sources, such as
scholarly journal articles, will contain thorough citations,
but you should also check that more popular sources you
use routinely identify their sources or provide verifiable
evidence for claims they make. In many Web sources,
documentation takes the form of links to the evidence
cited.
Audience. Was the source written for a general readership?
For specialists? For advocates or opponents?
Length. Is the source long enough to provide adequate
details in support of your claim?
Availability. Do you have access to the source? If it isn’t
readily accessible, your time might be better spent looking
elsewhere.
Omissions. What’s missing or omitted from the source?
Might such exclusions affect whether or how you can use
the source as evidence?

784

Note the differences between the covers of the Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
an academic journal, and The How of Happiness, a book about psychology.

785

Assessing Electronic
Sources
You’ll probably find working with digital sources both exciting
and frustrating, for even though these tools (the Web, social
networks, Twitter, and so on) are enormously useful, they offer
information of widely varying quality—and mountains and
mountains of it. Yet there is no question that, for example,
Twitter feeds from our era will be the subject of future scholarly
analysis. Because Web sources are mostly open and
unregulated, careful researchers look for corroboration before
accepting factual claims they find online, especially if it comes
from a site whose sponsor’s identity is unclear.

786

Practicing Crap Detection
In online environments, you must be the judge of the accuracy
and trustworthiness of the electronic sources you encounter.
This is a problem all researchers face, and one that led media
critic Howard Rheingold to develop a system for detecting
“crap,” that is, “information tainted by ignorance, inept
communication, or deliberate deception.” To avoid such “crap,”
Rheingold recommends a method of triangulation, which
means finding three separate credible online sources that
corroborate the point you want to make. But how do you ensure
that these sources are credible? One tip Rheingold gives is to
use sites like FactCheck.org to verify information, or to use the
search term “whois” to find out about the author or sponsor of a
site.

787

Every man [and woman] should have a built-in automatic crap detector operating
inside him. —Ernest Hemingway, during a 1954 interview with Robert Manning

In making judgments about online sources, then, you need to
be especially mindful and to rely on the same criteria and
careful thinking that you use to assess print sources. You may
find the following additional questions helpful in evaluating
online sources:

Consider the publisher’s credentials by comparing Deanna
Hartley’s article about employers looking at social media profiles,

788

published on Careerbuilder.com, with Scott O. Lilienfeld’s article
on the shortcomings of microaggressions, published in Aeon.com,
a not-for-profit registered charity.
LINK TO Hartley, “Creative Ways to Get Noticed by Employers on
Social Media,” in Chapter 26 and Lilienfeld, “Why a Moratorium on
Microaggressions Is Needed,” in Chapter 27

Who has posted the document or message or created the
site/medium? An individual? An interest group? A
company? A government agency? For Web sites, does the
URL offer any clues? Note especially the final suffix in a
domain name—.com (commercial), .org (nonprofit
organization), .edu (educational institution), .gov
(government agency), .mil (military), or .net (network).
Also note the geographical domains that indicate country of
origin—as in .ca (Canada), .ar (Argentina), or .ru (Russia).
Click on some links of a Web site to see if they lead to
legitimate and helpful sources or organizations.
What can you determine about the credibility of the author
or sponsor? Can the information in the document or site be
verified in other sources? How accurate and complete is it?
On a blog, for example, look for a link that identifies the
creator of the site (some blogs are managed by multiple
authors).
Who is accountable for the information in the document or
site? How thoroughly does it credit its sources? On a wiki,
for example, check its editorial policies: who can add to or
edit its materials?
How current is the document or site? Be especially cautious

789

of undated materials. Most reliable sites are refreshed or
edited regularly and should list the date.
What perspectives are represented? If only one perspective
is represented, how can you balance or expand this point of
view? Is it a straightforward presentation, or could it be a
parody or satire?

790

What are the kinds and levels of information available on these Web sites—a
commercial site about the TV show The Deadliest Catch (top) and an Alaska
Department of Fish and Game site on king crab (bottom)?

791

Assessing Field Research
If you’ve conducted experiments, surveys, interviews,
observations, or any other field research in developing and
supporting an argument, make sure to review your results with
a critical eye. The following questions can help you evaluate
your own field research:
Have you rechecked all data and all conclusions to make
sure they’re accurate and warranted?
Have you identified the exact time, place, and participants
in all your field research?
Have you made clear what part you played in the research
and how, if at all, your role could have influenced the
results or findings?
If your research involved other people, have you gotten
their permission to use their words or other materials in
your argument? Have you asked whether you can use their
names or whether the names should be kept confidential?
If your research involved interviews, have you thanked the
person or persons you interviewed and asked them to verify
the words you have attributed to them?

RESPOND●
1. The chapter claims that “most of the evidence that is used in
arguments on public issues . . . comes with considerable
baggage.” Find an article in a journal, newspaper, or magazine
that uses evidence to support a claim of some public interest. It
might be a piece about new treatments for malaria, Internet

792

privacy, dietary recommendations for schoolchildren,
proposals for air-quality regulation, the rise in numbers of
campus sexual assaults, and so on. Identify several specific
pieces of evidence, information, or data presented in the article
and then evaluate the degree to which you would accept, trust,
or believe those statements. Be prepared to explain specifically
why you would be inclined to trust or mistrust any claims
based on the data.
2. Check out Goodreads (you can set up an account for free) and
see what people there are recommending—or search for
“common reading programs” or “common reading lists.” Then
choose one of the recommended books, preferably a work of
nonfiction, and analyze it by using as many of the principles of
evaluation for printed books listed in this chapter as you can
without actually reading the book: Who is the author, and what
are his/her credentials? Who is the publisher, and what is its
reputation? What can you find out about the book’s relevance
and popularity: Why might the book be on the list? Who is the
primary audience for the book? How lengthy is it? How
difficult? Finally, consider how likely it is that the book you
have selected would be used in an academic paper. If you do
choose a work of fiction, might the work be studied in a
literature course?
3. Choose a news or information Web site that you visit routinely.
Then, using the guidelines discussed in this chapter, spend
some time evaluating its credibility. You might begin by
comparing it with Google News or Arts & Letters Daily, two sites
that have a reputation for being reliable—though not
necessarily unbiased.
4. On Web sites or social media, find several items that purport to
offer information or news, but lead readers into a tangle of ads,

793

photos, commentary, and other clickbait. You’ve seen the
teases: Most Unfriendly Cities in the US! The video Hillary
Clinton doesn’t want you to watch! Is this the smartest kitten
ever? Analyze the strategies items like these use to attract
readers and the quality of information they offer. Are such
items merely irksome or do they seriously diminish online
communication and social media?

794

CHAPTER 20 Using Sources

You may gather an impressive amount of evidence on your
topic—from firsthand interviews, from careful observations,
and from intensive library and online research. But until that
evidence is thoroughly understood and then woven into the
fabric of your own argument, it’s just a stack of details. You still
have to turn that data into credible information that will be
persuasive to your intended audiences.

795

Practicing Infotention
Today it’s a truism to say that we are all drowning in
information, that it is dousing us like water from a fire hose.
Such a situation has advantages: it’s never been easier to locate
information on any imaginable topic. But it also has distinct
disadvantages: how do you identify useful and credible sources
among the millions available to you, and how do you use them
well once you’ve found them? We addressed the first of these
questions in Chapter 18, “Finding Evidence.” But finding
trustworthy sources is only the first step. Experts on technology
and information like professors Richard Lanham and Howard
Rheingold point to the next challenge: managing attention.
Lanham points out that our age of information calls on us to
resist the allure of every single thing vying for our attention and
to discriminate among what deserves notice and what doesn’t.
Building on this insight, Rheingold has coined the term “
infotention,” which he says “is a word I came up with to
describe a mind-machine combination of brain-powered
attention skills and computer-powered information filters”
(Howard Rheingold, “Infotention,” http://www.rheingold.com).
Practicing infotention calls for synthesizing and thinking
critically about the enormous amount of information available
to us from the “collective intelligence” of the Web. And while
some of us can learn to be mindful while multitasking (a fighter
pilot is an example Rheingold gives of those who must learn to
do so), most of us are not good at it and need to train ourselves,
796

literally, to pay attention to attention (and intention as well), to
be aware of what we are doing and thinking, to take a deep
breath and notice where we are directing our focus. In short,
writers today need to learn to focus their attention, especially
online, and learn to avoid distractions. So just how do you put
all these skills together to practice infotention?

797

Building a Critical Mass
Throughout the chapters in Part 4, “Research and Arguments,”
we’ve stressed the need to discover as much evidence as
possible in support of your claim and to read and understand it
as thoroughly as you can. If you can find only one or two pieces
of evidence—only one or two reasons or illustrations to back up
your thesis—then you may be on unsteady ground. Although
there’s no definite way of saying just how much evidence is
enough, you should build toward a critical mass by having
several pieces of evidence all pulling in the direction of your
claim. Begin by putting Rheingold’s triangulation into practice:
find at least three credible sources that support your point.
And remember that circumstantial evidence (that is, indirect
evidence that suggests that something occurred but doesn’t
prove it directly) may not be enough if it is the only evidence
that you have. In the infamous case of Jack the Ripper, the
murderer who plagued London’s East End in 1888, nothing but
circumstantial evidence ever surfaced and hence no one was
charged with or convicted of the crimes. In 2007, however,
amateur detective Russell Edwards bought a shawl at auction—a
shawl found at one of the murder sites. After consulting with a
number of scientific experts and using DNA evidence, Edwards
identified Jack the Ripper as Aaron Kosminski, who eventually
died in an asylum.
If your support for a claim relies solely on circumstantial

798

evidence, on personal experience, or on one major example,
you should extend your search for additional sources and good
reasons to back up your claim—or modify the argument. Your
initial position may simply have been wrong.

799

Synthesizing Information
As you gather information, you must find a way to make all the
facts, ideas, points of view, and quotations you have
encountered work with and for you. The process involves not
only reading information and recording data carefully (paying
“infotention”), but also pondering and synthesizing it—that is,
figuring out how the sources you’ve examined come together to
support your specific claims. Synthesis, a form of critical
thinking highly valued by academia, business, industry, and
other institutions—especially those that reward innovation and
creative thinking—is hard work. It almost always involves
immersing yourself in your information or data until it feels
familiar and natural to you.
At that point, you can begin to look for patterns, themes, and
commonalities or striking differences among your sources.
Many students use highlighters to help with this process: mark
in blue all the parts of sources that mention point A; mark in
green those that have to do with issue B; and so on. You are
looking for connections among your sources, bringing together
what they have to say about your topic in ways you can organize
to help support the claim you are making.
You typically begin this process by paraphrasing or
summarizing sources so that you understand exactly what they
offer and which ideas are essential to your project. You also
decide which, if any, sources offer materials you want to quote

800

directly or reproduce (such as an important graph or table).
Then you work to introduce such borrowed materials so that
readers grasp their significance, and organize them to highlight
important relationships. Throughout this review process, use
“infotention” strategies by asking questions such as the
following:
Which sources help to set the context for your argument? In
particular, which items present new information or give
audiences an incentive for reading your work?
Which items provide background information that is
essential for anyone trying to understand your argument?
Which items help to define, clarify, or explain key concepts
of your case? How can these sources be presented or
sequenced so that readers appreciate your claims as valid
or, at a minimum, reasonable?
Which of your sources might be used to illustrate technical
or difficult aspects of your subject? Would it be best to
summarize such technical information to make it more
accessible, or would direct quotations be more
authoritative and convincing?
Which sources (or passages within sources) furnish the best
support or evidence for each claim or sub-claim within
your argument? Now is the time to group these together so
you can decide how to arrange them most effectively.
Which materials do the best job outlining conflicts or
offering counterarguments to claims within a project?
Which sources might help you address any important
objections or rebuttals?

801

D.K., the author of “Shooting Guns: It’s Rather Fun, Actually,”
presents a strong narrative explaining the appeal of shooting,
while at the same time synthesizing information on gun fatalities
and the financial influence of the National Rifle Association.
LINK TO D.K., “Shooting Guns: It’s Rather Fun, Actually,” in
Chapter 23

Remember that yours should be the dominant and controlling
voice in an argument. You are like the conductor of an
orchestra, calling upon separate instruments to work together
to create a rich and coherent sound. The least effective
academic papers are those that mechanically walk through a
string of sources—often just one item per paragraph—without
ever getting all these authorities to talk to each other or with the
author. Such papers go through the motions but don’t get
anywhere. You can do better.

Paraphrasing Sources You Will
Use Extensively
In a paraphrase, you put an author’s ideas—including major
and minor points—into your own words and sentence
structures, following the order the author has given them in the
original piece. You usually paraphrase sources that you expect
to use heavily in a project. But if you compose your notes well,
you may be able to use much of the paraphrased material
directly in your paper (with proper citation) because all of the

802

language is your own. A competent paraphrase proves you have
read material or data carefully: you demonstrate not only that
you know what a source contains but also that you appreciate
what it means. There’s an important difference.

Backing up your claims with well-chosen sources makes almost any argument
more credible.

Here are guidelines to help you paraphrase accurately and
effectively in an academic argument:
Identify the source of the paraphrase, and comment on its
significance or the authority of its author.
Respect your sources. When paraphrasing an entire work
803

or any lengthy section of it, cover all its main points and
any essential details, following the same order the author
uses. If you distort the shape of the material, your notes will
be less valuable, especially if you return to them later, and
you may end up misconstruing what the source is saying.
If you’re paraphrasing material that extends over more
than one page in the original source, note the placement of
page breaks since it is highly likely that you will use only
part of the paraphrase in your argument. For a print
source, you will need the page number to cite the specific
page of material you want to use.
Make sure that the paraphrase is in your own words and
sentence structures. If you want to include especially
memorable or powerful language from the original source,
enclose it in quotation marks. See Using Quotations
Selectively and Strategically in Chapter 20.
Keep your own comments, elaborations, or reactions
separate from the paraphrase itself. Your report on the
source should be clear, objective, and free of connotative
language.
Collect all the information necessary to create an in-text
citation as well as an item in your works cited list or
references list. For online materials, be sure to record the
URL so you know how to recover the source later.
Label the paraphrase with a note suggesting where and how
you intend to use it in your argument.
Recheck to make sure that the words and sentence
structures are your own and that they express the author’s
meaning accurately.

804

Here is a passage from linguist David Crystal’s book Language
Play, followed by a student’s paraphrase of the passage.
Language play, the arguments suggest, will help the
development of pronunciation ability through its focus
on the properties of sounds and sound contrasts, such as
rhyming. Playing with word endings and decoding the
syntax of riddles will help the acquisition of grammar.
Readiness to play with words and names, to exchange
puns and to engage in nonsense talk, promotes links with
semantic development. The kinds of dialogue interaction
illustrated above are likely to have consequences for the
development of conversational skills. And language play,
by its nature, also contributes greatly to what in recent
years has been called metalinguistic awareness, which is
turning out to be of critical importance to the
development of language skills in general and literacy
skills in particular (180).

Paraphrase of the Passage from
Crystal’s Book
In Language Play, David Crystal argues that
playing with language—creating rhymes,
figuring out riddles, making puns, playing
with names, using inverted words, and so on—
helps children figure out a great deal, from
the basics of pronunciation and grammar to

805

how to carry on a conversation. This kind of
play allows children to understand the
overall concept of how language works, a
concept that is key to learning to use—and
read—language effectively (180).
Note how the student clearly identifies the title and author of
the source in the opening line of her paraphrase, and how she
restates the passage’s main ideas without copying the exact
words or phrasing of the original passage.

Summarizing Sources
In her article about how one evangelical church is embracing gay
rights, Nicole Pasulka summarizes the recent evolution of legal,
political, and social perspectives on gay marriage.
LINK TO Pasulka, “How a Bible-Belt Evangelical Church Embraced
Gay Rights,” in Chapter 23

Unlike a paraphrase, a summary records just the gist of a
source or a key idea—that is, only enough information to
identify a point you want to emphasize. Once again, this muchshortened version of a source puts any borrowed ideas into your
own words. At the research stage, summaries help you identify
key points you want to make or key points your sources are
making that you want to refute and, just as important, provide a
record of what you have read. In a project itself, a summary

806

helps readers understand the sources you are using.
Here are some guidelines to help you prepare accurate and
helpful summaries:
Identify the thesis or main point in a source and make it the
heart of your summary. In a few detailed phrases or
sentences, explain to yourself (and readers) what the
source accomplishes.
When using a summary in an argument, identify the
source, state its point, and add your own comments about
why the material is significant for the argument that you’re
making.
Include just enough information to recount the main points
you want to cite. A summary is usually much shorter than
the original. When you need more information or specific
details, you can return to the source itself or prepare a
paraphrase.
Use your own words in a summary and keep the language
objective and denotative. If you include any language from
the original source, enclose it in quotation marks.
Collect all the information necessary to create an in-text
citation as well as an item in your works cited list or
references list. For online sources without page numbers,
record the paragraph, screen, or section number(s) if
available.
Label the summary with a note that suggests where and
how you intend to use it in your argument. If your summary
includes a comment on the source (as it might in the
summaries used for annotated bibliographies), be sure that
807

you won’t later confuse your comments with what the
source itself asserts.
Recheck the summary to make sure that you’ve captured
the author’s meaning accurately and that the wording is
entirely your own.
Following is a summary of the David Crystal passage on page
469:
In Language Play, David Crystal argues that
playing with language helps children figure
out how language works, a concept that is
key to learning to use—and read—language
effectively (180).
Notice that the summary is shorter and—relatedly—less detailed
than the paraphrase shown in the section Paraphrasing Sources
You Will Use Extensively. The paraphrase gives several
examples to explain what “language play” is, while the
summary sticks to the main point of the passage.

Using Quotations Selectively and
Strategically
To support your argumentative claims, you’ll want to quote
(that is, to reproduce an author’s precise words) in at least three
kinds of situations:
1. when the wording expresses a point so well that you cannot
improve it or shorten it without weakening it,
808

2. when the author is a respected authority whose opinion
supports your own ideas powerfully, and/or
3. when an author or authority challenges or seriously
disagrees with others in the field.
Consider, too, that charts, graphs, and images may also
function like direct quotations, providing convincing visual
evidence for your academic argument.
In an argument, quotations from respected authorities will
establish your ethos as someone who has sought out experts in
the field. Just as important sometimes, direct quotations (such
as a memorable phrase in your introduction or a detailed
eyewitness account) may capture your readers’ attention.
Finally, carefully chosen quotations can broaden the appeal of
your argument by drawing on emotion as well as logic,
appealing to the reader’s mind and heart. A student who is
writing on the ethical issues of bullfighting, for example, might
introduce an argument that bullfighting is not a sport by
quoting Ernest Hemingway’s comment that “the formal bullfight is a tragedy, not a sport, and the bull is certain to be killed”
and then accompany the quotation with an image such as the
one above.

809

A tragedy, not a sport?

The following guidelines can help you quote sources accurately
and effectively:
Quote or reproduce materials that readers will find
especially convincing, purposeful, and interesting. You
should have a specific reason for every quotation.
Don’t forget the double quotation marks [“ ”] that must
surround a direct quotation in American usage. If there’s a
quote within a quote, it is surrounded by a pair of single
quotation marks [‘ ’]. British usage does just the opposite,
810

and foreign languages often handle direct quotations much
differently.
When using a quotation in your argument, introduce its
author(s) and follow the quotation with commentary of
your own that points out its significance.
Keep quoted material relatively brief. Quote only as much
of a passage as is necessary to make your point while still
accurately representing what the source actually said.
If the quotation extends over more than one page in the
original source, note the placement of page breaks in case
you decide to use only part of the quotation in your
argument.
In your notes, label a quotation you intend to use with a
note that tells you where you think you’ll use it.
Make sure you have all the information necessary to create
an in-text citation as well as an item in your works cited list
or references list.
Copy quotations carefully, reproducing the punctuation,
capitalization, and spelling exactly as they are in the
original. If possible, copy the quotation from a reliable text
and paste it directly into your project.
Make sure that quoted phrases, sentences, or passages fit
smoothly into your own language. Consider where to begin
the quotation to make it work effectively within its
surroundings or modify the words you write to work with
the quoted material.
Use square brackets if you introduce words of your own
into the quotation or make changes to it (“And [more] brain
research isn’t going to define further the matter of ‘mind’”).
Use ellipsis marks if you omit material (“And brain
811

research isn’t going to define . . . the matter of ‘mind’”).
If you’re quoting a short passage (four lines or fewer in
MLA style; forty words or fewer in APA style), it should be
worked into your text, enclosed by quotation marks. Longer
quotations should be set off from the regular text. Begin
such a quotation on a new line, indenting every line a half
inch or five to seven spaces. Set-off quotations do not need
to be enclosed in quotation marks.
Never distort your sources or present them out of context
when you quote from them. Misusing sources is a major
offense in academic arguments.

Framing Materials You Borrow
with Signal Words and
Introductions
Because source materials are crucial to the success of
812

arguments, you need to introduce borrowed words and ideas
carefully to your readers. Doing so usually calls for using a
signal phrase of some kind in the sentence to introduce or
frame the source. Often, a signal phrase will precede a
quotation. But you need such a marker whenever you introduce
borrowed material, as in the following examples:
According to noted primatologist Jane
Goodall , the more we learn about the nature
of nonhuman animals, the more ethical
questions we face about their use in the
service of humans.
The more we learn about the nature of
nonhuman animals, the more ethical questions
we face about their use in the service of
humans, according to noted primatologist
Jane Goodall.
The more we learn about the nature of
nonhuman animals, according to noted
primatologist Jane Goodall , the more ethical
questions we face about their use in the
service of humans.
In each of these sentences, the signal phrase tells readers that
you’re drawing on the work of a person named Jane Goodall and
that this person is a “noted primatologist.”

813

Now look at an example that uses a quotation from a source in
more than one sentence:
In Job Shift, consultant William Bridges
worries about “dejobbing and about what a
future shaped by it is going to be like.”
Even more worrisome, Bridges argues , is the
possibility that “the sense of craft and of
professional vocation . . . will break down
under the need to earn a fee” (228).
The signal verbs worries and argues add a sense of urgency to
the message Bridges offers. They also suggest that the writer
either agrees with—or is neutral about—Bridges’s points. Other
signal verbs can have a more negative slant, indicating that the
point being introduced by the quotation is open to debate and
that others (including the writer) might disagree with it. If the
writer of the passage above had said, for instance, that Bridges
unreasonably contends or that he fantasizes, these signal verbs
would carry quite different connotations from those associated
with argues.
In some cases, a signal verb may require more complex
phrasing to get the writer’s full meaning across:
Bridges recognizes the dangers of changes in
work yet refuses to be overcome by them :
“The real issue is not how to stop the
change but how to provide the necessary
814

knowledge and skills to equip people to
operate successfully in this New World”
(229).
As these examples illustrate, the signal verb is important
because it allows you to characterize the author’s or source’s
viewpoint as well as your own—so choose these verbs with care.

Some Frequently Used Signal Verbs
acknowledges

claims

emphasizes

remarks

admits

concludes

expresses

replies

advises

concurs

hypothesizes

reports

agrees

confirms

interprets

responds

allows

criticizes

lists

reveals

argues

declares

objects

states

asserts

disagrees

observes

suggests

believes

discusses

offers

thinks

charges

disputes

opposes

writes

Note that in APA style, these signal verbs should be in a past
tense: Blau (1992) claimed; Clark (2018) has concluded.

Using Sources to Clarify and
Support Your Own Argument
The best academic arguments often have the flavor of a hearty
but focused intellectual conversation. Scholars and scientists
create this impression by handling research materials
strategically and selectively. Here’s how some college writers

815

use sources to achieve their own specific goals within an
academic argument.

Establish context
Michael Hiltzik, whose article “Don’t Believe Facebook: The
Demise of the Written Word Is Very Far Off” appears in Chapter
8, sets the context for his argument when, at the end of his first
paragraph, he paraphrases the claim of Facebook executive
Nicola Mendelsohn: “In five years, she told a Fortune
conference in London, her platform will probably be ‘all video,’
and the written word will be essentially dead.” Then he uses a
second paragraph to go into greater detail because
Mendelsohn’s view represents precisely the notion he intends
to contest:
“I just think if we look already, we’re
seeing a year-on-year decline on text,” she
said. “If I was having a bet, I would say:
video, video, video.” That’s because “the
best way to tell stories in this world,
where so much information is coming at us,
actually is video. It conveys so much more
information in a much quicker period. So
actually the trend helps us to digest much
more information.”
Only then does Hiltzik present his thesis—and it is short and
sweet: “This is, of course, exactly wrong.” As they say, game on.

816

Readers clearly know what’s at stake in the article and perhaps
what evidence to expect from the paragraphs to follow (see
Don’t Believe Facebook: The Demise of the Written Word Is
Very Far Off in Chapter 8.)

When using Web sources such as blogs, take special care to check authors’
backgrounds and credentials.

Review the literature on a subject
You will often need to tell readers what authorities have already
written about your topic, thus connecting them to your own
argument. So, in a paper on the effectiveness of peer editing,
Susan Wilcox does a very brief “review of the literature” on her
subject, pointing to three authorities who support using the
method in writing courses. She quotes from the authors and

817

also puts some of their ideas in her own words:
Bostock cites one advantage of peer review
as “giving a sense of ownership of the
assessment process” (1). Topping expands
this view, stating that “peer assessment
also involves increased time on task:
thinking, comparing, contrasting, and
communicating” (254). The extra time spent
thinking over the assignment, especially in
terms of helping someone else, can draw in
the reviewer and lend greater importance to
taking the process seriously, especially
since the reviewer knows that the classmate
is relying on his advice. This also adds an
extra layer of accountability for the
student; his hard work—or lack thereof—will
be seen by peers, not just the instructor.
Cassidy notes , “[S]tudents work harder with
the knowledge that they will be assessed by
their peers” (509): perhaps the knowledge
that peer review is coming leads to a
better-quality draft to begin with.
The paragraph is straightforward and useful, giving readers an
efficient overview of the subject. If they want more
information, they can find it by consulting Wilcox’s works cited
page.

818

Introduce a term or define a concept
Quite often in an academic argument, you may need to define a
term or explain a concept. Relying on a source may make your
job easier and enhance your credibility. That is what Laura
Pena achieves in the following paragraph, drawing upon two
authorities to explain what teachers mean by a “rubric” when it
comes to grading student work:
To understand the controversy surrounding
rubrics, it is best to know what a rubric
is. According to Heidi Andrade, a professor
at SUNY-Albany , a rubric can be defined as
“a document that lists criteria and
describes varying levels of quality, from
excellent to poor, for a specific
assignment” (“Self-Assessment” 61).
Traditionally, rubrics have been used
primarily as grading and evaluation tools
(Kohn 12) , meaning that a rubric was not
used until after students handed their
papers in to their teacher. The teacher
would then use a rubric to evaluate the
students’ papers according to the criteria
listed on the rubric.
Note that the first source provides the core definition while
information from the second offers a detail important to
understanding when and how rubrics are used—a major issue in

819

Pena’s paper. Her selection of sources here serves her thesis
while also providing readers with necessary information.

Present technical material
Sources can be especially helpful, too, when material becomes
technical or difficult to understand. Writing on your own, you
might lack the confidence to handle the complexities of some
subjects. While you should challenge yourself to learn a subject
well enough to explain it in your own words, there will be times
when a quotation from an expert serves both you and your
readers. Here is Natalie San Luis dealing with some of the
technical differences between mainstream and Black English:
The grammatical rules of mainstream English
are more concrete than those of Black
English; high school students can’t check
out an MLA handbook on Ebonics from their
school library. As with all dialects,
though, there are certain characteristics of
the language that most Black English
scholars agree upon. According to Samy Alim,
author of Roc the Mic Right, these
characteristics are the “[h]abitual be
[which] indicates actions that are
continuing or ongoing. . . . Copula absence.
. . . Stressed been. . . . Gon [indicating]
the future tense. . . . They for possessive.
. . . Postvocalic r. . . . [and] Ank and ang

820

for ‘ink’ and ‘ing’” (115). Other scholars
have identified “[a]bsence of third-person
singular present-tense s. . . . Absence of
possessive ’s,” repetition of pronouns, and
double negatives (Rickford 111-24).
Note that using ellipses enables San Luis to cover a great deal of
ground. Readers not familiar with linguistic terms may have
trouble following the quotation, but remember that academic
arguments often address audiences comfortable with some
degree of complexity.

Develop or support a claim
Even academic audiences expect to be convinced, and one of
the most important strategies for a writer is to use sources to
amplify or support a claim.
Here is Manasi Deshpande in a student essay making a specific
claim about disability accommodations on her campus:
“Although the University has made a concerted and continuing
effort to improve access, students and faculty with physical
disabilities still suffer from discriminatory hardship, unequal
opportunity to succeed, and lack of independence.” Now watch
how she weaves sources together in the following paragraph to
help support that claim:
The current state of campus accessibility
leaves substantial room for improvement.
There are approximately 150 academic and
821

administrative buildings on campus (Grant) .
Eduardo Gardea , intern architect at the
Physical Plant, estimates that only about
nineteen buildings comply fully with the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
According to Penny Seay , PhD, director of
the Center for Disability Studies at UT
Austin, the ADA in theory “requires every
building on campus to be accessible.”

Highlight differences or counterarguments
The sources you encounter in developing a project won’t always
agree with each other or you. In academic arguments, you don’t
want to hide such differences, but instead point them out
honestly and let readers make judgments based upon actual
claims. Here is a paragraph in which Laura Pena again presents
two views on the use of rubrics as grading tools:
Some naysayers, such as Alfie Kohn , assert
that “any form of assessment that encourages
students to keep asking, ‘How am I doing?’
is likely to change how they look at
themselves and what they’re learning,
usually for the worse.” Kohn cites a study
that found that students who pay too much
attention to the quality of their
performance are more likely to chalk up the
outcome of an assignment to factors beyond

822

their control, such as innate ability, and
are also more likely to give up quickly in
the face of a difficult task (14). However,
Ross and Rolheiser have found that when
students are taught how to properly
implement self-assessment tools in the
writing process, they are more likely to put
more effort and persistence into completing
a difficult assignment and may develop
higher self-confidence in their writing
ability (sec. 2). Building self-confidence
in elementary-age writers can be extremely
helpful when they tackle more complicated
writing endeavors in the future.
In describing Kohn as a “naysayer,” Pena may tip her hand and
lose some degree of objectivity. But her thesis has already
signaled her support for rubrics as a grading tool, so academic
readers will probably not find the connotations of the term
inappropriate.
These examples suggest only a few of the ways that sources,
either summarized or quoted directly, can be incorporated into
an academic argument to support or enhance a writer’s goals.
Like these writers, you should think of sources as your partners
in developing and expressing ideas. But you are still in charge.

Avoiding “Patchwriting”
823

When using sources in an argument, writers—and especially
those new to research-based writing—may be tempted to do
what Professor Rebecca Moore Howard terms “ patchwriting”:
stitching together material from Web or other sources without
properly paraphrasing or summarizing and with little or no
documentation. Here, for example, is a patchwork paragraph
about the dangers wind turbines pose to wildlife:
Scientists are discovering that technology
with low carbon impact does not mean low
environmental or social impacts. That is the
case especially with wind turbines, whose
long, massive fiberglass blades have been
chopping up tens of thousands of birds that
fly into them, including golden eagles, redtailed hawks, burrowing owls, and other
raptors in California. Turbines are also
killing bats in great numbers. The 420 wind
turbines now in use across Pennsylvania
killed more than 10,000 bats last year—
mostly in the late summer months, according
to the State Game Commission. That’s an
average of 25 bats per turbine per year, and
the Nature Conservancy predicts as many as
2,900 turbines will be set up across the
state by 2030. It’s not the spinning blades
that kill the bats; instead, their lungs
effectively blow up from the rapid pressure

824

drop that occurs as air flows over the
turbine blades. But there’s hope we may
figure out solutions to these problems
because, since we haven’t had too many wind
turbines heretofore in the country, we are
learning how to manage this new technology
as we go.
The paragraph reads well and is full of details. But it would be
considered plagiarized (see Chapter 21) because it fails to
identify its sources and because most of the material has simply
been lifted directly from the Web. How much is actually copied?
We’ve highlighted the borrowed material:
Scientists are discovering that technology
with low carbon impact does not mean low
environmental or social impacts . That is the
case especially with wind turbines, whose
long, massive fiberglass blades have been
chopping up tens of thousands of birds that
fly into them, including golden eagles, redtailed hawks, burrowing owls, and other
raptors in California . Turbines are also
killing bats in great numbers. The 420 wind
turbines now in use across Pennsylvania
killed more than 10,000 bats last year—
mostly in the late summer months, according
to the State Game Commission. That’s an

825

average of 25 bats per turbine per year, and
the Nature Conservancy predicts as many as
2,900 turbines will be set up across the
state by 2030. It’s not the spinning blades
that kill the bats; instead, their lungs
effectively blow up from the rapid pressure
drop that occurs as air flows over the
turbine blades. But there’s hope we may
figure out solutions to these problems
because, since we haven’t had too many wind
turbines heretofore in the country, we are
learning how to manage this new technology
as we go .
But here’s the point: an academic writer who has gone to the
trouble of finding so much information will gain more credit
and credibility just by properly identifying, paraphrasing, and
quoting the sources used. The resulting paragraph is actually
more impressive because it demonstrates how much reading
and synthesizing the writer has actually done:
Scientists like George Ledec of the World
Bank are discovering that technology with
low carbon impact “does not mean low
environmental or social impacts” (Tracy) .
That is the case especially with wind
turbines. Their massive blades spinning to
create pollution-free electricity are also

826

killing thousands of valuable birds of prey,
including eagles, hawks, and owls in
California (Rittier) . Turbines are also
killing bats in great numbers (Thibodeaux) .
The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette reports that
10,000 bats a year are killed by the 420
turbines currently in Pennsylvania.
According to the state game commissioner,
“That’s an average of 25 bats per turbine
per year, and the Nature Conservancy
predicts as many as 2,900 turbines will be
set up across the state by 2030”
(Schwartzel) . It’s not the spinning blades
that kill the animals; instead, Discovery
News explains, “the bats’ lungs effectively
blow up from the rapid pressure drop that
occurs as air flows over the turbine blades”
(Marshall) . But there’s hope that
scientists can develop turbines less
dangerous to animals of all kinds. “We
haven’t had too many wind turbines
heretofore in the country,” David
Cottingham of the Fish and Wildlife Service
points out, “so we are learning about it as
we go” (Tracy) .
Works Cited

Marshall, Jessica. “Wind Turbines Kill Bats without

827

Impact.” Discovery News, 25 Aug. 2008,
dsc.discovery.com/news/2008/08/25/wind-turbinebats.html.
Rittier, John. “Wind Turbines Taking Toll on Birds of
Prey.” USA Today, 4 Jan. 2005,
usatoday30.usatoday.com/news/nation/2005-01-04windmills-usat_x.htm.
Schwartzel, Erich. “Pa. Wind Turbines Deadly to Bats,
Costly to Farmers.” Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, 17
July 2011, www.postgazette.com/business/businessnews/2011/07/17/Pawind-turbines-deadly-to-bats-costly-tofarmers/stories/201107170197.
Thibodeaux, Julie. “Collateral Damage: Bats Getting
Caught in Texas Wind Turbines.” GreenSourceDFW, 31
Oct. 2011,
www.greensourcedfw.org/articles/collateral-damagebats-getting-caught-texas-wind-turbines.

Tracy, Ryan. “Wildlife Slows Wind Power.” The Wall
Street Journal, 10 Dec. 2011,
www.wsj.com/articles/SB1000142405297020350130457708859330713285

RESPOND●
1. Select one of the essays from Chapters 8–12 or 17. Following
the guidelines in this chapter, write a paraphrase of the essay
that you might use subsequently in an academic argument. Be
careful to describe the essay accurately and to note on what
pages specific ideas or claims are located. The language of the
paraphrase should be entirely your own—though you may
include direct quotations of phrases, sentences, or longer

828

passages you would likely use in a paper. Be sure these
quotations are introduced and cited in your paraphrase: Hiltzik
leaves no doubt that he rejects Mendelsohn’s claim: “This is, of
course, exactly wrong” (193). When you are done, trade your
paraphrase with a partner to get feedback on its clarity and
accuracy.
2. Summarize three readings or fairly lengthy passages from Parts
1–3 of this book, following the guidelines in this chapter. Open
the item with a correct MLA or APA citation for the piece (see
Chapter 22). Then provide the summary itself. Follow up with a
one- or two-sentence evaluation of the work describing its
potential value as a source in an academic argument. In effect,
you will be preparing three items that might appear in an
annotated bibliography. Here’s an example:
Hiltzik, Michael. “Don’t Believe
Facebook: The Demise of the Written
Word Is Very Far Off.” Everything’s an
Argument, by Andrea A. Lunsford and
John J. Ruszkiewicz, 8th ed., Bedford,
2019, pp. 193–96. Argues that those
who believe that video will soon
supplant print as the primary vehicle
for news are primarily marketers who
underestimate the efficiency and
precision of print. The journalistic
piece cites studies and provides
arguments that suggest print is far
from dead.

829

3. Working with a partner, agree upon an essay that you will both
read from Chapters 8–12 or 17, examining it as a potential
source for a research argument. As you read it, choose about a
half-dozen words, phrases, or short passages that you would
likely quote if you used the essay in a paper and attach a frame
or signal phrase to each quotation. Then compare the passages
you selected to quote with those your partner culled from the
same essay. How do your choices of quoted material create an
image or ethos for the original author that differs from the one
your partner has created? How do the signal phrases shape a
reader’s sense of the author’s position? Which set of quotations
best represents the author’s argument? Why?
4. Select one of the essays from Chapters 8–12 or 17 to examine
the different ways an author uses source materials to support
claims. Begin by highlighting the signal phrases you find
attached to borrowed ideas or direct quotations. How well do
they introduce or frame this material? Then categorize the
various ways the author actually uses particular sources. For
example, look for sources that provide context for the topic,
review the scholarly literature, define key concepts or terms,
explain technical details, furnish evidence, or lay out contrary
opinions. When you are done, write a paragraph assessing the
author’s handling of sources in the piece. Are the borrowed
materials integrated well with the author’s own thoughts? Do
the sources represent an effective synthesis of ideas?

830

CHAPTER 21 Plagiarism and Academic
Integrity

In many ways, “nothing new under the sun” is more than just a
cliché. Most of what you think or write is built on what you’ve
previously read or experienced or learned from others. Luckily,
you’ll seldom be called on to list every influence on your life.
But you do have responsibilities in school and professional
situations to acknowledge any intellectual property you’ve made
use of when you create arguments of your own. If you don’t,
you may be accused of plagiarism—claiming as your own the
words, research, or creative work of others.
What is intellectual property? It’s complicated. But, for
academic arguments in Western culture, it is the expression of
ideas you find in works produced by others that you then use to
advance and support your own claims. You have to document
not only when you use or reproduce someone’s exact words,
images, music, or other creations (in whole or in part), but also
when you borrow the framework others use to put ideas

831

together in original or creative ways. Needless to say,
intellectual property rights have always been contentious, but
never more so than today, when digital media make it
remarkably easy to duplicate and distribute all sorts of
materials. Accustomed to uploading and downloading files,
cutting and pasting passages, you may be comfortable working
with texts day-to-day in ways that are considered inappropriate,
or even dishonest, in school. You may, for example, have
patched together sources without putting them in your own
words or documenting them fully, practices that will often be
seen as plagiarism (see Avoiding “Patchwriting” in Chapter 20).

So it is essential that you read and understand any policies on
academic integrity that your school has set down. In particular,
pay attention to how those policies define, prosecute, and
punish cheating, plagiarism, and collusion. Some institutions
832

recognize a difference between intentional and unintentional
plagiarism, but you don’t want the honesty of anything you
write to be questioned. You need to learn the rules and
understand that the penalties for plagiarism are severe not only
for students but for professional writers as well.
But don’t panic! Many student writers today are so confused or
worried about plagiarism that they shy away from using sources
—or end up with a citation for almost every sentence in an
essay. There’s no reason to go to such extremes. As a
conscientious researcher and writer, you simply need to give
your best effort in letting readers know what sources you have
used. Being careful in such matters will have a big payoff: when
you give full credit to your sources, you enhance your ethos in
academic arguments—which is why “Academic Integrity”
appears in this chapter’s title. Audiences will applaud you for
saying thanks to those who’ve helped you. Crediting your
sources also proves that you have done your homework: you
demonstrate that you understand what others have written
about the topic and encourage others to join the intellectual
conversation. Finally, citing sources reminds you to think
critically about how to use the evidence you’ve collected. Is it
timely and reliable? Have you referenced authorities in a biased
or overly selective way? Have you double-checked all quotations
and paraphrases? Thinking through such questions helps to
guarantee the integrity of your academic work.

833

Giving Credit
Proper acknowledgment of sources is crucial in academic writing.
Check out C. Richard King’s extensive references for an example of
how to do it right.
LINK TO King, “Redskins: Insult and Brand,” in Chapter 23

The basic principles for documenting materials are relatively
simple. Give credit to all source materials you borrow by
following these three steps: (1) placing quotation marks around
any words you quote directly, (2) citing your sources according
to the documentation style you’re using, and (3) identifying all
the sources you have cited in a list of references or works cited.
Materials to be cited in an academic argument include all of the
following:
direct quotations
facts that are not widely known
arguable statements
judgments, opinions, and claims that have been made by
others
images, statistics, charts, tables, graphs, or other
illustrations that appear in any source
collaboration—that is, the help provided by friends,
colleagues, instructors, supervisors, or others
However, three important types of evidence or source material

834

do not need to be acknowledged or documented. They are the
following:
1. Common knowledge, which is a specific piece of
information most readers in your intended audience will
know (that Donald Trump won the 2016 presidential
election in the Electoral College, for instance).
2. Facts available from a wide variety of sources (that humans
walked on the Moon for the first time on July 20, 1969, for
example). If, for instance, you search for a piece of
information and find the same information on dozens of
different reputable Web sites, you can be pretty sure it is
common knowledge.
3. Your own findings from field research (observations,
interviews, experiments, or surveys you have conducted),
which should be clearly presented as your own
For the actual forms to use when documenting sources, see
Chapter 22.
Of course, the devil is in the details. For instance, you may be
accused of plagiarism in situations like the following:
if you don’t indicate clearly the source of an idea you
obviously didn’t come up with on your own
if you use a paraphrase that’s too close to the original
wording or sentence structure of your source material
(even if you cite the source)
if you leave out the parenthetical in-text reference for a
quotation (even if you include the quotation marks
835

themselves)
And the accusation can be made even if you didn’t intend to
plagiarize.
But what about all the sampling and mashups you see all the
time in popular culture and social media? And don’t some
artistic and scholarly works come close to being “mashups”?
Yes and no. It’s certainly fair to say, for example, that
Shakespeare’s plays “mash up” a lot of material from
Holinshed’s Chronicles, which he used without
acknowledgment. But it’s also true that Shakespeare’s works are
“transformative”—that is, they are made new by Shakespeare’s
art. Current copyright law protects such works that qualify as
transformative and exempts them from copyright violations.
But the issues swirling around sampling, mashups, and other
creative uses of prior materials (print and online) are far from
clear, and far from over. Perhaps Jeff Shaw (in a posting that
asks, “Is Mashup Music Protected by Fair Use?”) sums up the
current situation best:
Lest we forget, the purpose of copyright law is to help
content creators and to enhance creative expression. Fair
use is an important step toward those ends, and further
legislative work could solidify the step forward that fair
use represents.
—Jeff Shaw, “Is Mashup Music Protected by Fair Use?”

836

An infographic from groups supporting “Fair Use Week” defends the importance
of the fair use principle.

837

The “Fair Use Week” infographic, continued.

838

Getting Permission for
and Using Copyrighted
Internet Sources
When you gather information from Internet sources and use it
in your own work, it’s subject to the same rules that govern
information gathered from other types of sources.
A growing number of online works, including books,
photographs, music, and video, are published under the
Creative Commons license, which often eliminates the need to
request permission. These works—marked with a Creative
Commons license—are made available to the public under this
alternative to copyright, which grants permission to reuse or
remix work under certain terms if credit is given to the work’s
creator.
Even if the material does not include a copyright notice or
symbol (“© 2019 by Andrea A. Lunsford and John J.
Ruszkiewicz,” for example), it’s likely to be protected by
copyright laws, and you may need to request permission to use
part or all of it. “Fair use” legal precedents allow writers to
quote brief passages from published works without permission
from the copyright holder if the use is for educational or
personal, noncommercial reasons and if full credit is given to
the source. For blog postings or any serious professional uses

839

(especially online), however, you should ask permission of the
copyright holder before you include any of his/her ideas, text,
or images in your own argument.
If you do need to make a request for permission, here is an
example:
From: sanchez.32@stanford.edu
To: litman@mindspring.com
CC: lunsford.2@stanford.edu
Subject: Request for permission
Dear Professor Litman:
I am writing to request permission to quote from your
essay “Copyright, Owners’ Rights and Users’ Privileges on
the Internet: Implied Licenses, Caching, Linking, Fair
Use, and Sign-on Licenses.” I want to quote some of your
work as part of an article I am writing for the Stanford
Daily to explain the complex debates over ownership on
the Internet and to argue that students at my school
should be participating in these debates. I will give full
credit to you and will cite the URL where I first found
your work (msen.com/~litman/dayton.htm).
Thank you very much for considering my request.

840

Raul Sanchez

841

Acknowledging Your
Sources Accurately and
Appropriately
While artists, lawyers, and institutions like the film and music
industries sort out fair use laws, the bottom line in your
academic work is clear: document sources accurately and fully
and do not be careless about this very important procedure.
Here, for example, is the first paragraph from a print essay by
Russell Platt published in the Nation:
Classical music in America, we are frequently told, is in
its death throes: its orchestras bled dry by expensive
guest soloists and greedy musicians’ unions, its media
presence shrinking, its prestige diminished, its
educational role ignored, its big record labels dying out
or merging into faceless corporate entities. We seem to
have too many well-trained musicians in need of work,
too many good composers going without commissions,
too many concerts to offer an already satiated public.
—Russell Platt, “New World Symphony”
To cite this passage correctly in MLA documentation style, you
could quote directly from it, using both quotation marks and
some form of note identifying the author or source. Either of
842

the following versions would be acceptable:
Russell Platt has doubts about claims that
classical music is “in its death throes: its
orchestras bled dry by expensive guest
soloists and greedy musicians unions” (“New
World”).
But is classical music in the United States
really “in its death throes,” as some
critics of the music scene suggest (Platt)?
You might also paraphrase Platt’s paragraph, putting his ideas
entirely in your own words but still giving him due credit by
ending your remarks with a simple in-text note:
A familiar story told by critics is that
classical music faces a bleak future in the
United States, with grasping soloists and
unions bankrupting orchestras and classical
works vanishing from radio and television,
school curricula, and the labels of
recording conglomerates. The public may not
be willing to support all the talented
musicians and composers we have today
(Platt).
All of these sentences with citations would be keyed to a works
cited entry at the end of the paper that would look like the

843

following in MLA style:
Platt, Russell. “New World Symphony.” The
Nation, 15 Sept. 2005,
www.thenation.com/article/new-worldsymphony/.
How might a citation go wrong? As we indicated, omitting either
the quotation marks around a borrowed passage or an
acknowledgment of the source is grounds for complaint.
Neither of the following sentences provides enough
information for a correct citation:
But is classical music in the United States
really in its death throes, as some critics
of the music scene suggest, with its
prestige diminished, its educational role
ignored, and its big record labels dying
(Platt)?
But is classical music in the United States
really in “its death throes,” as some
critics of the music scene suggest, with
“its prestige diminished, its educational
role ignored, [and] its big record labels
dying”?
Just as faulty is a paraphrase such as the following, which
borrows the words or ideas of the source too closely. It

844

represents plagiarism, despite the fact that it identifies the
source from which almost all the ideas—and a good many words
—are borrowed:
In “New World Symphony,” Russell Platt
observes that classical music is thought by
many to be in bad shape in America. Its
orchestras are being sucked dry by costly
guest artists and insatiable unionized
musicians, while its place on TV and radio
is shrinking. The problem may be that we
have too many well-trained musicians who
need employment, too many good composers
going without jobs, too many concerts for a
public that prefers The Real Housewives of
Atlanta.
Even the fresh idea not taken from Platt at the end of the
paragraph doesn’t alter the fact that the paraphrase is mostly a
mix of Platt’s original words, lightly stirred.

845

Acknowledging
Collaboration
Writers generally acknowledge all participants in collaborative
projects at the beginning of the presentation, report, or essay.
In print texts, the acknowledgment is often placed in a footnote
or brief prefatory note.
The eighth edition of the MLA Handbook (2016) calls attention
to the shifting landscape of collaborative work, noting that
Today academic work can take many forms other than
the research paper. Scholars produce presentations,
videos, and interactive Web projects, among other kinds
of work . . . but the aims will remain the same: providing
the information that enables a curious reader, viewer, or
other user to track down your sources and giving credit
to those whose work influenced yours.

RESPOND●
1. Define plagiarism in your own terms, making your definition as
clear and explicit as possible. Then compare your definition
with those of two or three other classmates, and write a brief
report on the similarities and differences you noted in the
definitions. You might research terms such as plagiarism,
academic honesty, and academic integrity on the Web. Also be
certain to check how your own school defines the words.

846

2. Spend fifteen or twenty minutes jotting down your ideas about
intellectual property and plagiarism. File sharing of music and
illegally downloading movies used to be a big deal. Is it
simpler/better now just to subscribe to Netflix and Apple
Music? Do you agree that forms of intellectual property—like
music and films—need to be protected under copyright law?
How do you define your own intellectual property, and in what
ways and under what conditions are you willing to share it?
3. Come up with your own definition of academic integrity, based
on what you have observed yourself and other students doing
in high school, in college, and, perhaps, on the job. Think about
the consequences, for example, of borrowing materials and
ideas from each other in a study group or while working on a
collaborative project.
4. Not everyone agrees that intellectual material is property that
should be protected. The slogan “information wants to be free”
has been showing up in popular magazines and on the Internet
for a long time, often with a call to readers to take action
against protection such as data encryption and further
extension of copyright.
Using a Web search engine, look for pages where the phrase
“information wants to be free” or “free information” appears.
Find several sites that make arguments in favor of free
information, and analyze them in terms of their rhetorical
appeals. What claims do the authors make? How do they
appeal to their audience? What’s the site’s ethos, and how is it
created? After you’ve read some arguments in favor of free
information, return to this chapter’s arguments about
intellectual property. Which arguments do you find most
persuasive? Why?

847

5. Although this book is concerned principally with ideas and their
written expression, other forms of intellectual property are also
legally protected. For example, scientific and technological
developments are protectable under patent law, which differs
in some significant ways from copyright law (see the “Fair Use
Fundamentals” infographic in this chapter).
Find the standards for protection under U.S. copyright law and
U.S. patent law. You might begin by visiting the U.S. copyright
Web site (copyright.gov). Then imagine that you’re the
president of a small high-tech corporation and are trying to
inform your employees of the legal protections available to
them and their work. Write a paragraph or two explaining the
differences between copyright and patent, and suggest a policy
that balances employees’ rights to intellectual property with
the business’s needs to develop new products.

848

CHAPTER 22 Documenting Sources

What does documenting sources have to do with argument?
First, the sources that a writer chooses become part of any
argument, showing that he/she has done some research, knows
what others have said about the topic, and understands how to
use these items as support for a claim. Similarly, the list of
works cited or references makes a statement, saying, “Look at
how thoroughly this essay has been researched” or “Note how
up-to-date I am!”
Writers working in digital spaces sometimes simply add
hotlinks so that their readers can find their sources. If you are
writing a multimodal essay that will appear on the Web, such
links will be appreciated. But for now, college assignments
generally call for full documentation rather than simply a link.
You’ll find the information you need to create in-text citations
and works cited/references lists in this chapter.
Documentation styles vary from discipline to discipline, with
one format favored in the social sciences and another in the
849

natural sciences, for example. Your instructor will probably
assign a documentation style for you to follow. If not, you can
use one of the two covered in this chapter. But note that even
the choice of documentation style makes an argument in a
subtle way. You’ll note in the instructions that follow, for
example, that the Modern Language Association (MLA) style
requires putting the date of publication of a print source at or
near the end of a works cited list entry, whereas the American
Psychological Association (APA) style places that date near the
beginning of a references list citation. Such positioning suggests
that in MLA style, the author and title are of greater importance
than the date for humanities scholars, while APA puts a priority
on the date—and timeliness—of sources. Pay attention to such
fine points of documentation style, always asking what these
choices suggest about the values of scholars and researchers
who use a particular system of documentation.

850

MLA Style
Widely used in the humanities, the latest version of MLA style—
described in the MLA Handbook (8th edition, 2016)—has been
revised significantly “for the digital age.” If you have used MLA
style in the past, you’ll want to check the models here closely
and note the differences. Below, we provide guidelines drawn
from the MLA Handbook for in-text citations, notes, and entries
in the list of works cited.

In-Text Citations
MLA style calls for in-text citations in the body of an argument
to document sources of quotations, paraphrases, summaries,
and so on. For in-text citations, use a signal phrase to introduce
the material, often with the author’s name (As Geneva
Smitherman explains, . . .). Keep an in-text citation short, but
include enough information for readers to locate the source in
the list of works cited. Place the parenthetical citation as near to
the relevant material as possible without disrupting the flow of
the sentence, as in the following examples.

1. Author Named in a Signal Phrase
Ordinarily, use the author’s name in a signal phrase to
introduce the material, and cite the page number(s) in
parentheses.
Ravitch chronicles how the focus in
education reform has shifted toward
851

privatizing school management rather than
toward improving curriculum, teacher
training, or funding (36).

2. Author Named in Parentheses
When you don’t mention the author in a signal phrase, include
the author’s last name before the page number(s) in the
parentheses. The name and page number are not separated by a
comma.
Oil from shale in the western states, if it
could be extracted, would be equivalent to
six hundred billion barrels, more than all
the crude so far produced in the world
(McPhee 413).

3. Two Authors
Use both authors’ last names.
Gortner and Nicolson maintain that “opinion
leaders” influence other people in an
organization because they are respected, not
because they hold high positions (175).

4. Three or More Authors
When there are three or more authors, brevity (and the MLA)
suggests you use the first author’s name with et al. (in regular
type, not italicized).

852

Similarly, as Goldberger et al. note, their
new book builds on their collaborative
experiences to inform their description of
how women develop cognitively (xii).

5. Organization as Author
Give the full name of a corporate author if it’s brief or a
shortened form if it’s long.
Many global economists assert that the term
“developing countries” is no longer a useful
designation, as it ignores such countries’
rapid economic growth (Gates Foundation
112).

6. Unknown Author
Use the complete title of the work if it’s brief or a shortened
form if it’s long.
“Hype,” by one analysis, is “an artificially
engendered atmosphere of hysteria” (“Today’s
Marketplace” 51).

7. Author of Two or More Works
When you use two or more works by the same author, include
the title of the work or a shortened version of it in the citation.
Gardner presents readers with their own
silliness through his description of a
853

“pointless, ridiculous monster, crouched in
the shadows, stinking of dead men, murdered
children, and martyred cows” (Grendel 2).

8. Authors with the Same Last Name
When you use works by two or more authors with the same last
name, include each author’s first initial in the in-text citation.
Public health officials agree that the
potential environmental risk caused by
indoor residual spraying is far lower than
the potential risk of death caused by
malaria-carrying mosquitoes (S. Dillon 76).

9. Multivolume Work
Note the volume number first and then the page number(s),
with a colon and one space between them.
Aristotle’s “On Plants” is now available in
a new translation edited by Barnes (2:
1252).

10. Literary Work
Because literary works are often available in many different
editions, you need to include enough information for readers to
locate the passage in any edition. For a prose work such as a
novel or play, first cite the page number from the edition you
used, followed by a semicolon; then indicate the part or chapter
number (114; ch. 3) or act or scene in a play (42; sc. 2).
854

In Ben Jonson’s Volpone, the miserly title
character addresses his treasure as “dear
saint” and “the best of things” (1447; act
1).
For a poem, cite the stanza and line numbers. If the poem has
only line numbers, use the word line(s) in the first reference
(lines 33–34) and the number(s) alone in subsequent references.
On dying, Whitman speculates, “All that goes
onward and outward, nothing collapses, / And
to die is different from what any one
supposed, and luckier” (6.129-30).
For a verse play, omit the page number, and give only the act,
scene, and line numbers, separated by periods.
Before he takes his own life, Othello says
he is “one that loved not wisely but too
well” (5.2.348).
As Macbeth begins, the witches greet Banquo
as “Lesser than Macbeth, and greater”
(1.3.65).

11. Works in an Anthology
For an essay, short story, or other short work within an
anthology, use the name of the author of the work, not the
editor of the anthology; but use the page number(s) from the

855

anthology.
In the end, if the black artist accepts any
duties at all, that duty is to express the
beauty of blackness (Hughes 1271).

12. Sacred Text
To cite a sacred text, such as the Qur’an or the Bible, give the
title of the edition you used, the book, and the chapter and verse
(or their equivalent), separated by a period. In your text, spell
out the names of books. In a parenthetical reference, use an
abbreviation for books with names of five or more letters (for
example, Gen. for Genesis).
He ignored the admonition “Pride goes before
destruction, and a haughty spirit before a
fall” (New Oxford Annotated Bible, Prov.
16.18).

13. Indirect Source
Use the abbreviation qtd. in to indicate that what you’re quoting
or paraphrasing is quoted (as part of a conversation, interview,
letter, or excerpt) in the source you’re using.
As Catherine Belsey states, “to speak is to
have access to the language which defines,
delimits and locates power” (qtd. in Bartels
453).

856

14. Two or More Sources in the Same
Citation
Separate the information for each source with a semicolon.
Adefunmi was able to patch up the subsequent
holes left in worship by substituting
various Yoruba, Dahomean, or Fon customs
made available to him through research
(Brandon 115-17; Hunt 27).

15. Entire Work or One-Page Article
Include the citation in the text without any page numbers or
parentheses.
Kazuo Ishiguro’s dystopian novel Never Let
Me Go explores questions of identity and
authenticity.

16. Nonprint or Electronic Source
Give enough information in a signal phrase or parenthetical
citation for readers to locate the source in the list of works
cited. Usually give the author or title under which you list the
source. If the work isn’t numbered by page but has numbered
sections, parts, or paragraphs, include the name and number(s)
of the section(s) you’re citing. (For paragraphs, use the
abbreviation par. or pars.; for section, use sec.; for part, use pt.)
In his film version of Hamlet, Zeffirelli
highlights the sexual tension between the
857

prince and his mother.
Zora Neale Hurston is one of the great
anthropologists of the twentieth century,
according to Kip Hinton (par. 2).
Describing children’s language acquisition,
Pinker explains that “what’s innate about
language is just a way of paying attention
to parental speech” (qtd. in Johnson, sec.
1).

17. Visual Included in the Text
Number all figures (photos, drawings, cartoons, maps, graphs,
and charts) and tables separately.
This trend is illustrated in a chart
distributed by the College Board as part of
its 2014 analysis of aggregate SAT data (see
fig. 1).
Include a caption with enough information about the source to
direct readers to the works cited entry. (For an example of an
image that a student created, see the Sample First Page from an
Essay in MLA Format in this chapter.)

Explanatory and Bibliographic
Notes
858

We recommend using explanatory notes for information or
commentary that doesn’t readily fit into your text but is needed
for clarification, further explanation, or justification. In
addition, bibliographic notes will allow you to cite several
sources for one point and to offer thanks to, information about,
or evaluation of a source. Use a superscript number in your text
at the end of a sentence to refer readers to the notes, which
usually appear as endnotes (with the heading Notes, not
underlined or italicized) on a separate page before the list of
works cited. Indent the first line of each note five spaces, and
double-space all entries.

Text with Superscript Indicating a Note
Stewart emphasizes the existence of social
contacts in Hawthorne’s life so that the
audience will accept a different Hawthorne,
one more attuned to modern times than the
figure in Woodberry.3
Note
3Woodberry

does, however, show that

Hawthorne was often unsociable. He
emphasizes the seclusion of Hawthorne’s
mother, who separated herself from her
family after the death of her husband, often
even taking meals alone (28). Woodberry
seems to imply that Mrs. Hawthorne’s
859

isolation rubbed off on her son.

List of Works Cited
A list of works cited is an alphabetical listing of the sources you
cite in your essay. The list appears on a separate page at the end
of your argument, after any notes, with the heading Works
Cited centered an inch from the top of the page; don’t underline
or italicize it or enclose it in quotation marks. Double-space
between the heading and the first entry, and double-space the
entire list. (If you’re asked to list everything you’ve read as
background—not just the sources you cite—call the list Works
Consulted.) The first line of each entry should align on the left;
subsequent lines indent one-half inch or five spaces. See
Sample List of Works Cited for an Essay in MLA Format.

Print Books
The basic information for a book includes three elements, each
followed by a period:
the author’s name, last name first (for a book with multiple
authors, only the first author’s name is inverted)
the title and subtitle, italicized
the publication information, including the publisher’s
name (such as Harvard UP) followed by a comma, and the
publication date

1. One Author
Larsen, Erik. Dead Wake: The Last Crossing of
860

the Lusitania. Crown Publishers, 2015.

2. Two or More Authors
Jacobson, Sid, and Ernie Colón. The 9/11
Report: A Graphic Adaptation. Farrar, Straus,
and Giroux, 2006.

3. Organization as Author
American Horticultural Society. The Fully
Illustrated Plant-by-Plant Manual of
Practical Techniques. DK, 1999.

4. Unknown Author
National Geographic Atlas of the World.
National Geographic, 2004.

5. Two or More Books by the Same Author
List the works alphabetically by title. Use three hyphens for the
author’s name for the second and subsequent works by that
author.
Lorde, Audre. A Burst of Light. Firebrand
Books, 1988.
---. Sister Outsider. Crossings Press, 1984.

6. Editor

861

Rorty, Amelie Oksenberg, editor. Essays on
Aristotle’s Poetics. Princeton UP, 1992.

7. Author and Editor
Shakespeare, William. The Tempest. Edited by
Frank Kermode, Routledge, 1994.

8. Selection in an Anthology or Chapter in an Edited
Book
List the author(s) of the selection or chapter; its title; the title of
the book in which the selection or chapter appears; edited by
and the name(s) of the editor(s); the publication information;
and the inclusive page numbers of the selection or chapter.
Brown, Paul. “‘This thing of darkness I
acknowledge mine’: The Tempest and the
Discourse of Colonialism.” Political
Shakespeare: Essays in Cultural Materialism,
edited by Jonathan Dollimore and Alan
Sinfield, Cornell UP, 1985, pp. 48-71.

9. Two or More Works from the Same Anthology
Include the anthology itself in the list of works cited.
Gates, Henry Louis, Jr., and Nellie McKay,
editors. The Norton Anthology of African
American Literature. Norton, 1997.
Then list each selection separately by its author and title,
862

followed by a cross-reference to the anthology.
Karenga, Maulana. “Black Art: Mute Matter Given
Force and Function.” Gates and McKay, pp.
1973-77.
Neal, Larry. “The Black Arts Movement.” Gates
and McKay, pp. 1960-72.

10. Translation
Ferrante, Elena. The Story of the Lost Child.
Translated by Ann Goldstein, Europa Editions,
2015.

11. Edition Other Than the First
Lunsford, Andrea A., et al. Everything’s an
Argument with Readings. 8th ed., Bedford/St.
Martin’s, 2019.

12. Graphic Narrative
If the words and images are created by the same person, cite a
graphic narrative just as you would a book (see item 1 on p.
501).
Bechdel, Alison. Are You My Mother? Houghton
Mifflin Harcourt, 2012.
If the work is a collaboration, indicate the author or illustrator
who is most important to your research before the title. Then
863

list other contributors in order of their appearance on the title
page. Label each person’s contribution to the work.
Stavans, Ilan, writer. Latino USA: A Cartoon
History. Illustrated by Lalo Arcaraz, Basic
Books, 2000.

13. One Volume of a Multivolume Work
Byron, Lord George. Byron’s Letters and
Journals. Edited by Leslie A. Marchand, vol.
2, John Murray, 1973. 12 vols.

14. Two or More Volumes of a Multivolume Work
Byron, Lord George. Byron’s Letters and
Journals. Edited by Leslie A. !!Marchand,
John Murray, 1973-82. 12 vols.

15. Preface, Foreword, Introduction, or Afterword
Dunham, Lena. Foreword. The Liars’ Club, by
Mary Karr, Penguin Classics, 2015, pp. xixiii.

16. Article in a Reference Work
Robinson, Lisa Clayton. “Harlem Writers Guild.”
Africana: The Encyclopedia of the African and
African American Experience, 2nd ed., Oxford
UP, 2005.
864

17. Book That Is Part of a Series
Include the title and number of the series after the publication
information.
Moss, Beverly J. A Community Text Arises.
Hampton, 2003. Language and Social Processes
Series 8.

18. Republication
Trilling, Lionel. The Liberal Imagination.
1950. Introduction by Louis Menand, New York
Review of Books, 2008.

19. Government Document
Canada, Minister of Aboriginal Affairs and
Northern Development. 2015-16 Report on Plans
and Priorities. Minister of Public Works and
Government Services Canada, 2015.

20. Pamphlet
The Legendary Sleepy Hollow Cemetery. Friends
of Sleepy Hollow Cemetery, 2008.

21. Published Proceedings of a Conference
Meisner, Marx S., et al., editors.
Communication for the Commons: Revisiting
Participation and Environment. Proceedings of
865

Twelfth Biennial Conference on Communication
and the Environment, 6-11 June 2015, Swedish
U of Agricultural Sciences, International
Environmental Communication Association,
2015.

22. Title within a Title
Shanahan, Timothy. Philosophy and Blade Runner.
Palgrave Macmillan, 2014.

Print Periodicals
The basic entry for a periodical includes three elements:
the author’s name, last name first, followed by a period
the article title, in quotation marks, followed by a period
the publication information, including the periodical title
(italicized), the volume and issue numbers (if any, not
italicized), the date of publication, and the page number(s),
all followed by commas, with a period at the end of the
page numbers
For works with multiple authors, only the first author’s name is
inverted. Note that the period following the article title goes
inside the closing quotation mark.

23. Article in a Print Journal
Give the issue number, if available.
Matchie, Thomas. “Law versus Love in The Round

866

House.” Midwest Quarterly, vol. 56, no. 4,
Summer 2015, pp. 353-64.
Fuqua, Amy. “‘The Furrow of His Brow’:
Providence and Pragmatism in Toni Morrison’s
Paradise.” Midwest Quarterly, vol. 54, no. 1,
Autumn 2012, pp. 38-52.

24. Article That Skips Pages
Seabrook, John. “Renaissance Pears.” The New
Yorker, 5 Sept. 2005, pp. 102+.

25. Article in a Print Monthly Magazine
Nijhuis, Michelle. “When Cooking Kills.”
National Geographic, Sept. 2017, pp. 76-81.

26. Article in a Print Weekly Magazine
Grossman, Lev. “A Star Is Born.” Time, 2 Nov.
2015, pp. 30-39.

27. Article in a Print Newspaper
Bray, Hiawatha. “As Toys Get Smarter, Privacy
Issues Emerge.” The Boston Globe, 10 Dec.
2015, p. C1.

28. Editorial or Letter to the Editor

867

Posner, Alan. “Colin Powell’s Regret.” The New
York Times, 9 Sept. 2005, p. A20.

29. Unsigned Article
“Court Rejects the Sale of Medical Marijuana.”
The New York Times, 26 Feb. 1998, late ed.,
p. A21.

30. Review
Harris, Brandon. “Black Saints and Sinners.”
Review of Five-Carat Soul, by James McBride.
The New York Review of Books, 7 Dec. 2017,
pp. 50-51.

Digital Sources
Most of the following models are based on the MLA’s guidelines
for citing electronic sources in the MLA Handbook (8th edition,
2016), as well as on up-to-date information available at its Web
site (mla.org). The MLA advocates the use of URLs but prefers a
Digital Object Indicator (DOI) where available. A DOI is a
unique number assigned to a selection, and does not change
regardless of where the item is located online. The basic MLA
entry for most electronic sources should include the following
elements:
name of the author, editor, or compiler
title of the work, document, or posting
publication information (volume, issue, year or date). List
868

page numbers or paragraph numbers only if they are
included in the source.
name of database, italicized
DOI or URL

31. Document from a Web Site
Begin with the author, if known, followed by the title of the
work, title of the Web site, publisher or sponsor (if it is notably
different from the title of the Web site), date of publication or
last update, and the Digital Object Identifier or URL. If no
publication or update date is available, include a date of access
at the end.

“Social and Historical Context: Vitality.”
Arapesh Grammar and Digital Language Archive
Project, Institute for Advanced Technology in
the Humanities,
www.arapesh.org/socio_historical_context_vitality.php.
Accessed 22 Mar. 2017.

32. Entire Web Site
Include the name of the person or group who created the site, if
relevant; the title of the site, italicized; the publisher or sponsor
of the site; the date of publication or last update; and the URL.
Barcus, Jane. What Jane Saw. Liberals Arts
Development Studio/University of Texas at
Austin, 2013, whatjanesaw.org.
Halsall, Paul, editor. Internet Modern History
869

Sourcebook. Fordham U, 4 Nov. 2011,
legacy.fordham.edu/halsall/index.asp.

33. Course, Department, or Personal Web Site
For a course Web site, include the instructor’s name; the title of
the site, italicized; a description of the site (such as Course
home page, Department home page, or Home page—not
italicized); the sponsor of the site (academic department and
institution); dates of the course or last update to the page; and
the URL. Note that the MLA spells home page as two separate
words. For an academic department, list the name of the
department; a description; the academic institution; the date
the page was last updated; and the URL.
Film Studies. Department home page. Wayne State
University, College of Liberal Arts and
Sciences, 2016, clas.wayne.edu/FilmStudies/.
Masiello, Regina. 355:101: Expository Writing.
Rutgers School of Arts and Sciences, 2017,
wp.rutgers.edu/courses/55-355101.

34. Online Book
Cite an online book as you would a print book. After the print
publication information (if any), give the title of the Web site or
database in which the book appears, italicized; and the DOI or
URL.
Riis, Jacob A. How the Other Half Lives:
Studies among the Tenements of New York.
870

Edited by David Phillips, Scribner’s, 1890.
The Authentic History Center,
www.authentichistory.com/1898-1913/2progressivism/2-riis/.
Treat a poem, essay, or other short work within an online book
as you would a part of a print book. After the print publication
information (if any), give the title of the Web site or database,
italicized; and the DOI or URL.
Milton, John. Paradise Lost: Book I. Poetry
Foundation, 2014,
www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174987.

35. Article in a Journal on the Web
For an article in an online journal, cite the same information
that you would for a print journal. Then add the DOI or URL.
Wells, Julia. “The ‘Terrible Loneliness’:
Loneliness and Worry in Settler Women’s
Memoirs from East and South-Central Africa,
1890–1939.” African Studies Quarterly, vol.
17, no. 2, June 2017, pp. 47-64,
africa.ufl.edu/asq/v17/v17i2a3.pdf.

36. Article in a Magazine or Newspaper on the Web
For an article in an online magazine or newspaper, cite the
author; the title of the article, in quotation marks; the name of
the magazine or newspaper, italicized; the date of publication;
and the URL of the page you accessed.
871

Leonard, Andrew. “The Surveillance State High
School.” Salon, 27 Nov. 2012,
www.salon.com/2012/11/27/the_surveillance_state_high_s
Crowell, Maddy. “How Computers Are Getting
Better at Detecting Liars.” The Christian
Science Monitor, 12 Dec. 2015,
www.csmonitor.com/Science/ScienceNotebook/2015/1212/How-computers-are-gettingbetter-at detecting-liars.

37. Entry in a Web Reference Work
Cite the entry as you would an entry from a print reference
work (see item 16). Follow with the name of the Web site, the
date of publication, and the URL of the site you accessed.
Durante, Amy M. “Finn Mac Cumhail.”
Encyclopedia Mythica, 17 Apr. 2011,
www.pantheon.org/articles/f/finn_mac_cumhail.html.

38. Post or Comment on a Web Site
Begin with the author’s name; the title of the posting, in
quotation marks; the name of the blog, italicized; the sponsor of
the blog; the date of the most recent update; and the URL of the
page you accessed.
mitchellfreedman. Comment on “Cloud Atlas’s
Theory of Everything,” by Emily Eakin. NYR
Daily, NYREV, 3 Nov. 2012,
www.nybooks.com/daily/2012/11/02/ken-wilber872

cloud-atlas/.

39. Entry in a Wiki
Since wikis are collectively edited, do not include an author.
Treat a wiki as you would a work from a Web site (see item 31).
Include the title of the entry; the name of the wiki, italicized;
the date of the latest update; and the URL of the page you
accessed.
“House Music.” Wikipedia, 16 Nov. 2017,
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/House_music.

40. Post on Social Media
To cite a post on Facebook or another social media site, include
the writer’s name, a description of the posting, the date of the
posting, and the URL of the page you accessed.

Bedford English. “Stacey Cochran Explores
Reflective Writing in the Classroom and as a
Writer: http://ow.ly/YkjVB.” Facebook, 15
Feb. 2016,
www.facebook.com/BedfordEnglish/posts/1015341500125960

41. Email or Message on Social Media
Include the writer’s name; the subject line, in quotation marks
(for email); Received by (not italicized or in quotation marks)
followed by the recipient’s name; and the date of the message.
You do not need to include the medium, but may if you are
concerned there will be confusion.

873

Thornbrugh, Caitlin. “Coates Lecture.” Received
by Rita Anderson, 20 Oct. 2015.

42. Tweet
Include the writer’s real name, if known, with the user name (if
different) in parentheses. If you don’t know the real name, give
just the user name. Include the entire tweet, in quotation
marks. Include the publisher (Twitter) in italics, follow by the
date and time of the message and the URL.
Curiosity Rover. “Can you see me waving? How to
spot #Mars in the night sky:
https://youtu.be/hv8hVvJlcJQ.” Twitter, 5
Nov. 2015, 11:00 a.m.,
twitter.com/marscuriosity/status/672859022911889408.

43. Work from an Online Database or a Subscription
Service
For a work from an online database, list the author’s name; the
title of the work; any print publication information; the name of
the database, italicized; and the DOI or URL.
Goldsmith, Oliver. The Vicar of Wakefield: A
Tale. Philadelphia, 1801. America’s
Historical Imprints,
infoweb.newsbank.com.ezproxy.bpl.org/.
Coles, Kimberly Anne. “The Matter of Belief in
John Donne’s Holy Sonnets.” Renaissance
Quarterly, vol. 68, no. 3, Fall 2015, pp.
874

899-931. JSTOR, doi:10.1086/683855.

44. Computer Software or Video Game
Include the title, italicized; the version number (if given); and
publication information. If you are citing material downloaded
from a Web site, include the title and version number (if given),
but instead of publication information, add the publisher or
sponsor of the Web site; the date of publication; and the URL.
Edgeworld. Atom Entertainment, 1 May 2012,
www.kabam.com/games/edgeworld.
Words with Friends. Version 5.84, Zynga, 2013.

Other Sources (Including Online Versions)
45. Unpublished Dissertation
Abbas, Megan Brankley. “Knowing Islam: The
Entangled History of Western Academia and
Modern Islamic Thought.” Dissertation,
Princeton U, 2015.

46. Published Dissertation
Kidd, Celeste. Rational Approaches to Learning
and Development. Dissertation, U of
Rochester, 2013.

47. Article from a Microform
875

Sharpe, Lora. “A Quilter’s Tribute.” The Boston
Globe, 25 Mar. 1989, p. 13. Microform.
NewsBank: Social Relations 12, 1989, fiche 6,
grids B4-6.

48. Personal, Published, or Broadcast Interview
For a personal interview, list the name of the person
interviewed, the label Personal interview (not italicized), and
the date of the interview.
Cooper, Rebecca. Personal interview. 1 Jan.
2018.
For a published interview, list the name of the person
interviewed, the title (if any), along with the label Interview by
[interviewer’s name] (not italicized); then add the publication
information, including the URL if there is one.
Weddington, Sarah. “Sarah Weddington: Still
Arguing for Roe.” Interview by Michele Kort.
Ms., Winter 2013, pp. 32-35.
Jaffrey, Madhur. “Madhur Jaffrey on How Indian
Cuisine Won Western Taste Buds.” Interview by
Shadrach Kabango. Q, CBC Radio, 29 Oct. 2015,
www.cbc.ca/1.3292918.
For a broadcast interview, list the name of the person
interviewed; the title, if any; the label Interview by (not
italicized); and the name of the interviewer (if relevant). Then

876

list information about the program, the date of the interview,
and the URL, if applicable.
Fairey, Shepard. “Spreading the Hope: Street
Artist Shepard Fairey.” Interview by Terry
Gross. Fresh Air, National Public Radio,
WBUR, Boston, 20 Jan. 2009.
Putin, Vladimir. Interview by Charlie Rose.
Charlie Rose: The Week, PBS, 19 June 2015.

49. Letter
Treat a published letter like a work in an anthology, but include
the date of the letter.
Jacobs, Harriet. “To Amy Post.” 4 Apr. 1853.
Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl, edited
by Jean Fagan Yellin, Harvard UP, 1987, pp.
234-35.

50. Film
For films, ordinarily begin with the title, followed by the
director and major performers. If your essay or project focuses
on a major person related to the film, such as the director, you
can begin with that name or names, followed by the title and
performers.
Birdman or (The Unexpected Virtue of
Ignorance). Directed by Alejandro González
Iñárritu, performances by Michael Keaton,

877

Emma Stone, Zach Galifianakis, Edward Norton,
and Naomi Watts, Fox Searchlight, 2014.
Jenkins, Patty, director. Wonder Woman.
Performances by Gal Gadot, Chris Pine, and
Robin Wright, Warner Bros., 2017.

51. Television or Radio Program
“Free Speech on College Campuses.” Washington
Journal, narrated by Peter Slen, C-SPAN, 27
Nov. 2015.
“Take a Giant Step.” Prairie Home Companion,
narrated by Garrison Keillor, American Public
Media, 27 Feb. 2016,
prairiehome.publicradio.org/listen/full/?
name=phc/2016/02/27/phc_20160227_128.

52. Online Video Clip
Cite a short online video as you would a work from a Web site
(see item 31).
Nayar, Vineet. “Employees First, Customers
Second.” YouTube, 9 June 2015,
www.youtube.com/watch?v=cCdu67s_C5E.

53. Sound Recording
Blige, Mary J. “Don’t Mind.” Life II: The
Journey Continues (Act 1), Geffen, 2011.

878

54. Work of Art or Photograph
List the artist or photographer; the work’s title, italicized; and
the date of composition. Then cite the name of the museum or
other location and the city.
Bradford, Mark. Let’s Walk to the Middle of the
Ocean. 2015, Museum of Modern Art, New York.
Feinstein, Harold. Hangin’ Out, Sharing a
Public Bench, NYC. 1948, Panopticon Gallery,
Boston.
To cite a reproduction in a book, add the publication
information.
O’Keeffe, Georgia. Black and Purple Petunias.
1925, private collection. Two Lives: A
Conversation in Paintings and Photographs,
edited by Alexandra Arrowsmith and Thomas
West, HarperCollins, 1992, p. 67.
To cite artwork found online, add the title of the database or
Web site, italicized; and the URL of the site you accessed.
Clough, Charles. January Twenty-First. 1988-89,
Joslyn Art Museum, Omaha,
www.joslyn.org/collections-andexhibitions/permanent-collections/modern-andcontemporary/charles-clough-january-twentyfirst/.

879

55. Lecture or Speech
Smith, Anna Deavere. “On the Road: A Search for
American Character.” National Endowment for
the Humanities, John F. Kennedy Center for
the Performing Arts, Washington, 6 Apr. 2015.
Address.

56. Performance
The Draft. By Peter Snoad, directed by Diego
Arciniegas, Hibernian Hall, Boston, 10 Sept.
2015.

57. Map or Chart
“Map of Sudan.” Global Citizen, Citizens for
Global Solutions, 2011,
globalsolutions.org/blog/bashir#.VthzNMfi_FI.

58. Cartoon
Ramirez, Michael P. “Eagle and Loon.” Michael
P. Ramirez, 31 Aug. 2017,
http://www.michaelpramirez.com/loon-andeagle.html. Cartoon.

59. Advertisement
Louis Vuitton. Vanity Fair, Aug. 2017, p. 35.
Advertisement.
880

On p. 514, note the formatting of the first page of a sample essay
written in MLA style. On p. 515, you’ll find a sample works cited
page written for the same student essay.
Sample First Page for an Essay in MLA Style

881

882

Sample List of Works Cited for an Essay in MLA Style

883

884

APA Style
The Publication Manual of the American Psychological
Association (6th edition, 2010) provides comprehensive advice
to student and professional writers in the social sciences. Here
we draw on the Publication Manual’s guidelines to provide an
overview of APA style for in-text citations, content notes, and
entries in the list of references.

In-Text Citations
APA style calls for in-text citations in the body of an argument to
document sources of quotations, paraphrases, summaries, and
so on. These in-text citations correspond to full bibliographic
entries in the list of references at the end of the text.

1. Author Named in a Signal Phrase
Generally, give the author’s name in a signal phrase to
introduce the cited material, using the past tense for the signal
verb. Place the date, in parentheses, immediately after the
author’s name. For a quotation, the page number, preceded by
p. (not italicized), appears in parentheses after the quotation.
For electronic texts or other works without page numbers,
paragraph numbers may be used instead, preceded by the
abbreviation para. For a long, set-off quotation, position the
page reference in parentheses one space after the punctuation
at the end of the quotation.
According to Brandon (1993), Adefunmi
885

opposed all forms of racism and believed
that black nationalism should not be a
destructive force (p. 29).
As Johnson (2005) demonstrated, contemporary
television dramas such as ER and Lost are
not only more complex than earlier programs
but “possess a quality that can only be
described as subtlety and discretion” (p.
83).

2. Author Named in Parentheses
When you don’t mention the author in a signal phrase, give the
name and the date, separated by a comma, in parentheses at the
end of the cited material.
The Sopranos has achieved a much wider
viewing audience than ever expected,
spawning a cookbook and several serious
scholarly studies (Franklin, 2002).

3. Two Authors
Use both names in all citations. Use and in a signal phrase, but
use an ampersand (&) in parentheses.
Associated with purity and wisdom, Obatala
is the creator of human beings, whom he is
said to have formed out of clay (Edwards &
Mason, 1985).
886

4. Three to Five Authors
List all the authors’ names for the first reference. In subsequent
references, use just the first author’s name followed by et al. (in
regular type, not underlined or italicized).
Lenhoff, Wang, Greenberg, and Bellugi (1997)
cited tests that indicate that segments of
the left brain hemisphere are not affected
by Williams syndrome, whereas the right
hemisphere is significantly affected (p.
1641).
Shackelford (1999) drew on the study by
Lenhoff et al. (1997).

5. Six or More Authors
Use only the first author’s name and et al. (in regular type, not
underlined or italicized) in every citation, including the first.
As Flower et al. (2003) demonstrated,
reading and writing involve both cognitive
and social processes.

6. Organization as Author
If the name of an organization or a corporation is long, spell it
out the first time, followed by an abbreviation in brackets. In
later citations, use the abbreviation only.
First Citation

(Federal Bureau of Investigation [FBI], 2002)

887

Subsequent Citations

(FBI, 2002)

7. Unknown Author
Use the title or its first few words in a signal phrase or in
parentheses. (In the example below, a book’s title is italicized.)
The school profiles for the county
substantiate this trend (Guide to secondary
schools, 2003).

8. Authors with the Same Last Name
If your list of references includes works by different authors
with the same last name, include the authors’ initials in each
citation.
G. Jones (1998) conducted the groundbreaking
study of retroviruses, whereas P. Jones
(2000) replicated the initial trials two
years later.

9. Two or More Sources in the Same
Citation
List sources by the same author chronologically by publication
year. List sources by different authors in alphabetical order by
the authors’ last names, separated by semicolons.
While traditional forms of argument are
warlike and agonistic, alternative models do
exist (Foss & Foss, 1997; Makau, 1999).
888

10. Specific Parts of a Source
Use abbreviations (p., pt., and so on) in a parenthetical citation
to name the part of a work you’re citing. However, chapter is
not abbreviated.
Pinker (2003) argued that his research
yielded the opposite results (p. 6).
Pinker (2003) argued that his research
yielded the opposite results (Chapter 6).

11. Online Document
To cite a source found on the Internet, use the author’s name
and date as you would for a print source, and indicate the
chapter or figure of the document, as appropriate. If the
source’s publication date is unknown, use n.d. (“no date”). To
document a quotation, include paragraph numbers if page
numbers are unavailable. If an online document has no page or
paragraph numbers, provide the heading of the section and the
number of the paragraph that follows.
Werbach (2002) argued convincingly that
“despite the best efforts of legislators,
lawyers, and computer programmers, spam has
won. Spam is killing email” (p. 1).

12. Email and Other Personal
Communication
Cite any personal letters, email messages, electronic postings,
889

telephone conversations, or personal interviews by giving the
person’s initial(s) and last name, the identification, and the
date. Do not list email in the references list, and note that APA
style uses a hyphen in the word e-mail.
E. Ashdown (personal communication, March 9,
2015) supported these claims.

Content Notes
The APA recommends using content notes for material that will
expand or supplement your argument but otherwise would
interrupt the text. Indicate such notes in your text by inserting
superscript numerals. Type the notes themselves either at the
bottom of the page or on a separate page headed Footnotes (not
italicized or in quotation marks), centered at the top of the page.
Double-space all entries. Indent the first line of each note onehalf inch or five spaces, and begin subsequent lines at the left
margin.

Text with Superscript Indicating a Note
Data related to children’s preferences in
books were instrumental in designing the
questionnaire.1
Note
1

Rudine Sims Bishop and members of the

Reading Readiness Research Group provided
890

helpful data.

List of References
The alphabetical list of sources cited in your text is called
References. (If your instructor asks you to list everything you’ve
read as background—not just the sources you cite—call the list
Bibliography.) The list of references appears on a separate page
or pages at the end of your paper, with the heading References
(not underlined, italicized, or in quotation marks) centered one
inch from the top of the page. Double-space after the heading,
and begin your first entry. Double-space the entire list. For
print sources, APA style specifies the treatment and placement
of four basic elements: author, publication date, title, and
publication information. Each element is followed by a period.
Author: List all authors with last name first, and use only
initials for first and middle names. Separate the names of
multiple authors with commas, and use an ampersand (&)
before the last author’s name.
Publication date: Enclose the publication date in
parentheses. Use only the year for books and journals; use
the year, a comma, and the month or month and day for
magazines and newspapers. Do not abbreviate the month.
If a date is not given, put n.d. (“no date,” not italicized) in
the parentheses. Put a period after the parentheses.
Title: Italicize titles and subtitles of books and periodicals.
Do not enclose titles of articles in quotation marks. For
books and articles, capitalize only the first word of the title
and subtitle and any proper nouns or proper adjectives;
891

also capitalize the first word following a colon. Capitalize
all major words in the title of a periodical.
Publication information: For a book published in the
United States, list the city of publication and state
abbreviation. For books published outside the United
States, identify the city and country. Provide the publisher’s
name, dropping Inc., Co., or Publishers. If the state is
already included within the publisher’s name, do not
include the postal abbreviation for the state. For a
periodical, follow the periodical title with a comma, the
volume number (italicized), the issue number (if provided)
in parentheses and followed by a comma, and the inclusive
page numbers of the article. For newspaper articles and for
articles or chapters in books, include the abbreviation p.
(“page”) or pp. (“pages”).
The following APA style examples appear in a “hanging indent”
format, in which the first line aligns on the left and the
subsequent lines indent one-half inch or five spaces.

Print Books
1. One Author
Isenberg, N. (2016). White trash: The 400-year
untold history of class in America. New York,
NY: Viking.

2. Two or More Authors

892

Steininger, M., Newell, J. D., & Garcia, L.
(1984). Ethical issues in psychology.
Homewood, IL: Dow Jones-Irwin.

3. Organization as Author
Use the word Author (not italicized) as the publisher when the
organization is both the author and the publisher.
Linguistics Society of America. (2002).
Guidelines for using sign language
interpreters. Washington, DC: Author.

4. Unknown Author
National Geographic atlas of the world. (2010).
Washington, DC: National Geographic Society.

5. Book Prepared by an Editor
Hardy, H. H. (Ed.). (1998). The proper study of
mankind. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus.

6. Selection in a Book with an Editor
Villanueva, V. (1999). An introduction to
social scientific discussions on class. In A.
Shepard, J. McMillan, & G. Tate (Eds.),
Coming to class: Pedagogy and the social
class of teachers (pp. 262–277). Portsmouth,
NH: Heinemann.

893

7. Translation
Pérez-Reverte, A. (2002). The nautical chart
(M. S. Peden, Trans.). New York, NY: Harvest.
(Original work published 2000)

8. Edition Other Than the First
Bok, D. (2015). Higher education in America
(Rev. ed.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

9. One Volume of a Multivolume Work
Will, J. S. (1921). Protestantism in France
(Vol. 2). Toronto, Canada: University of
Toronto Press.

10. Article in a Reference Work
Chernow, B., & Vattasi, G. (Eds.). (1993).
Psychomimetic drug. In The Columbia
encyclopedia (5th ed., p. 2238). New York,
NY: Columbia University Press.
If no author is listed, begin with the article title, followed by the
year, and the rest of the citation as shown here.

11. Republication
Sharp, C. (1978). History of Hartlepool.
894

Hartlepool, United Kingdom: Hartlepool
Borough Council. (Original work published
1816)

12. Graphic Narrative
If the words and images are created by the same person, cite a
graphic narrative just as you would a book with one author (see
item 1 on p. 520).
Bechdel, A. (2012). Are you my mother? New
York, NY: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
If the work is a collaboration, indicate the author or illustrator
who is most important to your research, followed by other
contributors in order of their appearance on the title page.
Label each person’s contribution to the work.
Stavans, I. (Writer), & Arcaraz, L.
(Illustrator). (2000). Latino USA: A cartoon
history. New York, NY: Basic.

13. Government Document
U.S. Bureau of the Census. (2001). Survey of
women-owned business enterprises. Washington,
DC: Government Printing Office.

14. Two or More Works by the Same Author
List the works in chronological order of publication. Repeat the
author’s name in each entry.
895

Lowin, S. (2006). The making of a forefather:
Abraham in Islamic and Jewish exegetical
narratives. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Lowin, S. (2013). Arabic and Hebrew love poems
in Al-Andalus. New York, NY: Routledge.

Print Periodicals
15. Article in a Journal Paginated by Volume
Bowen, L. M. (2011). Resisting age bias in
digital literacy research. College
Composition and Communication, 62, 586–607.

16. Article in a Journal Paginated by Issue
Carr, S. (2002). The circulation of Blair’s
Lectures. Rhetoric Society Quarterly, 32(4),
75–104.

17. Article in a Monthly Magazine
Considine, A. (2017, December). From stage to
page and back again. American Theatre 34(10),
32–35.

18. Article in a Newspaper
Nagourney, A. (2002, December 16). Gore rules
out running in ’04. The New York Times, pp.
896

A1, A8.

19. Letter to the Editor or Editorial
Insert the appropriate label in brackets after the title.
Erbeta, R. (2008, December). Swiftboating
George [Letter to the editor]. Smithsonian,
39(9), 10.

20. Unsigned Article
Guidelines issued on assisted suicide. (1998,
March 4). The New York Times, p. A15.

21. Review
Avalona, A. (2008, August). [Review of the book
Weaving women’s lives: Three generations in a
Navajo family, by L. Lamphere]. New Mexico,
86(8), 40.

22. Published Interview
Shor, I. (1997). [Interview with A. Greenbaum].
Writing on the Edge, 8(2), 7–20.

23. Two or More Works by the Same Author in the
Same Year
List two or more works by the same author published in the
same year alphabetically by title (excluding A, An, or The), and

897

place lowercase letters (a, b, etc.) after the dates.
Murray, F. B. (1983a). Equilibration as
cognitive conflict. Developmental Review, 3,
54–61.
Murray, F. B. (1983b). Learning and development
through social interaction. In L. Liben
(Ed.), Piaget and the foundations of
knowledge (pp. 176–201). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Digital Sources
The following models are based on the APA’s Publication
Manual (6th edition). When one is available, use a digital object
identifier (DOI) instead of a URL to locate an electronic source.
The DOI is a unique number assigned to an electronic text
(article, book, or other item) and intended to give reliable
access to it. List the retrieval date only if a source changes very
frequently. The basic APA entry for most electronic sources
should include the following elements:
name of the author, editor, or compiler
date of electronic publication or most recent update
title of the work, document, or posting
publication information, including the title, volume or
issue number, and page numbers
the DOI (digital object identifier) of the document, if one is
available
a URL, only if a DOI is not available, with no angle brackets
898

and no closing punctuation

24. Document from a Web Site
To cite a whole site, give the URL in parentheses in the text. To
cite a document from a Web site, include information as you
would for a print document, followed by a note on its retrieval.
Provide a date of retrieval only if the information is likely to
change frequently.
American Psychological Association. (2013).
Making stepfamilies work. Retrieved from
http://www.apa.org/helpcenter/stepfamily.aspx
Mullins, B. (1995). Introduction to Robert
Hass. In Readings in contemporary poetry at
Dia Center for the Arts. Retrieved from
http://awp.diaart.org/poetry/95_96/intrhass.html

25. Article from a Periodical on the Web
For an article you read online, provide either the DOI or the
URL of the periodical’s homepage, preceded by Retrieved from
(not italicized).
Haines, R. (2015, February 27). The problem
with separate toys for boys and girls. The
Boston Globe. Retrieved from
http://www.bostonglobe.com
Lambert, N. M., Graham, S. M., & Fincham, F. D.
(2009). A prototype analysis of gratitude:
Varieties of gratitude experiences.
899

Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
35, 1193–1207. doi:10.1177/0146167209338071

26. Article or Abstract from a Database
For an article you find on a database, provide a DOI if one is
available. If the online article does not have a DOI, provide the
URL for the journal’s homepage. You need not identify the
database you have used.
Strully, K. (2014). Racially and ethnically
diverse schools and adolescent romantic
relationships. American Journal of Sociology,
120(3), 750–757. doi:10.1086/679190
Hayhoe, G. (2001). The long and winding road:
Technology’s future. Technical Communication,
48(2), 133–145. Retrieved from
techcomm.stc.org

27. Software or Computer Program
OS X Lion (Version 10.7) [Computer operating
system]. (2011). Cupertino, CA: Apple.

28. Online Government Document
Cite an online government document as you would a printed
government work, adding the URL. Note that the APA spells
website as one word.
Finn, J. D. (1998, April). Class size and

900

students at risk: What is known? What is
next? Retrieved from United States Department
of Education website:
http://www.ed.gov/pubs/ClassSize/title.html

29. Entry in a Web Reference Work
Cite the entry as you would an entry from a print reference
work (see item 10). Follow with the date of publication, the
name of the Web site, and the URL.

Tour de France. (2006). In Encyclopaedia
Britannica. Retrieved from
http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/600732/Tourde-France

30. Post or Comment on a Web Site
Begin with the author’s name; the date of the most recent
update; the title of the post, followed by the description Blog
post or Blog comment, not italicized and in brackets; and the
URL.
Marcotte, A. (2012). Rights without perfection
[Blog post]. Retrieved from
http://www.rawstory.com/rs/2010/05/pandagonrights_without_perfection/

31. Entry in a Wiki
Since wikis are collectively edited, do not include an author.
Include the title of the entry; the date of the latest update; the

901

name of the wiki, italicized; and the URL of the source.
Fédération Internationale de Football
Association. (2014). In Wikipedia. Retrieved
May 11, 2014 from
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FIFA

32. Post on Social Media
To cite a post on a public Facebook page or other social media,
include the writer’s name, the date of the post, the title of the
post or a description of it, a label in brackets, and the URL of
the source.
Ferguson, S. (2014, March 6). Status update
[Facebook post]. Retrieved from
https://www.facebook.com/sarah.ferguson?
fref=nf
Do not include a social media post on the list of references if
your readers will not be able to access the source; instead, cite it
as a personal communication in the text.

American Psychological Association (2017,
August 3). Why are doctors underusing a drug
to treat opioid addiction? [Facebook post].
Retrieved August 5, 2017, from
https://www.facebook.com/AmericanPsychologicalAssociat

33. Tweet
Include the writer’s real name, if given. Otherwise, list the
902

writer’s Twitter handle; the date of the tweet; the entire text of
the tweet with no end punctuation, followed by Tweet in
brackets; the words Retrieved from; and the full Twitter account
URL with no end punctuation.

LunsfordHandbks. (2017, November 30). Claudia
Rankine’s “Citizen” is an incredible book in
both form and content, and I think it can
spark interesting and needed discussions when
taught in a writing course [Tweet]. Retrieved
from
https://twitter.com/LunsfordHandbks/status/93634667947

34. Newsgroup Posting
Include in the list of references only if the posting is archived.
Give the author’s name, the date and subject line of the posting,
and the URL of the newsgroup.
Wittenberg, E. (2001, July 11). Gender and the
Internet [Msg 4]. Retrieved from
news://comp.edu.composition

35. Email Message or Synchronous Communication
Because the APA stresses that any sources cited in your list of
references must be retrievable by your readers, you shouldn’t
include entries for email messages or synchronous
communications (MOOs, MUDs); instead, cite these sources in
your text as forms of personal communication (see item 12 on
p. 518). And remember that you shouldn’t quote from other

903

people’s email without asking their permission to do so.

Other Sources
36. Technical or Research Reports and Working
Papers
Kinley-Horn and Associates. (2011). ADOT
bicycle safety action plan (Working Paper No.
3). Phoenix: Arizona Department of
Transportation.

37. Unpublished Paper Presented at a Meeting or
Symposium
Welch, K. (2002, March). Electric rhetoric and
screen literacy. Paper presented at the
meeting of the Conference on College
Composition and Communication, Chicago, IL.

38. Unpublished Dissertation
Seward, D. E. (2008). Civil voice in
Elizabethan parliamentary oratory: The
rhetoric and composition of speeches
delivered at Westminster in 1566 (Unpublished
doctoral dissertation). University of Texas
at Austin, Austin, TX.

39. Poster Session
904

Mensching, G. (2002, May). A simple, effective
one-shot for disinterested students. Poster
session presented at the National LOEX
Library Instruction Conference, Ann Arbor,
MI.

40. Motion Picture, Video, or DVD
Bigelow, K. (Director). (2009). The hurt locker
[Motion picture]. United States: Summit
Entertainment.

41. Television or Radio Program, Single Episode
Burnett, A. (Writer), & Attias, D. (Director).
(2014, March 26). The deal [Television series
episode]. In J. Weisberg (Executive
producer), The Americans. Los Angeles, CA:
DreamWorks Television.
Young, R. (Host). (2018, March 1). How “Black
Panther” is inspiring black cosplayers [Radio
series episode]. In K. McKenna (Senior
producer), Here and now. Retrieved from
http://www.wbur.org/

42. Online Video Clip
Weber, J. (2012). As we sow, part I: Where are
the farmers? [Video file]. Retrieved from
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_cdcDpMf6qE
905

43. Sound Recording
Begin with the writer’s name, followed by the date of copyright.
Give the recording date at the end of the entry (in parentheses,
after the period) if it’s different from the copyright date.
Ivey, A., Jr., & Sall, R. (1995). Rollin’ with
my homies [Recorded by Coolio]. On Clueless
[CD]. Hollywood, CA: Capitol Records.
Sample Title Page for an Essay in APA Style

906

907

Sample First Text Page for an Essay in APA Style

908

909

Sample References List for an Essay in APA Style

910

911

RESPOND●
1. The MLA and APA styles differ in several important ways, both
for in-text citations and for lists of sources. You’ve probably
noticed a few: the APA uses lowercase letters for most words in
titles and lists the publication date right after the author’s
name, whereas the MLA capitalizes most words and puts the
publication date at the end of the works cited entry. More
interesting than the details, though, is the reasoning behind the
differences. Placing the publication date near the front of a
citation, for instance, reveals a special concern for that
information in the APA style. Similarly, the MLA’s decision to
capitalize titles isn’t arbitrary: that style is preferred in the
humanities for a reason. Working in a group, find as many
consistent differences between the MLA and APA styles as you
can. Then, for each difference, speculate about the reasons
these groups organize or present information in that way. The
MLA and APA style manuals themselves may be of help. You
might also begin by determining which academic disciplines
subscribe to the APA style and which to the MLA.
2. Working with another person in your class, look for examples of
the following sources: an article in a journal, a book, a film, a
song, and a TV show. Then make a references page or works
cited list (five entries in all), using either MLA or APA style.

912

PART 5 arguments

913

CHAPTER 23 How Does Popular Culture
Stereotype You?

Check the dictionary, and you’ll learn that the term stereotype
originally referred to a printing plate cast in metal from the
mold of a page of set type. Although English borrowed the word
from French, its parts are ultimately of Greek origin: stereo
means “solid” or “three-dimensional” and type means “model.”
By extension, the word has come to mean a widely held image
that is fixed, allowing for little individuality among a group’s
members. Ironic, isn’t it, that a term originally referring to a
three-dimensional printing plate has come to mean a onedimensional representation of an entire group?
The selections in this chapter focus on stereotyping in popular
culture, challenging you to analyze what many consider to be
unsavory stereotypes of various groups often found there. At
the same time, the chapter challenges you to think about
whether it is possible to undo stereotypes, to move from onedimensional representations of groups to representations that

914

acknowledge the groups’ complexities.
The chapter opens with a selection by Alli Joseph that considers
how the 2016 blockbuster film Moana was initially received
among Native Americans and Pacific Islanders, groups who
contend that they have not been fairly represented in American
culture. Because it focuses on a Disney film, the article
understandably raises questions about how well Disney
succeeded in doing a better job with Moana than it had done in
the past with other films, even as the article also seeks to
explain why making films about marginalized groups is difficult
—period.
The second reading is a 2015 selection by a writer identified
only as D.K., which discusses the ways in which people who
enjoy shooting guns are often misrepresented by Americans
wanting stronger gun-control regulations. Its two audiences—
readers in the U.S. and those around the world—make for an
interesting rhetorical situation as the writer seeks to explain
U.S. culture to the rest of the world and also to his intended
American readers.
In the third selection, Nicole Pasulka presents a case study that
may encourage readers to examine stereotypes about
fundamentalist Christians and LGBTQ individuals. This 2015
selection also documents generational changes taking place in
many fundamentalist communities, reminding us of a
limitation of stereotypes—both stereotypes and those who

915

subscribe to them get stuck in time.
Next is an excerpt from C. Richard King’s 2016 book, Redskins:
Insult and Brand. It historicizes the controversy over the name
of the Washington, D.C., professional football team, seeking to
encourage readers to examine their own assumptions (and
stereotypes) about what these debates are and aren’t about.
The fifth selection, an excerpt from a 2011 research article by
five psychologists led by Melinda C. R. Burgess, investigates the
prevalence and consequences of racial stereotypes in video
games, calling attention to the way such stereotypes show up in
unexpected places.
The visual argument for this chapter is three cereal boxes by
Canadian artist Sonny Assu from his 2006 Breakfast Series. Assu
uses illustrations and text on the boxes to mock stereotypes of
the First Nations people of Canada.
The chapter closes with Sara Morrison’s 2016 report on how
journalists are learning to do a better job covering the
transgender community, moving beyond “coming out” stories
to examine issues important to that community.
Originally, stereotypes were part of a printer’s trade, enabling
the printer to disseminate information quickly and cheaply. No
less a part of popular culture today, stereotypes of different
sorts continue disseminating information, much of which we
increasingly find problematic. These readings may help you
916

examine your experience with stereotypes, offering ways to
think about undoing those you’ve decided it’s time to discard.

917

Alli Joseph wears many media hats as a writer and
producer who works in print, broadcast journalism, and
online. Joseph is also president of Seventh Generation
Stories, a company that helps groups and individuals
preserve their family’s stories. A member of the
Shinnecock Indian Nation, Joseph refers to herself as a
“Native [sic] New Yorker.” In this essay, which appeared
in December 2016, a week after Disney released Moana,
Joseph examines the responses of Americans of
indigenous heritage to the movie. This piece first
appeared at Salon.com, where Joseph is a contributing
editor. As you read, consider why members of some
groups have frequently found Disney films, so popular in
the U.S. and worldwide, problematic and how Disney’s
recent efforts to change that script are being received.

With Disney’s Moana, Hollywood Almost Gets It Right: Indigenous
People Weigh In
ALLI JOSEPH
This Thanksgiving the receipts for the opening weekend of
the new Disney film Moana rocketed to $82 million
domestically and $99 million globally. At this rate the new
film is poised to crush Frozen and Big Hero 6.
What’s more, after only a week in business, it is already

918

winning critical acclaim and beginning to rack up award
nominations. Maybe most encouraging of all, Native
Americans and other indigenous people are loving Moana,
which means “ocean” and tells the story of a young Pacific
Islander chief’s daughter, a bold, strong and independent
teen who sets sail to save her people.

I took my children, who are of mixed ethnicity—part Native
American, African American and white—to see Moana last
weekend, and I lamented that they would never understand
how much progress this represents for the portrayal of
indigenous people in mass media. True, they’re little kids,
and they should be expected to watch an animated film only
with the limited scope and wonder of all children. But the
experience impelled me to write about the swelling pride I
felt during this film and how my late mother would have felt
about it.
919

indigenous
native to a place; increasingly, this term is used in reference to the groups that lived
in the Americas and the Pacific before the arrival of Europeans.

She passed away nine years ago today and was a fierce
advocate for equal and civil rights and outspoken about the
horrible racist stereotypes of Native Americans, black
people and other brown folks specifically in Disney films.
She might have actually tipped her hat to this one, as I did.
Here’s why.
It’s easy to see why most are loving on the film. This is the
first time that a female Pacific Islander is the principal
character of a major Disney animation film. She doesn’t
need a man. She sails her own boat. The ocean, which is a
character in the film, loves and propels her.
Many Pacific Islanders have praised Moana across social
media, with tweets expressing joy and optimism about the
character and the film. The young indigenous Hawaiian
actress who voiced the character, Auli’i Cravalho, knows she
has added responsibility portraying the first Disney person
of color from the Pacific.
“I carry, of course, such a big responsibility with the
Polynesian community and I love it. I really do,” 16-year-old
Cravalho told People magazine recently. “It warms my heart
every time I think about it.”

920

Auli’i Cravalho

Closer to home, Natahne Dennis, a member of the
Shinnecock Indian Nation, took her young daughter to see
the film last weekend. She wrote on Facebook, “I was
watery-eyed through half of it. . . . It’s all about not
forgetting who you are and where you come from . . .
keeping with your traditions, listening to your elders and
respecting the power of all our elements . . . very relative to
what’s happening right now.”
Shinnecock Indian Nation
a federally recognized Native tribe, part of the Algonquian peoples, located on the
eastern end of Long Island, New York.

Though it’s a film made for children, Moana has a cultural
921

and social relevance for adults as well. I cried, too, at the
soaring songs, and their lyrics by Lin-Manuel Miranda,
which rang out about freedom and the import of knowing
where you come from.
Lin-Manuel Miranda (1980– )
award-winning American composer, lyricist, playwright, and actor of Puerto Rican
descent. He is best known for his work on the 2015 Broadway musical, Hamilton: An
American Musical, for which he wrote the book, lyrics, and music and in which he
acted.

What Disney got right was its portrayal of a strong, teenage
female character of color—again, an indigenous person—
without a love interest. It is the first Disney film in which the
heroine, a bona fide Disney princess though she is, has no
male suitor and she’s not interested in finding one. Moana is
922

bright, resourceful, strong and adventurous, making
decisions from the heart and based on her heritage that she
feels will benefit her people and save their homeland from
destruction at the hands of a folkloric demon.
Disney didn’t get it all right, however. Critics observe the
corporate animation house stole brown peoples’ cultural
mores and identity to make a buck, and didn’t fully consult
them on content all the way through. The critics aren’t
wrong, but what they expect is not realistic: Making big
studio features is a business proposition; crafting a
documentary that explores true culture and origins typically
is not.
mores (pronounced mo-rayz)
a community’s customs, traditions, and ways of behaving shaped by its social norms.

Cultural appropriation is a common complaint about the
media and not surprising here—and disappointing, as
Moana is overall an uplifting, beautiful film. But the film’s
achievements are not enough for some to cite progress
toward more accurate, less-stereotypical portrayal of other
cultures in film. In Indian Country Today, Vicente Diaz
wrote, “A small but growing movement of Pacific Islanders .
. . are expressing outcry, mostly in social media.” Diaz said
protesters decry the “company’s trafficking on indigenous
cultural heritage.”
cultural appropriation (sometimes cultural misappropriation)
the use of elements of a minority culture—clothing, foodways, music, etc.—by the

923

majority culture, often to the benefit of members of the majority culture and
denigration of the source culture. To appropriate something is to borrow and use it
without permission.
Indian Country Today
from 2011 to 2017, Indian Country Today was first a weekly online newsletter and
later a Web site and multimedia news platform about the Native peoples of North
America.

As a Native American and a member of the media who has
worked in advertising, broadcasting and Web content
creation over the past 20 years, I understand the confluence
of imagery, cost and influence that goes into making a
successful brand. Those who are angry at Disney managers’
trading on cultures not their own fail to acknowledge or
accept the way business is done. We may not like it, but
understanding it gives perspective.
confluence
a merging or coming together, as of two rivers.

That said, it is a valid argument to demand consistent and
responsible input from respected elders and historians from
the culture being portrayed. And if you want change,
sometimes you have to accept progress when it comes,
endorse it but ask for more—and then observe.
Native American scholars including Kelsey Leonard, a
Harvard and Oxford educated Shinnecock tribal member,
have urged caution when labeling a film an “accurate
portrayal” of indigenous people “especially if we are not

924

from, as in the case of Moana,” a Pacific Island nation, as
Leonard put it.
Kelsey Leonard (1980– )
first Native American woman to earn a degree from Oxford University in England,
where she received her MSc in Water Science, Policy and Management. She was also
the first member of the Shinnecock Indian Nation to graduate from Harvard
University, where she studied sociology, anthropology, and ethnic studies.

“If you do not know the oral history, are not from those
islands, have never visited those places, do not understand
the vast diversity of languages and peoples, then extreme
caution should be used in making sweeping claims about
this movie,” Leonard said. “If they made a movie about
Shinnecocks, I wouldn’t want a Navajo telling me if it was an
accurate portrayal.”
Disney has maintained that everybody involved in the
production of the picture did their level best to make a
responsible film that honors Pacific Island culture,
traditions and history. Early reports that director and New
Zealander Taika Waititi was consulted through the entire
film, were not accurate.
Taika Waititi (1975– )
also known as Taika Cohen, is among the most successful New Zealand film
directors. His father is Māori, the indigenous people of New Zealand, while his mother
is of Russian Jewish heritage.

Indeed the voice cast is almost fully comprised of actors
with Pacific Island heritage and Waititi apparently did write

925

an early draft of the script for Moana. But the script was
ultimately rewritten by Jared Bush, a non-Pacific Islander.
“It continues to be disappointing that when people are called
as advisory cultural and artistic consultants on projects that
their work is not respected all the way through,” Courtney
Leonard, another Shinnecock woman and sister of Kelsey
Leonard, wrote. “It’s also a lot of responsibility when you
come from that culture to please everyone under the
auspices and pretenses that are what Disney is.”
Diaz wrote in Indian Country Today, “Any altruism
associated with this latest commercial ad-venture will
always be trumped by the proverbial bottom line, but more
depressingly, by an enduring colonial legacy in the Pacific
islands that is further animated in the 21st century by
neoliberal and postcolonial desires for selling and
consuming native culture of a very specific type.”
colonial
having been colonized by a foreign power. The colonial powers involved in colonizing
various Pacific islands have included the Portuguese, the Spanish, the Dutch, the
British, the Germans, the Americans, and the Japanese.
neoliberal
a late twentieth-century political movement that places strong faith in markets,
privatization of what had been public (or government) programs, deregulation, and
free trade. Here, the focus is the mass marketing of often inaccurate replicas of things
related to specific cultural groups (e.g., as Halloween costumes, toys, etc.).
postcolonial
the state of having once been colonized. Once people become independent, legacies
of the colonial period often play a major role in how they see themselves and how

926

their societies are organized, and economic relationships with the former colonizer
often shape the society.

As Disney often does, the script is populated by characters
that are a mash-up of Pacific Island cultures, and therefore
are not as accurate in their representation as they could be.
Disney made some early gaffes in the associated
merchandise, like a tattooed skin suit of the Polynesian
demigod Maui featured in the film (oh no!) and plastic toy
figures that turn Pele, the Hawaiian fire goddess responsible
for volcanoes, lightening and wind respectfully referred by
those in the culture as Madame Pele, into the lava witch
seen in the film (ugh!).
gaffes
unintentional blunders.

Both products have been pulled from stores. Copy on the
tattoo skin suit packaging, according to Variety, had cheerily
read, “Your little one will set off on adventures in this Maui
costume featuring the demigod’s signature tattoos, rope
necklace, and island-style skirt. Plus, padded arms and legs
for mighty stature!”
Variety
a Web site that publishes information on the entertainment industry. Founded as a
weekly newspaper in 1905 reporting on New York City theater and vaudeville, a daily
edition focusing on the movie industry was added in Los Angeles in 1933. Since 2013,
it has existed only online as variety.com.

So, yeah, Disney thought it would be fun for your kid to wear

927

a replica suit of a person’s skin. I would have liked to have
joined the marketing meeting where that was approved.
Disney briefly hung its head, telling Variety in September
when the toys and costumes were released, “The team
behind Moana has taken great care to respect the cultures of
the Pacific Islands that inspired the film, and we regret that
the Maui costume has offended some. We sincerely
apologize and are pulling the costume from our website and
stores.”

The crows from Dumbo

The animation, music and storyline, in Disney fashion, are
largely airtight in quality—almost magical. And in spite of
any controversy, the film represents progress in the way
indigenous people are portrayed by big media. Moana
represents huge strides from 1989’s crab Sebastian in The
Little Mermaid, who sounded Jamaican and sang to the

928

princess Ariel that life “under the sea” is better because no
one has to have a job underwater. And from the way-back
machine, there were the 1941 crows in Dumbo, who step ’n’
fetched it, talked jive and were unintelligent. The list goes
on, from “ Uncle Remus” to the racist and slutty Native
American portrayals in Peter Pan and Aladdin.
The Little Mermaid
a highly successful 1989 animated Disney film based on a Danish folktale by Hans
Christian Anderson and much appreciated for its sophisticated animation.
Dumbo
a very successful 1941 animated film about an elephant, Dumbo, that can use his very
large ears to fly. The movie included a group of crows, all but one of which was voiced
by African Americans. Some film critics have argued that the crows represented
African Americans in terms of negative stereotypes circulating in American culture at
the time.
step ’n’ fetched
a reference to the American comedian and film star Stepin Fetchit (1902–1985), born
Lincoln Thomas Monroe Andrew Perry. Fetchit’s stage name was a play on “step and
fetch it.” In the 1930s and 1940s, he portrayed a character claiming to be “the laziest
man in the world.” He was the first African American actor to receive credit for a film
he appeared in and the first to earn a million dollars in the industry. By the 1950s, his
popularity declined as many came to see the character he portrayed as one that
perpetuated false and harmful stereotypes of African Americans.
Uncle Remus
the narrator in seven books of African American folk tales by white southern author
Joel Chandler Harris, the first published in 1881. In 1946, Disney released a live
action/animated musical, Song of the South, based on Harris’s books. Controversy
relating to the books and the film stems from their representation of African
American language and their patronizing portrayal of African Americans.
Peter Pan
an animated 1953 Disney film based on J. M. Barrie’s 1904 play, Peter Pan, or The Boy

929

Who Wouldn’t Grow Up. It has been criticized for its negative portrayal of Native
Americans.
Aladdin
an animated 1992 Disney film based on a folktale from A Thousand and One Nights, an
important collection of tales in Arabic literature. It was the source of great
controversy because of its portrayal of Arabs, among other issues.

Stepin Fetchit

Still, wrote my cousin Adrienne Silva, “It’s nice to have
characters and toys that look more like us. I sßaw ßa crispy
white dad ansd his daughter excitedly looking for a Tiana
doll when The Princess and the Frog came out. It’s not
perfect, but it’s a start. As a parent, I purchase my kids all
brown when possible . . . and unfortunately, the fact that it’s
even a possibility is ‘progress’ in this country.”
Tiana
the main character in the 2009 Disney film The Princess and the Frog. Tiana was the
ninth Disney Princess and the first of African American descent.

Said Natahne Dennis: “I’m sure there were inaccurate
930

portrayals, there’s always something wrong to critics,”
adding, “I know my child left feeling empowered as she
quoted lines from the movie. If nothing else, it was an
indigenous woman determined to bring healing back to her
people.”
And this universal theme, of knowing where you come from
and honoring that, may have to be enough for now.

RESPOND●
1. Joseph has in many ways offered a critical evaluation of
Moana. What criteria has she used in offering her
evaluation? (See Chapter 10 on evaluative arguments.) If
you have seen the film, what was your response to Joseph’s
observations? Had you considered these issues before?
Why or why not, do you think?
2. Joseph assumes many readers will accept the claim that,
despite their best current efforts, Disney films do not
manage to avoid misrepresenting cultures around the
world. What specific evidence does she cite to support the
claim with regard to Moana? (See the discussion of kinds of
evidence in logical arguments in Chapter 4.)
3. Joseph offers what is ultimately a very interesting
evaluation of the Disney film Moana. On the one hand, she
is jubilant about many aspects of it and its possible value to
children, especially girls, of indigenous heritage. At the
same time, she is quick to acknowledge that Disney didn’t
get everything right. Yet, she is also, in many regards, an
apologist—that is a defender—of Disney’s efforts, despite

931

what she and others see as the film’s problems. How does
Joseph establish her ethos as someone qualified to
represent Native perspectives? As someone who
understands how the media operate in the U.S. and
internationally? (See Chapter 3 for information on
arguments based on ethos.)
4. THINKING CRITICALLY As Joseph notes, she is a member of the
Shinnecock Nation and not a Pacific Islander, yet she
clearly feels a strong connection to Moana and links it in
important ways to her own experience as someone of
Native heritage. And in paragraph 15 of the article, Joseph
quotes another Shinnecock who “urged caution when
labeling a film an ‘accurate portrayal’” of an indigenous
group one has no direct familiarity with. First, what set of
circumstances might lead Native Americans to feel they
have a stake in the representations of Pacific Islanders in
popular culture, a stake not shared by white Americans, for
example? Second, what challenges do groups like Native
Americans and Pacific Islanders, both of which have been
historically marginalized in the larger society, face in
finding common ground?
5. Paragraph 24 of the article catalogs several Disney films
that have been criticized for their representations of
various groups; the earlier of these films were made at a
time when fewer people were concerned with such issues.
That situation has changed—a change many Americans
have been happy to see. Choose one of these films and
write an evaluative essay about it. Watch the movie, and
evaluate it with regard to the question of whether any
groups are represented in negatively stereotypical ways.
(This would be a good assignment to engage in with one or

932

two classmates, ideally of different backgrounds, so that
you would have several perspectives on the film as you
wrote. Consult Chapter 10 on writing evaluations.)

933

“Shooting Guns: It’s Rather Fun, Actually” was published
in February 2015 on the economist.com, the Web site of the
Economist, a widely read weekly magazine published in
London; half its readers are in the United States. The
Economist’s target audience is “highly educated, cultured
readers,” especially those in business and policy. D.K., the
author, identifies as “a liberal European reporter” and uses
spellings we’d expect from a European writer and a British
publication: centre, realise, neighbourhoods, organisation,
and Mr without a period. The piece appeared in a regular
feature of the Economist, “Democracy in America,” which
seeks to describe aspects of American democracy that differ
in crucial ways from, say, democracies in Europe. As you
read, consider the stereotypes D.K. is calling into question
and those he or she is perpetuating. Likewise, try to assess
whether you believe D.K. is male or female and why you draw
that conclusion; doing so may give you insight into how
stereotypes work.
Shooting Guns: It’s Rather Fun, Actually
D.K.
Shooting a handgun at a target is a thrill; don’t let anyone tell
you otherwise. You load bullets into a clip, push it up into the
gun, turn off the safety catch, take careful hold of the gun with
two hands, aim and shoot. The thing jumps in your hand and
you see the bullet knock a hole in the target and spark off the
floor at the back of the range. There is an extraordinary rush

934

and then you do it again. Another spark; perhaps this time the
hole in the target is a little closer to the centre. Soon you have
fired the whole clip and you’re loading the deadly weapon in
your hand again.
That is just to preface a more obvious point. To a liberal
European reporter, from afar, American gun culture appears
utterly insane. Americans are far more likely to murder
someone or to kill themselves than people in almost all Western
European countries, largely because guns make it easier. That
almost 33,000 people are killed with firearms each year in
America (including three Muslims in Chapel Hill, North
Carolina, earlier this week) is a colossal and largely
unnecessary waste of life. That people celebrate these deadly
devices and carry them around while shopping, picking up their
children from school or working, seems monstrous.
Yet shooting is fun. And what Europeans—and liberal
Americans—often don’t realise is that these deadly weapons are
also an accessible, affordable and interesting hobby for millions
of people. My experience of firing a pistol took place at a
shooting range in the Maryland suburbs, about half an hour’s
drive outside of Washington, DC. I had until then never visited a
shooting range and I had no idea of what to expect. But the
experience was actually oddly familiar. This place was not a
temple to violence. Rather, it mostly closely resembled the golf
driving range that my father would occasionally take me to as a
child.

935

Most of the building’s space was given over to sales. Punters
could buy all manner of guns, from something that resembled a
sniper rifle to a pink pistol around the size of a mobile phone.
But they could also buy clothes: camouflage hunting jackets;
bright high-vis jackets; Smith and Wesson baseball caps and Tshirts. Much of the gear was police-themed, since police
officers are apparently loyal customers (which is also true of
driving ranges). T-shirts commemorating dead cops, bulletproof jackets and leather badge holders sat a little awkwardly
alongside more conventional sporting gear.
punter
in British English, an informal term for a client or customer.

In the range people fired guns gleefully at targets. Some were
white, male, middle-aged and so fit the stereotype. But not all.
Across from where I fired my pistol, two black women, one with
a small son, were taking turns (the child heavily supervised).
Shooting targets was a fine family day out. At a practice target
outside of the range, plenty of people were learning how to hold
a weapon for the first time, without pointing it at anyone,
dropping it or injuring themselves as it recoiled. Again, it
resembled a driving range: people hitting targets for fun.

936

And the truth is that in the range, the violence that guns inflict
on America felt extremely remote. A few stickers here and there
made political points (“My right to own a gun is what protects
your right to tell me I can’t,” said one). But mostly, the idea of
guns as a means to kill somebody was absent. And so it is for
most people who fire guns. The most dangerous
neighbourhoods for gun violence in America are in poor cities,
not in the suburban areas where most gun owners live. Most of
the 21,000 or so suicides in which guns are used take place
behind closed doors. And the numbers, while devastatingly
high, are not so high that most Americans will know someone
who was killed with a gun.
For the majority of gun owners, being told that their harmless
937

hobby is somehow responsible for the deaths of other people
must be deeply unpleasant. Worse still is when they are told it
by metropolitan types with more money than them. Michael
Bloomberg, for example, New York’s billionaire ex-mayor. Or
possibly me. And it makes me wonder whether one of the
problems—certainly not the main problem, but one of them—
with attempts to control guns is precisely that the people
making the loudest case for reform are people like Mr
Bloomberg and me.
metropolitan
referring to urban areas.

My evidence for this is this advert, put together by the NRA, in
which the viewer is warned that Mr Bloomberg, guarded by
armed men (a hypocrite as well as a snob!), wants to take away
your safety. The NRA is an extremely nasty organisation.
Supported by the money of gun manufacturers, it has created a
machine whereby politicians must take stances on gun control
that are more extreme than most of their voters believe,
because otherwise they will be punished with attack adverts.
But the NRA is not the voice of most gun owners. Poll after poll
shows that solid majorities of gun owners would prefer stricter
background checks. The NRA, however, gets its support by
convincing gun owners that their hobby is under threat from
metropolitan liberal elitists.
But keeping guns out of the hands of criminals and the mentally

938

ill is not incompatible with widespread gun ownership. And
bringing about the changes that will make America safer means
convincing people who routinely use guns safely that they are
not the enemy. Perhaps what gun control needs is a few
advocates who are a little more visibly familiar with the sheer
fun of holding a pistol and pulling the trigger.
RESPOND●

1. How well has D.K. made his or her case? Where and how does
D.K. provide evidence that shooting guns is or can be fun? What
is your response to those descriptions?
2. Where and how does D.K. call into question stereotypes some
Americans, especially those who want far stronger gun control
regulations, have of those who use guns at shooting ranges or
in certain other contexts? In what ways does D.K. seek to create
a sympathetic view of such individuals? How successful do you
believe the author is?
3. Although D.K. apparently comes to see some gun owners and
users in a (more) sympathetic light based on his or her
experience at the shooting range, s/he has no kind words for
the National Rifle Association. How does s/he use polling data
to level a criticism at the NRA? Might the claim hold with
respect to other organizations or other hot-button political
issues? How would this situation contribute to stereotypes and
political polarization?
4. THINKING CRITICALLY As noted, the Economist is a British-based
publication, although a large percentage of its readership is
located in the U.S. In what ways do we see D.K. writing for an
audience of both Americans and non-Americans, a complex

939

intended/ideal audience? Who is likely D.K.’s invoked audience,
that is, the audience whose values are reflected in the text? And
who is now among D.K.’s real audience? (See Chapter 1 on the
complex question of audiences.)
5. The Guardian, another British-based publication, produces an
online version for U.S. audiences. In 2013, it ran a feature, “13
Misconceptions about Gun Owners,” based on responses to a
query to readers who owned guns about such misconceptions
(bit.ly/2njgPYB). The feature is in the form of a listicle, a
relatively recent genre consisting of a list of items. Choose two
of the misconceptions submitted by readers who said they
owned guns and use them as the basis of short arguments
of fact. In other words, for each misconception, write a healthy
paragraph of four or five sentences in which you begin with the
misconception as stated and then explain what the stereotype
is and how the comment submitted calls it into question. To
help you with this assignment, imagine your audience to be a
group of international students who have recently arrived in
the U.S. and who have limited knowledge of American culture.
Consider the information you’ll need to provide so that your
newly arrived classmates can understand this complicated and
contentious part of American culture. (See Chapter 8 on
arguments of fact.)

940

New York–based Nicole Pasulka is an award-winning
researcher, reporter, and writer who covers topics related
to the criminal justice system, gender and sexuality, social
justice, and business. She has written for National Public
Radio, the Believer, Mother Jones, BuzzFeed, Hazlitt, and
the New York Observer. This essay appeared in January
2015 on TakePart, which was a digital news and lifestyle
magazine focusing on issues relating to culture and social
justice. In 2016, TakePart was merged with its parent
company’s operations as part of Participant Media, a
motion picture studio. As you read, consider the many
levels at which stereotypes are at play within and across
the groups described here.

How a Bible-Belt Evangelical Church Embraced Gay Rights
NICOLE PASULKA
When Dale Wigden went to services at Grace Pointe
Evangelical Church in Franklin, Tennessee, for the first
time around two years ago, he wasn’t expecting much. Since
coming out as gay in his 20s, he’d had a complicated
relationship with organized religion.
evangelical
referring to a form of Protestant Christianity that focuses on individual salvation by
grace through faith in Jesus Christ in the form of a conversion experience (“being
saved”), the authority of the Christian Bible as the word of God, and the need to
convert those who have not been saved.

941

Wigden, who is now 40, grew up in a very religious
Independent Baptist family just outside Rochester, New
York. His mother and much of his family still go to the same
church they always have—a community Wigden says he
finds “insular and closed-minded.” After he told his family
he was gay, they tried to stage interventions, and he
rebuffed their efforts outright. By the time he moved to
Nashville in 2012, all the rejection meant Wigden was “not in
the religious frame of mind.”
Independent Baptist
Baptist churches that are not affiliated with larger hierarchical groups of Baptists;
thus, each church is independent. Such churches are generally quite conservative
theologically and politically.
intervention
here, an effort by a group of family members or friends to confront someone who has

942

a serious problem (e.g., an addiction or behavioral issue) in an effort convince the
person to address the problem, often by seeking some sort of professional help or
participation in some sort of recovery program.

The uncommon spelling of the word “pointe” in Grace
Pointe’s name made him think it was probably some sort of
“boutique church,” so he was skeptical. He’d attended a gayfriendly church while living in Chicago, but “it just seemed
like anything goes.” Even though he knew his own lifestyle
wasn’t considered moral by many people’s standards, the
style of worship there “bugged me,” Wigden says.
“Where is the place where I can be gay and Christian?” he
wondered.
That first day at Grace Pointe, an interdenominational
church with a membership of about 1,500, the pastors were
leading an old-fashioned hymn sing. When they got to
“Amazing Grace,” Pastor Melissa Greene said something that
“hit me right square between the eyes,” Wigden says.
Speaking about the line “that saved a wretch like me,”
Greene said the church didn’t agree with the word “wretch.”
interdenominational
celebrating the strengths of many denominations, here, Protestant ones.

“It doesn’t matter what you’ve done or who you are, you
were born beloved by God,” Wigden says she told the
congregation. According these pastors, God didn’t want to
punish him. From that moment on, he says, he was “hooked

943

on Grace Pointe.”
While the Grace Pointe leadership, staff, and congregation
emphasize love and encourage people to ask questions and
voice doubts, this is no hotbed of progressive activism. The
town of Franklin is in what Greene calls “the buckle of the
Bible Belt.” Half an hour outside Nashville, Franklin is
affluent, overwhelmingly conservative, and about 85
percent white. With a population of around 68,000 people,
it’s also the home of the World Christian Broadcasting
Company.
Bible Belt
a term often applied to the southeastern and south-central U.S., where conservative
Protestantism has long played a key role in daily life and in politics; church
attendance is much higher in this region of the country than in others.
World Christian Broadcasting Company
a nonprofit organization that operates a Christian short-wave radio station currently
broadcasting around the world in Mandarin, Russian, and English. While the content
includes discussions of the Bible, it is largely geared toward secular listeners as a
form of evangelism.

There are strong lines drawn between right and wrong at
Grace Pointe Church. “Everyone has sin in their lives,”
Greene told TakePart. However, not everyone at Grace
Pointe agrees on what actions are sinful. Despite some
opposition from within the congregation, this Bible Belt
church is now making a religious argument for gay rights.
More than 70 percent of Americans know a gay or lesbian

944

person. Following stunning legal victories for gay marriage
over the past four years, gay rights have moved from the
fringe to the mainstream. Antigay attitudes haven’t
disappeared, but even some of the most conservative
corners of the country have started to advocate for a
tempered version of gay rights. On Tuesday, the Mormon
Church leadership issued a statement in support of an LGBT
anti-discrimination law in Utah. Though the state law
includes a wide exemption for religious freedom, the
Mormon Church’s statement suggests that conservative
circles can no longer ignore the presence of out gay people.
Many deeply religious Christian communities are often
assumed to condemn same-sex relations. But the truth is,
evangelical churches are diverse and evolving quickly on the
question of how to include LGBT members. In a 2014 poll by
Public Religion Research Institute, a nonprofit, nonpartisan
group, 42 percent of millennial evangelical Christians
surveyed said they support same-sex marriage.
millennial
referring to those who became adults early in the twenty-first century.

Just outside Seattle earlier this month, Eastlake Community
Church—a megachurch that holds 13 services a week across
six locations—announced it would become LGBT-inclusive.
Last year in Los Angeles, a pastor named Danny Cortez was
dismissed from the Southern Baptist Convention after he
began speaking out in support of same-sex marriage.
945

megachurch
a large church with over 2,000 weekly attendees; the term is generally used to refer to
large evangelical or conservative Protestant churches.

Behind the scenes for Cortez’s decision was Brandan
Robertson, the spokesperson for Evangelicals for Marriage
Equality, a Washington, D.C.–based group that will bring a
petition with more than 1,179 signatures of faithful
evangelicals who support same-sex marriage rights to the
Ethics and Religious Liberty conference in October. The
ERLC has been adamant that marriage is a “union between
one man and one woman.”
A counterculture within evangelical Christianity seems
determined to challenge this idea. At this year’s Gay
Christian Network Conference, Robertson spoke to a room
of 150 evangelicals who support LGBT rights. He told them
it’s “vital” that they stay in their evangelical communities
and “not join liberal churches or LGBT churches.”
counterculture
opposing the dominant social norms.
Gay Christian Network
Christian interdenominational ministry representing a range of theological positions
that was formed in 2001 to serve as an LGBTQ ally by working to change the attitudes
of Christians on LGBTQ issues, especially within churches.
liberal churches
mainline Protestant denominations that have affirmed a commitment to welcoming
and including LGBTQ individuals; they are termed liberal because they do not rely on
literalist readings of the Christian scriptures but seek to understand them in terms of
the historical contexts out of which they grew.

946

LGBT churches
churches established to serve specifically the LGBTQ community (though all are
welcomed); an example would be Metropolitan Community Church, founded in 1968.

Change begins “in the pews,” Robertson says. Though he
believes the movement for LGBT acceptance in more
conservative churches is gaining momentum, he
acknowledges that LGBT evangelicals “have a long way to
go.”
Wigden was always open about the fact that he’s gay. When
he first started attending services at Grace Pointe in 2012,
LGBT people were part of the congregation but weren’t
allowed to hold leadership roles or have weddings in the
church.
The leaders were telling the congregation everyone was
welcome, but “we weren’t a place where everyone is
welcome here and has equal benefits,” says Greene.
Greene is the pastor of worship and arts at Grace Pointe, and
for the past six years she’s led the music every Sunday and
curated the services from top to bottom. She knows most of
the people who come to church on Sunday and believes that
around 15 percent of them identify as LGBT. In June 2012,
close to the time Wigden moved to Nashville and started
attending services, country singer and Grace Pointe member
Carrie Underwood came out in support of gay marriage and
told a U.K. newspaper that the church was “gay friendly.”

947

In many ways, it was. Everyone knew out members like
Wigden. He felt accepted and had plenty of friends in the
congregation, even though he didn’t have equal rights there.
But the virulently antigay Westboro Baptist Church heard
Underwood’s comments and called to ask about the church’s
stance on gay inclusion. When Westboro announced it was
going to picket Grace Pointe, “we felt like this is a good pitch
for us to bring this dialogue to the forefront,” Greene says.
Westboro Baptist Church
an independent Baptist church known for its fiery language about a number of
groups including LGBTQ individuals, Jews, Muslims, Mormons, Catholics, and
Orthodox Christians. It came to public attention for its picketing at funerals, including
those of Matthew Shephard and of U.S. soldiers killed in various Middle East conflicts.
Member of the church contend that the soldiers’ deaths are God’s punishment of the
country for its moral laxity, in particular, its growing acceptance of LGBTQ
individuals.

In order to broach the subject more openly, in August 2012
Pastor Stan Mitchell devoted five services to a detailed
interrogation of the biblical arguments against
homosexuality—the passages that are often called “clobber
texts” and cited as proof that same-sex desires are against
God.

948

Signs like this one supporting marriage equality can be seen in front of
LGBTQ-friendly churches.

Dressed in jeans and a striped polo shirt, Mitchell told the
congregation that though the church needs to deal with the
question of same-sex marriage, the Bible does not explicitly
prohibit loving, consensual same-sex relationships. “The
evil desires of those men in Sodom and Gomorrah had
nothing to do with the problem of whether genuine love can
be expressed between consenting adults of the same sex—
zero,” he said.
Sodom and Gomorrah
cities mentioned in the Hebrew Bible (Genesis 18–19) as sinful. Two angels in the
form of men had visited Lot, the nephew of Abraham. The men of the city of Sodom
insisted that Lot turn the visitors over to the crowd, which Lot refused to do. As part
of a larger narrative, the cities were destroyed by brimstone and fire. Theological

949

debates about the sin of Sodom focus on how to interpret the passage. Did the text
imply that the visiting men would be gang-raped? Was the sin homosexual behavior?
Rape? A failure to offer hospitality to the strangers, a recurring command the Deity
gave to the Hebrew people?

Though Mitchell wasn’t changing policies, just digging into
scripture, Greene estimates that Grace Pointe lost about 20
percent of its membership as a result of the service.
Still, the church kept inching toward wider acceptance,
always with the question of whether the Bible condemns
same-sex desire. After this meticulous analysis of the
“clobber texts,” Greene says the leadership was more
convinced than ever: “LGBT inclusion is the beautiful
byproduct of what we believe the Gospel says.”
Gospel
here, the teachings of Jesus.

Then, on Jan. 11, after more than two years of deliberation,
Mitchell announced that Grace Pointe would allow LGBT
people to take leadership roles, have baby dedications, and,
yes, get married.
Some jumped to their feet at the news and began
applauding. Wigden says he was “thrilled.” He’d known the
conversations were taking place but didn’t expect the
announcement to happen that day. Others were less than
enthusiastic and sat quietly, absorbing the news. “I
understand why the people who cheered, cheered,” says one
congregant, who wanted to remain anonymous because he
950

still isn’t sure how he feels about the decision. “I just wish
the victory they felt could have been amongst themselves,
somewhere else.”
Though Greene says the recent decision to fully accept LGBT
members represents “God’s heart, as far as we can tell,” she
thinks the church will lose hundreds of members and take a
financial hit as a result. Sunday attendance declined from an
average 800 to 1,000 to 482 two weeks after the sermon, and
January giving dropped by almost 50 percent.
The congregant who is struggling to accept the new policies
but is still a member of the church tells TakePart that the
applause after Mitchell’s announcement made Grace Pointe
“seem divided.”
“Of course, it is divided,” he continues. “But I didn’t want to
see a victory lap from anybody. I wanted them to be reverent
and respectful.”
Many of the congregants at Grace Pointe were raised in
more conservative religious communities that were
uncompromising in their condemnation of homosexuality.
A spirit of inclusion is in conflict with the history of
exclusion both at Grace Pointe and in evangelical churches
across the region.
Right now, congregants are paying close attention to the way
church leaders address such politically charged differences
951

among the congregation. Wigden’s reaction to the church’s
validation of LGBT people reveals a great deal about the
narrow line that many walk when trying to live as
evangelical and gay.
Before he moved to Nashville in 2012, Wigden and a man he
was in a relationship with lived in Chattanooga. They had
friends in the city’s gay neighborhood, but the couple chose
to live in a largely heterosexual, conservative suburb. “The
focus, in my mind,” Wigden says, “is integration.” He says
he and his partner lived there mainly to prove to straight,
suburban people that “we were just like them.”
Eventually the couple broke up, and Wigden moved to
Nashville for work, but he still keeps in touch with many of
his old neighbors on Facebook. “That, to me, is changing
people’s minds about being gay. It’s not always about the
pride parade or drag show.”
Wigden is excited about the new church policy. He feels bad
that other congregants are leaving the church over the
decision after investing “their blood sweat and tears” in the
congregation. But he’s also scared about the potential influx
of more politically vocal LGBT congregants.
“The last thing you want is for a church to do something like
this and then other gay people come in being very militant
about stuff and demanding things,” he says. Though he cried
with happiness when Mitchell announced Grace Pointe
952

would marry gay couples, he’s nervous that these changes
will make it seem like “gay church.”
“I don’t want Grace Pointe to have a booth at the [gay] pride
festival,” Wigden says. “That’s not the way this church is.”
RESPOND●

1. In what ways does Pasulka’s article challenge common
stereotypes of evangelical Christians held by those outside
this group? Of LGBTQ individuals by those outside this
group? How does it demonstrate diversity within each
group?
2. Even though Dale Wigden is quite happy that Grace Pointe
came to publicly and fully accept LGBTQ individuals as part
of the congregation, he is, at the same time, quite clear that
he believes acceptance should come with limits. What are
his limits, and what might motivate them? Do you agree
with them? Why or why not? To what extend does Wigden
rely on stereotypes in describing the experience of LGBTQ
individuals?
3. Although Pasulka uses several kinds of evidence to support
her claims in this selection, her major organizational
strategy is to use the story of Dale Wigden as a way of
unifying the essay. Look carefully at the points in the essay
where he is mentioned and those where he is not. How
does Pasulka rely on Wigden’s story as a frame for
structuring her essay?
4. THINKING CRITICALLY Chapter 1 (pp. 28–29) discusses the
important notion of kairos, or the right, critical, or

953

opportune moment for action, as key to understanding the
rhetorical situation, that is, the moment when it may be
possible to persuade the audience of one’s perspective.
Where do we see kairotic moments described in this
article? What changes, and what brought about those
changes? What do these situations demonstrate about the
power of argument?
5. Using your responses to Questions 1 through 4, write a
rhetorical analysis of Pasulka’s essay, focusing in
particular on the sorts of arguments and evidence she uses
as well as how she arranges those arguments and that
evidence. (Building on Chapters 2–4, which discuss
arguments based on emotion, character, and facts and
reason, respectively, Chapter 6 describes how to compose a
rhetorical analysis.)

954

“Redskins: Insult and Brand” is the opening chapter of C.
Richard King’s 2016 book of the same name. Professor King,
who teaches at Washington State University, writes on topics
related to the racial politics of culture, predominantly in the
U.S. but recently in Austria as well. The book from which this
selection comes treats the continuing debate over the name of
the Washington, D.C., professional football team. On the one
hand, it represents a very recognizable and lucrative brand;
on the other, the term is now considered an insult by nearly
all Americans and certainly by Native Americans. King’s goal
is to ask questions about how mainstream understandings of
Native Americans and their cultures work against fully
including them in American culture. Particularly because this
selection focuses on the power of language, we include the
“Author’s Note on Language” at the beginning so that you can
see the decisions Professor King has made about his own
linguistic choices. As you read, consider the power that labels
and labeling play in constructing and perpetuating
stereotypes of any kind.
Redskins: Insult and Brand
C. RICHARD KING
AUTHOR’S NOTE ON LANGUAGE
Names and naming, as this book details, always carry a charge
in the study of indigenous people, precisely because they
articulate power, identity, and representation so succinctly,
forcefully, and often invisibly. Thus, one must take great care in
955

the interpretation and application of language. Colonial
histories, national narratives, and cultural practices do not
make this easy. In what follows, I make two conscious language
choices. First, I will use American Indians, Native Americans,
indigenous peoples, and native nations interchangeably in this
text. Second, I endeavor to avoid the r-word. I understand it to
be a racial slur, on par with the n-word. While the former
enjoys wider acceptance and use than the latter, this is not a
defensible rationale for relying on it. In fact, persistent
reiteration makes it appear reasonable and even appropriate, a
pattern that I think important to disrupt and undermine. To this
end, I will substitute phrases like the Washington professional
football team and the DC NFL franchise, as well as the team and
the franchise. When unavoidable, I employ an altered version
of the word, R*dskin(s), to underscore its unspeakable,
problematic nature. I have not edited the usage of others in
direct quotations, in part to remain faithful to my sources and
in part to draw attention to the slur.
Redskin is a problem. It is an outdated reference to an
American Indian. It is best regarded as a racial slur on par with
other denigrating terms. In fact, while similar terms have been
crossed out of our collective vocabulary as inappropriate and
offensive, . . . it still finds use. Most visibly, it remains the
moniker of the Washington professional football team, long
anchoring its brand and traditions. This should unsettle us. The
word has deep connections to the history of anti-Indian
violence, marked by ethnic cleansing, dispossession, and
956

displacement. It is a term of contempt and derision that targets
indigenous people. As much a weapon as a word, then, it
injures and excludes, denying history and humanity. Its
lingering presence undermines the pursuit of equality,
inclusion, and empowerment by American Indians. Indeed, this
continued use of a racial slur as the name of a professional
sports team, the ongoing defense of it, and the willingness of
the franchise, the National Football League (NFL), and their
media partners to profit from it pose an even more troubling set
of problems.
moniker
informal term for a name.

Sportscaster Bob Costas seemed to recognize as much when in
October 2013, during halftime of the Sunday Night Football
game between Dallas and Washington, he offered a sharply
worded critique of the latter’s team name, describing it as a
“slur” and an “insult.”1 In denouncing the continued use of the
moniker, he followed a growing number of high-profile
journalists, from Peter King and Bill Simmons to Christine
Brennan and Dave Zirin. At the same time, he joined media
figures, including Howard Stern, Matthew Berry, and John
Oliver, and athletes, like Billy Mills, Mike Tyson, and Martina
Navratilova, who have all publicly spoken out against the
name.2 And in the subsequent NFL season, use of the team
name declined by 27 percent, as sportscasters “deferred to
‘Washington’ more often.”3 Costas’s comments, moreover,
echoed the long-standing position of the National Congress of
957

American Indians (NCAI) and nearly a dozen tribes. And they
found support in positions taken by a number of professional
organizations, including the American Studies Association, the
American Sociological Association, and the Organization of
American Historians; religious groups; and news outlets, like
Mother Jones, the Seattle Times, and the Washington City
Paper.4 Even Larry Dolan, owner of the Cleveland Indians,
infamous for its continued use of the caricature Chief Wahoo,
has remarked, “If we were the Redskins, the day after I owned
the team, the name would have been changed.”5
These changing attitudes coincide with a recent ruling in
Blackhorse et al. v. Pro Football, Inc., which stripped the team
of several of its trademarks (and was upheld by a federal court
in the first round of appeals). They unfold alongside, if not in
direct response to, Change the Mascot, a well-orchestrated
campaign spearheaded by the National Congress of American
Indians and the Oneida Nation, and a growing grassroots
movement, armed with social media. The shifts in public
opinion, moreover, find resonance in recent calls for action
from members of the U.S. Congress, including fifty U.S.
senators who demanded change in a letter to the organization,
in President Obama’s statement that he would think about
changing the team name, and in efforts by the Obama
administration to block the building of new stadium in the
District of Columbia so long as the franchise has its current
moniker. Some seventy years after its inception, the name
makes many people uncomfortable. Some, in fact, are so
958

uneasy, they have resolved not to use it. These individual
epiphanies, actions, and condemnations together direct
attention to a shift around popular understandings of racial
images, ideas, and identities. While all of these actions were
undoubtedly fomented by a broader movement within Indian
Country intent on reclaiming dignity, sovereignty, and
humanity, in part by bringing stereotypes like mascots to an
end, Costas did not highlight these unsettling politics. Instead,
he anchored his critique in the seemingly settled truths found in
dictionaries, where the word is defined as an offensive,
antiquated, and insulting reference to an American Indian.
Blackhorse et al. v. Pro Football, Inc.
a 2013 case, the second dealing with the issue, in which a group of American Indians
petitioned the U.S. Patents and Trademarks Office to cancel the trademark registrations
of the Washington pro football team, an action which would have forced the team to
change its name and logo. After a series of rulings and appeals involving arcane aspects of
trademark law and whether the First Amendment is applicable to trademarks, the case
went to the Supreme Court. Before it could be decided there, the Court ruled in 2017 in
Matal v. Tam, a case in which the Asian American rock band The Slants was suing for the
right to trademark its name (see p. 158), that part of the relevant law under which
Blackhorse was being argued was unconstitutional and that trademarks are protected as
private speech under the First Amendment. Therefore, the Blackhorse case was moot,
meaning that the laws on which the legal arguments were based were no longer valid. In
light of the ruling, both sides in the Blackhorse case withdrew their complaints.
Oneida Nation
federally recognized tribe of the Oneida people located in New York state.
epiphany
a sudden insight or realization into the nature or meaning of a situation.
Indian Country
legally, the term refers to several categories of self-governing Native communities in the

959

U.S. (It is important to remember here that over the years, the U.S. government has signed
over 600 treaties and contracts with Native communities, giving them certain rights in
return for land or other concessions.) Colloquially, it often refers to any place that
indigenous Americans live.

As a scholar who has written about the history and significance
of Native American mascots for more than two decades, I have
long known the franchise to exemplify the practices associated
with playing Indian in athletics, offering some of the most vivid
and troubling examples of popular uses and understandings of
American Indians.6 Among the most prominent and profitable
in sport, the organization since its inception has offered
insights into the privileges and pleasures associated with taking
and remaking Indianness. This alone would merit study and
reflection, but in recent years, something even more significant
has begun to unfold. Recent events suggest to me that we have
reached something of a critical juncture, which makes this an
especially opportune moment to reflect on the past, present,
and possible futures of the Washington professional football
team.
Perhaps most obviously, a dynamic, multifaceted opposition
has converged around the moniker and logo. While far from
united, this critical mass has its roots in Indian Country and has
important connections to broader struggles for selfdetermination and decolonization. Unprecedented in size,
scope, and diversity, it has made the once-unremarkable, and
often-celebrated, team and its traditions the subject of debate,
rendering them increasingly indefensible. In doing so, it has

960

actively challenged anti-Indian racism, while pushing to restore
dignity and humanity to indigenous people.
logo
a graphic or symbol to encourage brand recognition; Apple’s logo is a stylized apple with a
bite taken out, while Nike’s logo is a swoosh.
self-determination
a principle of international law that people have or should have the right to determine for
themselves what sort of political system they will have and to pursue the group’s cultural,
social, and economic goals.
decolonization
efforts to undo colonization, including efforts to reject seeing one’s people in the way the
colonizer saw them. In this case, an effort to reject the negative views of Indians
promulgated by the dominant culture as well as to establish a viable way of life for
contemporary indigenous Americans.

The ongoing debate, moreover, has fostered a shifting defense
of the organization and its use of American Indians, which has
appealed to and exposed the complex contours of racial politics
and cultural identity today. Much of the defense casts the
961

franchise and fans in a positive light, stressing that they have
good intentions and mean to convey honor with the moniker,
logo, and associated practices. And more, it has stressed
indigenous support, highlighting the importance of public
opinion polls as well as endorsements of the team by prominent
individuals and reservation communities. Importantly, the
defense is about more than Indianness. In particular, it turns in
spoken and unspoken ways on whiteness. On the one hand, it
invokes the attachments and sentimentality of white fans to
legitimate the team and its traditions. On the other hand, it
derives from and defends a series of entitlements or
prerogatives anchoring a long history of owning Indians and
Indianness in U.S. settler society.

962

A Native American confronts a Cleveland Indians fan dressed as Chief Wahoo,
the team’s mascot.

Current events also focus our understanding of the past. They
provide much-needed critical distance to assess the creation of
the brand and its broader significance. That the team would
have settled on its name unselfconsciously underscores how
deep the entitlement and attachment to things “Indian” were at
the time and how deeply embedded anti-Indian racism was in
American public culture. It was, not to overstate things, a
paradoxical love of imagined Indians and a loathing of actual,
embodied Indians that continues to this day. Not surprisingly,
963

the franchise, in common with other sports teams, Hollywood
films, and commercial culture generally, traded in stereotypical
renderings of Native Americans that, like the moniker, distorted
and dehumanized them. To fans, journalists, and owners alike,
the logo, fight song, and marching band all were in good fun.
And while they meant no harm, a point many make today, these
traditions create hostile environments that do in fact harm.
Then, as now, such images and attitudes encouraged a kind of
thoughtlessness. Such thoughtlessness allowed people to take
the team and its traditions for granted without the burdens of
history or introspection.
Finally, the critical juncture produced by recent events may be
the beginning of the end. It is certainly a moment of change, a
moment when countless people call for the team to change,
when individuals create new team names and logos, and when
many others imagine a time after the current moniker and
mascot have been changed. Of course, this moment of change
and what it has brought into being are about much more than
the brand, its use of a slur, or even the intransigence of the
current owner. The issue is about dignity and respect,
combating anti-Indian racism while furthering selfdetermination and decolonization. As such, when the name
changes, for that action to be of lasting and meaningful
importance, it must be paired with deeper transformations,
including education, coming to terms with the past, and
expressing honor for indigenous people by honoring treaties
made with native nations.
964

intransigence
refusal to change one’s opinion or stance on some issue.

The critical juncture explored in this book has been marked by
public condemnations of the team and calls for change, which
have heightened public awareness of the word and its origins.
Recent events likely played a key role in the increase in online
searches. In 2014 Dictionary.com dubbed the team name, along
with caliphate, Ebola, and sociopath, one of its eleven trending
words.7 Growing interest and increased attention, moreover,
may explain why Americans generally remain supportive of the
franchise but have growing unease about the word. A recent
survey, for instance, found that 83 percent of Americans
indicated they would not use the word in a conversation with a
Native American.8 One pizza restaurant in Washington DC
learned how profoundly attitudes have shifted around the term.
In fall 2014, when it ran a promotion, “Redskins score, You
score,” the reaction from its customers was so negative that it
felt compelled to issue an apology less than six hours later. It
read in part, “We are listening to all of your feedback. . . . We
agree that the use of the name is wrong, offensive, and hurtful
to all. In our future promotions and emails, we will make sure
not to make the same mistake.”9
Whatever the precise cause, the conservative columnist Charles
Krauthammer rightly concludes that words and public usage of
and attitudes toward them change:
Fifty years ago the preferred, most respectful term for
965

African Americans was Negro. The word appears 15 times
in Martin Luther King’s “I have a dream” speech. . . . The
preferred term is now black or African American. With a
rare few legacy exceptions, Negro carries an unmistakably
patronizing and demeaning tone.
If you were detailing the racial composition of Congress,
you wouldn’t say: “Well, to start with, there are 44
Negroes.” . . . Similarly, regarding the further racial
breakdown of Congress, you wouldn’t say: “And by my
count, there are two redskins.” It’s inconceivable, because
no matter how the word was used 80 years ago, it carries
invidious connotations today.10
invidious
unfair or unjust.
connotations
the feelings or attitudes associated with a word or set phrase, in contrast to its dictionary
definition or denotation. Nasal mucus and snot have identical denotations, but very
different connotations.

For Krauthammer, like Costas and growing numbers of people,
these changing sensibilities do not simply argue against use of
the slur to describe an American Indian, they also argue against
its continued use as name for a professional football team.
Even as the past few years have witnessed an unparalleled push
toward and increasing momentum for change, it would be
wrong to conclude that concern with the team and its traditions
is of recent origin or driven by forces outside of Indian Country.
966

For more than four decades, American Indians and their allies
have voiced their opposition. They have appealed to the
ownership, held rallies and demonstrations at NFL games, and
filed lawsuits to strip the team of its trademarks. They have
created art, produced public service announcements, and
formed organizations devoted to change. They have funded
studies, launched protests on social media, and lodged
complaints with governmental bodies, like the Federal
Communications Commission. Through it all, they have worked
to develop a diverse coalition within and beyond Indian Country
and across cultural and racial lines in the nation’s capital. These
efforts have had noticeable impacts on public opinion. They
have also prompted the franchise and the league to repeatedly
respond to questions and criticism, secure support among
indigenous people—often through questionable, if not
fraudulent, means—and wage a series of public relations
campaigns.
Even as Costas, Congress, and myriad others have called the
team and its name into question, it has remained one of the
most valuable franchises in professional sports. It has an easily
recognizable and familiar brand, which is at once hugely
popular and highly profitable. It is, according to Forbes, the
third most valuable NFL franchise.11 By way of comparison, in
2014 the Bureau of Indian Affairs had a total operating budget of
$2.6 billion, while the team had a total value of $2.4 billion and
total revenues of $395 million.12 The franchise’s ownership has
bristled at the ongoing critique, suggesting that the team name
967

is in fact quite positive, enjoying support from the majority of
Americans and American Indians. Far from being an ethnic
slur, the team has long asserted, its moniker conveys respect
and honor. The franchise, moreover, has sought to reframe the
controversy through a sophisticated promotional campaign
rooted in focus groups, polls, and philanthropic initiatives. The
National Football League, for its part, has actively defended the
team, endorsed its interpretation of the name and its origins,
and supported it in court. And even as more journalists and
news outlets have spoken out against the team name, according
to the Washington Business Journal, in an editorial ending its
use of the moniker, “The vast majority of media outlets
continue to use it. Our sister paper, the Sports Business Journal,
reported last week that 44 of 48 major newspapers—those in
cities with NFL teams along with the Wall Street Journal, L.A.
Times and USA Today—still use the name.”13 Finally, fans
largely have continued to support the team. Disappointing play
has not diminished pride or attendance appreciably. And many
are quite vocal in defense of the team and its traditions on social
media. Nevertheless, merchandise sales, in a possible sign of
things to come, were down 35 percent in 2014.14 Despite this
and in keeping with the general support of the organization,
according to Forbes, the valuation and revenues for the team
rose during the same period.15
The ongoing struggle lends itself to binary thinking, moral
declarations, and public denunciations. To many, either the
moniker is respectful or it is racist. It is a stereotype or not.
968

Such arguments, whatever their merits, simplify the conflict
and its cultural import. They discourage full understanding of
the significance of the debate, competing claims, and key
words. Indeed, the struggle over the team name, what it means,
and why it matters raises important questions about popular
perceptions of American Indians, the cultural life of brands,
and existing obstacles to inclusion and equality. It also
encourages deeper reflection on race and racism, the shifting
contours of American attitudes and identities, and the
possibilities and limitations of change in consumer society.
Some of these complexities find expression in the city that has
long celebrated the franchise. Washington DC exemplifies
racial politics in the United States. Built in part by slave labor,
on land taken from native nations, the seat of American
democracy was long marked by pronounced segregation and
black-white racial tensions. For much of its first three decades
in DC, the team played off these tensions, endeavoring to cast
itself as the team of the South. Even as the city has changed, the
centrality of race has not, and a rising Latino population has
introduced a new dynamic that has complicated established
assumptions. Economic and demographic shifts, moreover,
have fostered a whitening of the urban core, increasingly
pushing the poor and people of color to the margins. For all of
this, on any given Sunday, residents of the metropolitan area
form an imagined community united in shared identification
with a team and becoming cultural citizens by exalting
imaginary Indians. Even as they dress in feathers and sing the
969

praises of their braves on the warpath, fans erase indigenous
people. They make claims on and through images of them but
disclaim their histories or continued relevance. In the process,
they forget the past and its legacies. They forget about
dispossession, displacement, and death. Few will remember
that the team currently plays on the ancestral territory of the
Piscataway Tribe or that the capital is built on the homelands of
the Patawomeck Tribe. And even as they don its colors or sing
its fight song, fewer still will acknowledge the ways in which a
professional football team continues to profit from anti-Indian
stereotypes and stories.
The creation, consumption, and contestation of the brand,
then, have emerged and evolved in a context marked by the
interplay of racisms. What the team means and how individuals
and institutions make sense of it can be understood only in light
of overlapping identities, ideologies, and exclusions. Perhaps
most obviously, the moniker and logo reflect the force of antiIndian racism to dehumanize and deny. As such, they
underscore the importance and invisibility of U.S. settler
society, particularly the ingrained prerogatives of taking and
remaking land, culture, and identity, which actively contribute
to the erasure and exclusion of indigenous people. At the same
time, arguments around the team and its traditions also reveal
the centrality of a model of black-white race relations for
assessing the shape and significance of racism generally.
contestation
the act of disputing.

970

Of course, one cannot speak of settler colonialism, prevailing
understandings of race and racism, or the team and its
traditions without talking about the construction of whiteness.
The assumptions, aspirations, and anxieties of Euro-Americans
not only introduce Indianness into athletics in the form of
mascots and monikers but anchor the ongoing defense of them
as well. At root, this cultural complex, as embodied by the
Washington professional football team, turns on owning
Indians. The franchise has long regarded Indianness as a
resource or raw material to exploit for pleasure and profit. The
establishment of its brand depended on embellishments of
pseudo-Indian motifs. In fact, over its first three decades, the
organization elaborated on popular stereotypes and romantic
images of American Indians to create a logo, rituals, marching
band, cheer squad, and identity. Fans and the franchise alike
have felt entitled to use Indians and Indianness as they have
seen fit. Even as the franchise ownership has become uneasy
with outside criticism of its name, the organization has fought
to prop up the brand through philanthropy that some interpret
as little more than bribery and fake instances of indigenous
support for its racist image. Anxiety, along with entitlement,
has shaped the origin, elaboration, and defense of the brand.
Jennifer Guiliano has identified the historic anxieties that
prompted the emergence of American Indian mascots. She has
argued in particular that the changing shape and significance of
white masculinities in the wake of modernity, urbanization, and
industrialization gave rise to American Indian mascots and
monikers like those associated with the Washington
971

professional football team.16 Today a new set of anxieties paces
the defense of the team and its traditions; specifically, it reflects
the shape and significance of white masculinities in the wake of
multiculturalism, feminism, and postindustrialization.
Arguments for the team and its traditions, then, often hinge on
other issues, circle around whites and whiteness, and display
deep-seated resentments about a changing world as much as
they purport to pay homage and convey respect. Thus, while it
may be easy to see the team name as a slur, it is difficult, even
for many critics, to recognize and respond to the ways that
attachment, entitlement, identity, and anxiety shape the debate
and stymie change.
settler colonialism
a form of colonization whereby the newly arrived settlers work to occupy the land and
displace the indigenous people. The settlement of what are today the U.S. and Canada
was a process of settler colonialism.
postindustrialization
the era after the industrial era, that is, the current era in which heavy industry is in great
decline as a result of globalization and technological advances that permit industry to
need fewer employees to do the same amount of work—or even more—because of
increased efficiency and automation.

Ultimately, the name, the team, and the brand matter not just
because they reference an offensive racial slur or profit on
hurtful stereotypes. They have pressing significance because of
how they encourage anti-Indian racism, reinforce white
privilege, and perpetuate distorted understandings of people
and the past. As Amanda Blackhorse, lead plaintiff in a current
legal challenge, notes, “Native American people have been
972

targeted for their race, their land, and their resources. So when
the dominant culture believes they are superior to the
indigenous population they will dehumanize and dominate us
for their own good. This includes the dehumanization of our
entire being, especially our identity.”17 Clearly part of a deeper
history and larger struggle, the prerogative to imagine and
exploit popular ideas about American Indians for pleasure and
profit, as the franchise has long done, negatively affects
indigenous people, belittling, disempowering, and
marginalizing them on any given Sunday. For Blackhorse, this
pattern raises two questions seldom asked: “Why have we not
achieved true self-determination as indigenous people?” and
“Why is it that in this day and age are we still fighting for
common decency to be respected by our non-native
counterparts?”18 Tracing the history of the team and studying
the defense of its use of a racial slur may be a first and
necessarily partial step toward addressing these big questions.
Such efforts offer an important opportunity to better
comprehend the problem posed by R*dskin today, creating an
important means of combating the ongoing dehumanization of
indigenous people in the United States. Echoing Blackhorse, for
the franchise and its fans, for the league and its media partners,
for politicians and the public, the key challenge posed by the
critique of the team and its traditions might be phrased as two
overlapping questions: How do we stop the dehumanization of
indigenous peoples? And how do we create new stories and
spaces, reimagine self and society, and otherwise transform
traditions to rehumanize them?
973

NOTES
1. Kogod, “Bob Costas on Redskins Name.”
2. Anderson, “How Media Organizations Are Handling the
Redskins Name”; Beaujon, “Here’s a List”; Keene, “Who Has
Spoken Out?”
3. Burke, “‘Redskins’ Mentions Down 27%”; Bene, “Broadcasters
Really Are Saying ‘Redskins’ a Lot Less.”
4. Anderson, “How Media Organizations Are Handling the
Redskins Name”; Beaujon, “Here’s a List”; Keene, “Who Has
Spoken Out?” On the ethics of using the name in news coverage,
see Jensen, “Banning ‘Redskins’”; Lindsay, “Representing
Redskins.”
5. Wulf, “Why Use of Native American Nicknames.”
6. On the team, see Coombe, “Sports Trademarks and Somatic
Politics”; Goddard, “I Am a Red-Skin”; Harjo, “Fighting NameCalling”; Sigelman, “Hail to the Redskins?”; Strong,
“Trademarking Racism”; Waggoner, “On Trial.”
7. “11 Trending Words of 2014.”
8. Brady, “Poll.”
9. Steinberg, “Pizza Chain Apologizes.”
10. Krauthammer, “Redskins and Reason.”
974

11. “Washington Redskins Valuation.”
12. Odle, “What’s in a Name?”
13. Fruehling, “We Won’t Use Redskins Anymore.”
14. Ley, “Washington Merchandise Sales Are Down.”
15. “Washington Redskins Valuation.”
16. Guiliano, Indian Spectacle.
17. Blackhorse, “This Is What Dehumanization Looks Like.”
18. Blackhorse, “This Is What Dehumanization Looks Like.”

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Anderson, Monica. “How Media Organizations Are Handling
the Redskins Name.” Pew Research Center, October 30, 2013.
http://www.pewresearch.org/2013/10/30/how-mediaorganizations-are-handling-the-redskins-name/.
Beaujon, Andrew. “Here’s a List of Outlets and Journalists That
Won’t Use the Name ‘Redskins.’” Poynter Mediawire, June 19,
2014. http://www.poynter.org/news/mediawire/256258/heresa-list-of-outlets-and-journalists-who-wont-use-the-nameredskins/.
Bene, Ross. “Broadcasters Really Are Saying ‘Redskins’ a Lot
Less This Year.” Deadspin, September 17, 2014.
975

http://regressing.deadspin.com/broadcasters-really-aresaying-redskins-a-lot-less-th-1635806862.
Blackhorse, Amanda. “This Is What Dehumanization Looks
Like.” Indian Country Today, March 20, 2015.
http://indiancountrytodaymedianetwork.com/2015/03/20/blackhorsewhat-dehumanization-looks-159694.

Brady, Erik. “Poll: 83% Would Not Call Native American a
‘Redskin.’” USA Today, November 20, 2014.
http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/nfl/redskins/2014/11/20/washingt
redskins-poll-name-controversy-daniel-snyder/19297429/.
Burke, Timothy. “‘Redskins’ Mentions Down 27% on NFL Game
Broadcasts in 2014.” Deadspin, December 30, 2014.
http://regressing.deadspin.com/redskins-mentions-down-27on-nfl-game-broadcasts-in-1676147358.
Coombe, Rosemary J. “Sports Trademarks and Somatic Politics:
Locating the Law in Critical Cultural Studies.” In SportCult,
edited by R. Martin and T. Miller, 262–88. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 1999.
“11 Trending Words of 2014.” Dictionary.com, December 18,
2014. http://blog.dictionary.com/trending-words-2014/.
Fruehling, Douglas. “We Won’t Use Redskins Anymore.”
Washington Business Journal, August 1, 2014.
http://www.bizjournals.com/washington/printedition/2014/08/01/we-won-t-use-redskins-anymore.html.
Goddard, Yves. “‘I Am a Red-Skin’: The Adoption of a NativeAmerican Expression (1769–1826).” European Review of
976

Native American Studies 19, no. 2 (2005).
http://anthropology.si.edu/goddard/redskin.pdf.
Guiliano, Jennifer. Indian Spectacle: College Mascots and the
Anxiety of Modern America. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers
University Press, 2015.
Harjo, Suzan Shown. “Fighting Name-Calling: Challenging
‘Redskins’ in Court.” In Team Spirits: Essays on the History
and Significance of Native American Mascots, edited by C.
Richard King and Charles Fruehling Springwood, 189–207.
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2001.
Jensen, Robert. “Banning ‘Redskins’ from the Sports Page: The
Ethics and Politics of Native American Nicknames.” Journal
of Mass Media Ethics 9 (1994): 16–25.
Keene, Adrienne. “Who Has Spoken Out against the Redskins?”
Native Appropriations (blog), June 23, 2014.
http://nativeappropriations.com/2014/06/who-has-spokenout-against-the-redskns.html.
Kogod, Sarah. “Bob Costas on Redskins Name: ‘It’s an Insult, a
Slur.’” Washington Post, October 13, 2013.
http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/dc-sportsbog/wp/2013/10/13/bob-costas-on-redskins-name-its-aninsult-a-slur/.
Krauthammer, Charles. “Redskins and Reason.” Washington
Post, October 17, 2013.
http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/charleskrauthammer-redskins-and-reason/2013/10/17/cbb11eee-

977

374f-11e3-ae46-e4248e75c8ea_story.html.
Ley, Tom. “Washington Merchandise Sales Are Down 35
Percent,” Deadspin, September 5, 2014.
http://deadspin.com/washingtons-merchandise-sales-aredown-35-percent-1631023843.
Lindsay, Peter. “Representing Redskins: The Ethics of Native
American Team Names.” Journal of the Philosophy of Sport
35 (2008): 208–24.
Odle, Mairin. “What’s in a Name? On Sports Teams and Scalp
Bounties.” Junto (blog), December 22, 2014.
http://earlyamericanists.com/2014/12/22/guest-post-whats-ina-name-on-sports-teams-and-scalp-bounties/.
Sigelman, Lee. “Hail to the Redskins? Public Reactions to a
Racially Insensitive Team Name.” Sociology of Sport Journal
15 (1998): 317–25.
Steinberg, Dan. “Pizza Chain Apologizes for Using ‘Wrong,
Offensive, and Hurtful’ Redskins Name.” Washington Post,
September 19, 2014.
http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/dc-sportsbog/wp/2014/09/19/pizza-chain-apologizes-for-using-wrongoffensive-and-hurtful-redskins-name/.
Strong, Pauline Turner. “Trademarking Racism: Pseudo-Indian
Symbols and the Business of Professional Sports.”
Anthropology Now, September 2014.
http://anthronow.com/print/trademarking-racism-pseudoindian-symbols-and-the-business-of-professional-sports.

978

Waggoner, Linda M. “On Trial—The Washington R*dskins’ Wily
Mascot: Coach William Lone Star Dietz.” Montana: The
Magazine of Western History 63, no. 1 (Spring 2013): 24–47.
http://nmai.si.edu/sites/1/files/pdf/seminarssymposia/WaggonerWEBSpr2013.pdf.
“Washington Redskins Valuation.” Forbes, August 2014.
http://www.forbes.com/teams/washington-redskins/.
Wulf, Steve. “Why Use of Native American Nicknames Is an
Obvious Affront.” ESPN, September 3, 2014.
http://espn.go.com/espn/otl/story/_/id/11426021/why-nativeamerican-nicknames-stir-controversy-sports.
RESPOND●

1. What argument(s) is King making about the use of the term
redskin? In what ways it is an invitational argument, that is, one
that invites readers to explore a complex set of issues they may
not have previously considered? (See Chapter 1 on invitational
arguments.)
2. Where in King’s argument can we find logical appeals? pathetic
appeals? ethical appeals? (See Chapters 1–4 on these
categories of appeals and arguments.)
3. What various sorts of logical evidence, in particular, does King
use to support his claims as he writes? Why is logical evidence
useful and important when constructing arguments about
topics as controversial as this one? (See Chapter 4 on evidence
for arguments based on fact and reason.)
4. THINKING CRITICALLY King clearly hopes that the Washington
football team’s owners will one day change the team’s name

979

and its logo. What forces—historical and contemporary—have
led to the current situation, both the use of this name and logo
and the refusal of the owners and supporters to want to change
the team’s name and logo?
5. In paragraph 8, writing about the representations of American
Indians created at earlier and even in recent times in the U.S.,
King notes:
And while they meant no harm, a point many make today,
these traditions create hostile environments that do in fact
harm. Then, as now, such images and attitudes encourage
a kind of thoughtlessness. Such thoughtlessness allowed
people to take the team and its traditions for granted
without the burden of history or introspection.
Obviously, King believes that all of us have a responsibility
to consider the burden of history and to engage in
introspection when we create images or express attitudes
about groups of which we are not a member. Write an
argument of definition in which you explore the meaning
of the notions of “the burden of history” or “introspection”
as it relates to how we represent cultures of which we are
not a part, whether through images (e.g., Halloween
costumes or cartoons) or language (the use of specific
terms or the making of remarks that assume all members
of a group are the same). If, on the other hand, you would
contend that we have no obligation to consider the burden
of history or to engage in introspection with respect to
these matters, write an evaluative argument in which
you evaluate and reject King’s assumption, being careful
to present and justify your evaluative criteria. (See Chapter

980

9 on arguments of definition and Chapter 10 on evaluative
arguments.)

981

This selection is an excerpt from a 2011 research article
that appeared in Media Psychology. As the abstract notes, the
study uses content analysis of video game magazines to make
claims about the perpetuation of racial stereotypes in the
world of video gaming and about the possible consequences
of such stereotypes.
In excerpting this article, we have retained the abstract, the
introduction (including the literature review), and part of
Study 1, specifically, the discussion of the method used, the
content variables analyzed, the first part of the results
section, the discussion section, and the conclusion. We have
omitted the technical part of the results section, which
reports the statistical analyses of the data presented in Table
1; we also omitted Studies 2 and 3. We found the authors’
discussion of the theoretical importance of stereotyped
portrayals—part of the literature review—especially relevant
for this chapter.
At the time of the article’s publication, its authors were
teaching or conducting research at Southwestern Oklahoma
State University (Burgess and Burgess), UC–Santa Barbara
(Dill), Oklahoma State University (Stermer), and UNC–
Wilmington (Brown).
In their general discussion at the end of the study, the authors
wrote, “Whereas schools are teaching children to tolerate and
even celebrate diversity, this research demonstrates that

982

some forms of popular media are sending opposing signals
with troubling effects” (pp. 308–9). As you read, consider how
these researchers provide evidence to back up this claim and
give serious thought to the ways other kinds of popular media
perpetuate, rather than challenge, stereotypes of various
sorts.
Playing with Prejudice: The Prevalence and Consequences of Racial
Stereotypes in Video Games
MELINDA C. R. BURGESS, KAREN E. DILL, S. PAUL STERMER,
STEPHEN R. BURGESS, AND BRIAN P. BROWN

ABSTRACT
A content analysis of top-selling video game magazines (Study
1) and of 149 video game covers (Study 2) demonstrated the
commonality of overt racial stereotyping. Both studies revealed
that minority females are virtually absent in game
representations. Study 1 revealed that, in video game
magazines, minority males, underrepresented generally, were
more likely to be portrayed as athletes or as aggressive, and less
likely to be depicted in military combat or using technology,
than White males. Study 2 also showed evidence of the
“dangerous” minority male stereotype in video game covers.
Again, underrepresented overall, minority males were
overrepresented as thugs, using extreme guns, and also as
athletes. Study 3, an experiment, exposed players to both
violent and nonviolent games with both White and Black

983

characters. Participants were faster at classifying violent stimuli
following games with Black characters and at classifying
nonviolent stimuli following games with White characters,
indicating that images of popular video game characters evoke
racial stereotypes.

INTRODUCTION
Emerging in recent years as one of the most ubiquitous forms
of entertainment, video games have become a media giant with
U.S. sales recently reaching a record high of over $21 billion
(Ortutay, 2009). Children between 8 and 17 years old make up
the group that plays the most video games (Gentile, Saleem, &
Anderson, 2007), with approximately 90% of this age group
being regular players (Walsh et al., 2005). There is a sizeable
effects literature demonstrating that games influence
behaviors, thoughts, feelings, and attitudes (Anderson,
Berkowitz, et al., 2003; Anderson, Gentile, & Buckley, 2007; Dill,
Brown, & Collins, 2008; Konijn, Bijvank, & Bushman, 2007).
Recent brain research even demonstrates differences in the
brain’s empathic responding based on differential video game
exposure (Bartholow, Bushman, & Sestir, 2006).
ubiquitous
present everywhere.
effects literature
a body of research in a particular discipline focusing on the effects of some phenomenon
(e.g., stereotypes in the media, eating too much sugar, exercising, praying).

984

empathic
showing evidence of understanding others’ feelings or life situations.

Only recently has gaming research begun to concern itself with
the portrayals of game characters, and this research has often
focused on the portrayal of women in games (e.g., Burgess,
Stermer, & Burgess, 2007; Dill & Thill, 2007). Two initial
investigations of race in video games (Dill, Gentile, Richter, &
Dill, 2005; Glaube, Miller, Parker, & Espejo, 2001) revealed a
pattern of infrequent appearance for minority characters and
stereotyped depictions when minorities were present. Glaube et
al.’s (2001) examination of 70 console games (such as
PlayStation) found that some minorities (e.g., Latina women
and Native American men) were never present, and that
children’s games included only White and nonhuman
characters. This pattern was echoed in a sample of 20 computer
games examined by Dill, Gentile, et al. (2005), which revealed
only a few Black and Latino men in the role of main characters
and not a single Latino or Latina secondary character. Beyond
this, both investigations found frequent stereotyping of
minority characters. Glaube et al. (2001) found that Latino
characters were only present in sports games, that Asian
characters were largely consigned to a wrestling or fighting
role, and that Black characters were typically depicted as
unaffected by violence through a lack of pain or physical
suffering. Interestingly, even in games created before the terror
attacks of 9/11, targets of violence were disproportionately
likely to be portrayed as Middle Eastern (Dill, Gentile, et al.,
2005).
985

Other content analyses have focused specifically on portrayals
of aggression related to gender and race. Smith, Lachlan, and
Tamborini (2003) found that, across all game types, 71% of
perpetrators of violence and 65% of targets were White, and
that 79% of perpetrators and 77% of targets were male. In a
further investigation, these same authors classified the
ethnicity of violent characters as White, Black, Hispanic, Native
American, Asian/Pacific Islander, Middle Eastern, or
undefined. Results showed that the majority of characters were
White (40.5%) with the next largest group being Asian/Pacific
Islander, at only 8%. Interestingly, whereas mild violence was
the most common form of violence, Asian/Pacific Islanders was
the ethnicity most likely to engage in extreme violence, defined
in part by large scale bloodshed and disfiguring injuries.
Whereas the portrayal of game characters has been a concern,
there is also a growing body of research examining the social

986

effects of media images, from video game as well as other
outlets, on young adults (Dill, Brown, et al., 2008; Johnson,
Bushman, & Dovidio, 2008). Dill, Brown, et al. (2008) exposed
participants to images of women and men that were either
stereotypical sex-typed images from video games or
professional images from press photographs. Then participants
gave their reactions to a real-life account of the sexual
harassment of a female college student by her male professor.
Results demonstrated that men who were exposed to the video
game images (female sex objects and powerful males) were
more tolerant of sexual harassment. This research suggests that
exposure to stereotypical imagery in the media can alter social
judgments, such as deciding that a case of sexual harassment is
less serious or requires less action against the perpetrator. The
larger meaning is that stories we glean from mass media can
change how we behave in the real world.
In one study dealing with racial stereotypes (Dill & Burgess,
2011), White students saw either video game images of Black
men who fit the aggressive criminal or “dangerous minority”
stereotype or media images of esteemed Black leaders such as
Barack Obama alongside analogous White images. Next, in a
purportedly unrelated study, participants evaluated the Web
site of a political candidate named Peter Smith who was either
Black or White. Results revealed interactive effects of the
exemplar prime (negative or positive) on favorability and
capability ratings of this candidate. Those who saw the negative
(Black video game) exemplars rated the Black candidate as less
987

favorable and capable than the White candidate. In a reversal,
those who saw the positive (Black leader) exemplars rated the
Black candidate as more favorable and capable than the White
candidate.
interactive effects of the exemplar prime
the priming image here was the initial video game image—“Black men who fit the
aggressive criminal or ‘dangerous minority’ stereotype or media images of esteemed
Black leaders”—while the interactive effects refer to the consequences of the first images
seen on the evaluation of the candidate, Peter Smith, when presented as Black or White.
In other words, the researchers were examining whether there is an interaction between
the image research subjects were first exposed to and their subsequent evaluations of the
fictitious character, Peter Smith.

Whereas there is a sufficient body of literature to appreciate the
damage inherent in repeated negative and stereotyped
portrayals of minorities and women, there has been a paucity
of research on racial portrayals in video games. At the same
time, there has been public interest in these portrayals,
centering on a sample of blatantly stereotypical portrayals.
Perhaps most notably, Grand Theft Auto: Vice City was
criticized for depicting Haitians and Cubans as criminals and
for potentially inciting hate crimes (Haitian, Cuban leaders
denounce GTA, 2003). The game’s producer, Rockstar,
responded to public protest about game content by removing
the lines “Kill the Haitians” and “Kill the Cubans” from the
game.
paucity
only a limited amount.

988

THEORETICAL IMPORTANCE OF STEREOTYPED PORTRAYALS
Stereotypes have both cognitive (e.g., generalizations) and
affective (e.g., fear) components (Amodio & Devine, 2006).
Repeated exposure to a particular portrayal of a group teaches
that this cultural view is a relevant schema for processing
members of that particular group. For example, exposure to the
schema of the violent Black man teaches that it is appropriate to
experience apprehension when approached by a Black male.
Further, exposure to these stereotypical images triggers access
to thoughts, preferences, and evaluations, ultimately predicting
discriminatory behavior (Amodio & Devine, 2006).
cognitive
relating to thought.
affective
relating to feelings or emotions.
schema
pattern of thought that influences how we process new information.
apprehension
fear or anxiety.

Stereotypes may sometimes be consciously processed, but
stereotypes can also provoke thoughtless, non-conscious,
impulsive reactions. In an update of his cognitive
neoassociation theory of aggression, Berkowitz (2008)
underlined the theoretical importance of these automatic
processes, and the role of classical conditioning in inciting
hostility and aggression. Negative ideas and feelings associated
989

with a group are applied to other group members. These
negative associations can trigger negative affect which, in turn,
prompts impulsive aggressive reactions that preempt more
conscious reasoning. “My cognitive-neoassociationistic analysis
. . . suggests what kinds of external stimuli have this relatively
compelling capacity to elicit aggressive reactions: primarily
situational features that are associated with aggression and
those that are linked to decidedly negative experiences”
(Berkowitz, 2008, p. 120).
cognitive neoassociation theory
psychological theory developed by Berkowitz to explain the link between negative
feelings and anger or hostile behavior toward some group or situation.

Berkowitz (2008) noted that African Americans are commonly
stereotyped as aggressive, hostile, and criminal (see also
Devine, 1989), and that these are devalued social identities. He
wrote, “. . . those people who are associated with aggression
generally and/or with gratifications for aggression in particular
or who are associated with negative affect are especially likely
to be the victims of aggression” (p. 128). Again, for aggression to
be evoked, the perpetrator need not engage in a conscious
cognitive appraisal (of the stereotype or situation) because
aggression can be provoked through an automatic, impulsive
route. Berkowitz cited research—particularly that of Devine
(1989) and of Bargh, Chen, and Burrows (1996)—as examples of
how even unconscious exposure to images of Blacks and words
associated with Black stereotypes evoke hostility and
aggression. He noted that aggressive portrayals activate
990

hostility toward African Americans, which in turn makes
aggression toward them more likely. “. . . [N]on-conscious
activation of the African American stereotype can promote
hostile-aggressive behavior towards others” (Berkowitz, 2008, p.
122).
gratifications
sources of pleasure.

Relating this explicitly to mass media, imagery that associates
African American men with the negative stereotypes of
aggression, hostility, and criminality conditions viewers to
associate this constellation of negativity with African American
men in general. Subsequently, unrelated Black men will trigger
this association, which can, in turn, provoke increased
aggression and hostility.
It is important to note that the stereotypical images of Black
video game characters are not even real people, but they can
still provide fodder for negative social judgments and negative
reactions to real Black men. Support for this notion comes from
Slusher and Anderson (1987), who found that even when people
are simply asked to imagine stereotypes such as a rich lawyer,
they do not distinguish between what they have imagined and
what they have seen in reality. Slusher and Anderson call this a
failure of reality monitoring. People treat their imaginary vision
as they would a real-life image and it supports their stereotypes.
If this is true, then it follows logically that seeing another type
of imaginary or fantasy image—a picture of a video game
991

character—might also be treated as confirmation of a
stereotype. There will be little difference from seeing a Black
thug in a video game and seeing a real Black criminal—both will
be taken as evidence confirming the culturally held stereotype
of the Black male criminal.
Given the large body of violent video game research (see
Anderson, Berkowitz, et al., 2003), we expected portrayals of
aggression. We were also aware of the racially charged
discussions surrounding games like Grand Theft Auto (Leonard,
2009) and wanted to explore whether or not the portrayal of
aggression differed as a function of the race of characters. A
theoretically relevant way of characterizing this portrayal of
violence is whether or not it is socially sanctioned (Lachlan,
Tamborini, et al., 2009). We were interested in whether Whites
would be more likely to be portrayed as engaged in socially
sanctioned violence compared to minorities.

STUDY 1
METHOD
Study 1 is an exploratory content analysis designed to
investigate how Black males are portrayed in imagery from topselling video game magazines. The variables, described below
(and the percent agreement between the two raters), are: race
(.98), hypermasculinity (.99), aggression (.99), war/military
aggression (.96), fighting (1.00), athletics (.91), and use of
technology (.94). The sample used in the present study included
992

images taken from the six top-selling game magazines on sale in
January 2006. One issue from each magazine was selected, and
the largest male and female images on every page from each
issue were included. This produced a sample of 482 images (362
male images and 120 female images), which were then coded by
one White male and one White female undergraduate research
assistant. For details about magazine and image selection, and
for rating procedures, see Dill and Thill (2007).
exploratory (study)
a study that seeks to explore some topic in a new way rather than directly continuing an
existing research tradition.
content analysis
in the social sciences, a method of analyzing texts with a focus on their content.

CONTENT VARIABLES
For each image, the following races were coded following Dill
and Thill (2007): White, Black, Hispanic, Asian, other, and
humanoid. The other category was reserved for characters who
appeared to be human and who appeared to be of a non-White
race that was not always determinable. Only three races (Native
American, Egyptian, and undeterminable) were listed by coders
under the other category.
Hypermasculinity was defined as exaggerated male
characteristics such as unnaturally large muscles or expressions
of dominance. Hypermasculinity relates to features of extreme
dominance, power, and aggression (Dill & Thill, 2007; Scharrer,

993

2004, 2005).
Aggression was defined as being engaged in behavior intended
to harm another living being (Aronson, Wilson, & Akert, 2007).
Of the violence categories used in Study 1, we categorized war
and military aggression as socially sanctioned and fighting as
not socially sanctioned. We argue that military violence should
be considered relatively more socially sanctioned than fighting
because military aggression is legal and, thus, sanctioned by
governments and often respected by citizens. In contrast,
violence in the form of non-sports fighting is most often
considered criminal activity and thus, by definition, is not
socially sanctioned. Therefore, aggressive images were further
coded as war/military aggression or fighting (no identifiable
military rationale). Some images did not fit either category,
such as a violent athlete. These images were simply coded as
aggressive and not included in the subcategorical analysis.
In the initial stages of this exploratory investigation, we
remarked that computer and technology use were regularly
portrayed in gaming magazines. We were also aware that sports
games have ranked consistently among the top sellers. We,
therefore, coded computer and technology use and athletics by
race of character.
RESULTS
The data were coded using the variables described above.
Frequency data were calculated for each race on the variables
994

described above (see Table 1).

Table 1. Character portrayals as a function of race in
video game magazines (%)
White

Black

Asian

Hispanic

Other

223

37

6

5

21

76.4

12.7

2.1

1.7

7.2

66.9

12.8

4.3

14.4

2.7

Gamers (%)

59

15

3

18

5

Frequency (N) of

91

3

5

2

5

85.8

2.8

4.7

1.9

4.7

66.9

12.8

4.3

14.4

2.7

59

15

3

18

5

21.2

29.8

0

20

38.1

66.4

73

66.6

80

85.7

8.1

0

0

0

0

Frequency (N) of
males
Frequency (%) of
males
U.S. population
(%)

females
Frequency (%) of
females
U.S. population
(%) — whites vs.
all minorities
Gamers (%) —
whites vs. all
minorities
Hypermasculine
— males
Aggressive
(males) — yes
Socially
sanctioned
(military) (out of
aggressive)

995

Fighting (out of

37.8

48.1

25

75

55.5

33.6

27

33

20

14.3

48

22.2

0

0

77.7

39.2

18.5

0

25

66.6

Athlete (males)

8.1

29.7

0

0

9.5

Violent and/or

74.4

100

75

80

95

13.9

2.7

33.3

20

0

aggressive)
Aggressive
(males) — no
Armor (males)
(out of
aggressive)
Posing with
weapons (males)
— (out of
aggressive)

athletic
Technology use
(males)

DISCUSSION
The results of this content analysis illustrate that, although by
no means were all minorities portrayed stereotypically,
portrayals of race in video game magazines did differ across
racial lines in a manner that was consistent with stereotypes.
First, from a simple perspective of frequency, minority
characters were underrepresented as compared to U.S. Census
statistics, even when using the comparison group of gamers. It
is interesting to note that humanoid (alien) characters were
depicted more often than minority humans. Minority females
were particularly underrepresented.

996

From the perspective of pedagogy it is useful to consider actual
frequency of nonviolent character portrayals, as opposed to
relative frequency. Minority male characters were generally
infrequent (constituting only 23.6% of the total male images),
and nonviolent minorities were even more infrequent (only
5.5% of the total male images). In fact, nonviolent White males
(25.6% of the total male images) were as common as all
minority males.
pedagogy
teaching.

Finally, results of exploratory analysis revealed that minority
males were more than twice as likely as White males to be
portrayed as athletic. Computer and technology use was almost
exclusively limited to White males with White males being
more than twice as likely as Black males to be depicted using
technology. These data are possibly consistent with stereotypes
about minorities, for example, that Black males are more
athletic and less intelligent than Whites (Berkowitz, 2008).
However, because these are exploratory data, we will be
conservative when speculating on reasons for these patterns.
CONCLUSIONS
Research has shown that those exposed to false information in
fictional stories are persuaded by it and that persuasion persists
over time (Appel & Richter, 2007). Furthermore, Slusher and
Anderson (1987) demonstrated that people fail to distinguish

997

between stereotyped associations they imagine and those they
have actually seen. The results of this content analysis of
gaming magazines illustrates that there are consistent racial
stereotypes in video game magazines and that representations
of race do not match with reality. The problem with this is that
the magazines may shape reality by being a source of social
information to those who are exposed to them. In other words,
after seeing negative racial stereotypes in video game
magazines, players may experience failures in reality
monitoring and may believe that they have had actual
stereotype-confirming experiences. Furthermore, given what
we know about the persuasive power of false information in
fiction (Appel & Richter, 2007), it is likely that this information
could alter gamers’ thoughts, feelings, and behaviors.

REFERENCES
Amodio, D. M., & Devine, P. G. (2006). Stereotyping and
evaluation in implicit race bias: Evidence for independent
constructs and unique effects on behavior. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 91(4), 652–661.
Anderson, C. A., Berkowitz, L., Donnerstein, E., Huesmann, R.
L., Johnson, J., Linz, D., . . . Wartella, E. (2003). The influence
of media violence on youth. Psychological Science in the
Public Interest, 4, 81–110.
Anderson, C. A., Gentile, D. A., & Buckley, K. E. (2007). Violent
video game effects on children and adolescents: Theory,
998

research, and public policy. New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.
Appel, M., & Richter, T. (2007). Persuasive effects of fictional
narratives increase over time. Media Psychology, 10, 113–
134.
Aronson, E., Wilson, T. D., & Akert, R. M. (2007). Social
psychology (6th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson
Prentice Hall.
Bargh, J. A., Chen, M., & Burrows, L. (1996). Automaticity of
social behavior: Direct effects of trait construct and
stereotype activation on action. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 71, 230–244.
Bartholow, B. D., Bushman, B. J., & Sestir, M. A. (2006). Chronic
violent video game exposure and desensitization to violence:
Behavioral and event-related brain potential data. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 42, 532–539.
Berkowitz, L. (2008). On the consideration of automatic as well
as controlled psychological processes in aggression.
Aggressive Behavior, 34, 117–129.
Burgess, M. C. R., Stermer, S. P., & Burgess, S. R. (2007). Sex,
lies, and video games: The portrayal of male and female
characters on video game covers. Sex Roles, 57, 419–433.
Department of Defense. (2002). Population representation in
the military services. Retrieved from http://www.defense
link.mil/prhome/poprep2002/summary/summary.htm

999

Devine, P. G. (1989). Stereotyping and prejudice: Their
automatic and controlled components. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 56, 5–18.
Dill, K. E., Brown, B. P., & Collins, M. A. (2008). Effects of
exposure to sex-stereotyped video game characters on
tolerance of sexual harassment. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 44, 1402–1408.
Dill, K. E., & Burgess, M. C. R. (2011). Media images as positive
and negative exemplars of race: Evoking Obama or video
game characters changes outcomes for black men.
Dill, K. E., Gentile, D. A., Richter, W. A., & Dill, J. C. (2005).
Violence, sex, age and race in popular video games: A
content analysis. In E. Cole & J. Henderson-Daniel (Eds.),
Featuring females: Feminist analyses of media (pp. 115–130).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Dill, K. E., & Thill, K. P. (2007). Video game characters and the
socialization of gender roles: Young people’s perceptions
mirror sexist media depictions. Sex Roles, 57, 851–864.
Funk, J. B. (2005). Children’s exposure to violent video games
and desensitization to violence. Child and Adolescent
Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 14, 387–403.
Gentile, D. A., Saleem, M., & Anderson, C. A. (2007). Public
policy and the effects of media violence on children. Social
Issues and Policy Review, 1, 15–61.
Glaube, C. R., Miller, P., Parker, M. A., & Espejo, E. (2001). Fair
play? Violence, gender, and race in video games. Retrieved
1000

from
http://publications.childrennow.org/publications/media/fair
play_2001b.cfm
Haitian, Cuban leaders denounce GTA. (2003, December).
Grand Theft Auto. Retrieved from
http://www.nbc6.net/entertainment/2706043/detail.html
Johnson, J. D., Bushman, B. J., & Dovidio, J. F. (2008). Support
for harmful treatment and reduction of empathy toward
Blacks: Remnants of stereotype activation involving
Hurricane Katrina and L’il Kim. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 44, 1506–1513.
Lachlan, K., Tamborini, R., Weber, R., Westerman, D., Skalski,
P., & Davis, J. (2009). The spiral of violence: Equity of violent
reprisal in professional wrestling and its dispositional and
motivational features. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic
Media, 53, 56–75.
Leonard, D. (2009). Young, black (& brown) and don’t give a
fuck: Virtual gangstas in the era of state violence. Cultural
Studies/Critical Methodologies, 9, 248–272.
doi:10.1177/1532708608325938
Ortutay, B. (2009). Video game sales top $21 billion in 2008.
Retrieved from
http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/28682836/ns/technology_and
_science-games/t/video-game-sales-top-billion/
Scharrer, E. (2004). Virtual violence: Gender and aggression in
video game advertisements. Mass Communication & Society,

1001

7, 393–412.
Scharrer, E. (2005). Hypermasculinity, aggression, and
television violence: An experiment. Media Psychology, 7,
353.
Slusher, M. P., & Anderson, C. A. (1987). When reality
monitoring fails: The role of imagination in stereotype
maintenance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
52, 653–662.
Smith, S. L., Lachlan, K., & Tamborini, R. (2003). Popular video
games: Quantifying the presentation of violence and its
context. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 47, 58–
76.
State and County Quick Facts. (2008). Retrieved from
http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states.00000.html
Stermer, P., Burgess, S., Burgess, M., Davis, C., McCarter,
Jones, K., et al. (2006, April). Video game playing experience
and preferences in males and females. Presented at the
annual meeting of the Southwestern Psychological Society,
Austin, TX.

Walsh, D., & Gentile, D. (2007). 12th annual MediaWise video
game report card. National Institute on Media and the Family
with results from the 2007 MediaWise-Harris Interactive Poll.
Retrieved from
http://www.mediafamily.org/research/2007_Video_Game_Report_Card.
Walsh, D., Gentile, D., Walsh, E., Bennett, N., Robideau, B.,
Walsh, M., et al. (2005). MediaWise Video and Computer
1002

Game Report Card. Retrieved from
http://www.mediafamily.org/research/report_vgrc_2005.shtml
RESPOND●

1. How do Burgess and her coauthors use data to support their
claims (a) that the representations of minorities found in
gaming magazines correspond to stereotypes, rather than
reality, and (b) that such stereotyping is far from innocent in its
consequences? In other words, what sorts of evidence do
Burgess et al. provide for their claims?
2. What are the benefits of using the careful and clearly stated
methods of analyzing quantifiable data that are associated
with a field like psychology when dealing with a topic as
complex and controversial as the one Burgess et al. are
tackling?
3. As you no doubt noted, Burgess et al. define the variables in
their study—race, hypermasculinity, aggression (both socially
sanctioned and unsanctioned), and the use of technology—in
the section “Content Variables.” What kind of definition do they
provide for each of these variables? (See Chapter 9 on kinds of
definitions.) Do you think you could code data from a gaming
magazine appropriately and consistently based on these
definitions? Why or why not? (The answer to this question
illustrates something important about this kind of definition.)
How do these variables and the definitions of them map onto
the categories used in Table 1 of the article? Why might the list
of portrayals be more detailed than the list of variables that are
defined?
4. THINKING CRITICALLY Research studies in fields like psychology
and in the social, natural, and applied sciences all have a

1003

similar format, often referred to as IMRAD (introduction,
methods, results, analysis, and discussion), and the sections
are often labeled by their function. What are the advantages of
having such a standardized format for writers? For readers?
5. Carefully reread the discussion and conclusions sections of this
study to be sure you understand the logic of the authors’ claims
in the conclusion, including the ways the researchers qualify
their claims. (It may also be useful to review the section on the
theoretical importance of stereotyped portrayals.) Write an
essay in which you evaluate these claims by describing the
stereotyped portrayal of some group in a specific example of
popular culture—a movie, a television series, or a video game.
(For a discussion of evaluative arguments, see Chapter 10.) To
complete this assignment, you’ll obviously need to study the
example you are analyzing with some care, and you may well
wish to code instances of certain stereotyped portrayals, as the
authors of this research study did. At the end of your essay, be
sure to speculate about how the stereotyped portrayal may, in
light of the study excerpted here, be harmful for the individuals
who consume it and for society at large.

1004

Sonny Assu (1975– ) is an award-winning
contemporary Canadian artist from British Columbia who
works in a range of media. He is also a member of the
Ligwilda’xw of the Kwakwaka’wakw Nations. Raised in the
suburbs, only at age eight did he learn of his First Nations
heritage. Assu’s art combines Kwakwaka’wakw and
Western traditions in an effort to understand what it
means to be an indigenous person living in “the colonial
state of Canada,” as he and other indigenous Canadians
refer to the country. Assu received his BFA at Emily Carr
University in Vancouver, BC, and his MFA at Concordia
University in Montreal, QC.
At first, Breakfast Series (2006) appears to be nothing
more than popular cereal boxes, three of which are
reproduced here: Treaty Flakes, Salmon Loops, and Lucky
Beads. On closer inspection, however, the viewer realizes
that Assu has taken popular brands of breakfast cereal as
a starting point for raising hot-button issues in indigenous
communities across North America, including Native land
rights, treaties, and cultural foodways. As you study these
visual arguments, note the complex ways in which Assu
appropriates the components of cereal boxes to critique
the way the dominant culture sees and has treated Native
peoples. (To appropriate something is to use it, generally
without permission, for one’s own purposes.)

1005

Breakfast Series
SONNY ASSU (Gwa’gwa’da’ka)

Treaty Flakes
1006

(Front) Kwakwaka’wakw Frosted Treaty Flakes
(Side) Kwakwaka’wakw Frosted Treaty Flakes
Nutritional Facts
per ¾ cup (30g or 200ml)
Amount 30g Cereal With Milk*
Calories 120 180

Member Nations:
Camp Mudge 100%
Campbell River 100%
Kwiakah 100%
Comox 100%

Total Land
14,000 Hectares
Government BS 100%

DOES NOT CONTAIN A GOVERNMENT REFERENDUM
Ingredients: Sugar-coated lies, government bureaucracy,
self governance, land resources, broken promises,
acknowledging the past, securing the future
1007

Kwakwaka’wakw Kitchens
Satisfaction Guaranteed!
A/P [signature] ’06
A/P
artist’s proof.

1008

Salmon Loops
(Front) Kwakwaka’wakw Salmon Loops
Now BURSTING with even more delicious Salmon Flavor!
(Side) Kwakwaka’wakw Salmon Loops
Contains 100% Pacific Salmon
Sea-Lice Free!
Nutritional Facts
per ¾ cup (30g or 200ml)
Amount 30g Cereal With Milk*
Calories 120 180

% Daily Value
Fat* 100%
Fibre None
Protein 30g

Salmon
Coho 10%
Pink 50%
Chinook 7%

1009

Chum 30%
Sockeye 3%

*It’s good fat, don’t worry. Makes you smart.

Ingredients:
Pacific Salmon (Coho, Chum, Pink, Sockeye, Chinook),
Honey, Salt, Eulachon Oil, Smoke.
May contain traces of kelp.

Kwakwaka’wakw Kitchens
Satisfaction Guaranteed!
A/P [signature] ’06

1010

Lucky Beads
(Front) General Custer (with logo)
Good source of trickery—12 essential lies & deceptions
Lucky Beads
Free plot of land in every box!

1011

(Side) General Custer (with logo)
Nutritional facts
per ¾ cup (30g or 200ml)
Amount 30g Cereal With Milk*
Calories 120 180

Lies 100%
Deception 100%
Shiny Beads: A handful
Pompous, stuck up, greedy, laughing white rich men
rubbing their hands together saying “stupid Indians” 100%

Ingredients:
Sugar, lies, deception, wheat, corn, bullshit, beads, giggling
white men, broken trust, North American, Manhattan

Kwakwaka’wakw Kitchens
Satisfaction Guaranteed!
A/P [signature] ’06
RESPOND●

1. Parody involves imitation with humorous exaggeration,

1012

often as a form of critique, a kind of evaluative argument.
(See Chapter 10 on evaluative arguments.) In what ways
does each of these cereal boxes represent a parody of an
actual breakfast cereal box? Why are breakfast cereal boxes
an especially interesting resource to employ in critiquing
the majority culture’s perspectives on indigenous
Americans?
2. As the headnote explains, Assu’s art focuses on the
situation of Native Canadians and their complex and
troubled history with Canadians of European descent. How
do we see those conflicts represented in Breakfast Series?
3. Of these three pieces from Breakfast Series (the complete
series includes five cereal boxes), which do you find to offer
the strongest critique of the treatment of Native Americans
in Canada? Which do you see as most positive in its
representation of Native culture? Why?
4. THINKING CRITICALLY Breakfast Series is currently on display in
the Seattle Art Museum in Seattle, Washington. The
museum’s blog posting on the cereal boxes characterizes
them as displaying a “light-hearted presentation . . . of
serious social issues” (bit.ly/2FrNtyt). Do you find this to be
an accurate portrayal of Assu’s method? Why or why not? If
not, how would you describe Assu’s method? Why?
5. As Chapter 8 explains, arguments of fact are generally the
basis of all other kinds of arguments, and they frequently
include detailed descriptions of some object or
phenomenon under consideration. Write a robust
description of one of the three cereal boxes in Assu’s
Breakfast Series. Your goal is to describe as thoroughly and
dispassionately as possible the box you have chosen, being
sure to include any visual imagery that carries meaning.

1013

(For example, because of the font and color used, the
Kwakwaka’wakw logo on two of the boxes, Treaty Flakes
and Salmon Loops, is reminiscent of the Kellogg’s logo
while the logo “General Custer” on the Lucky Beads box
recalls the logo of General Mills because of the shape of the
letter G.) As part of your description, be sure to explain to
the reader each of the design aspects you have chosen to
include. (Information in Chapter 14 on visual rhetoric will
likely prove useful here.)

1014

Sara Morrison is a New York journalist who has been a
contributor to the Atlantic Wire, senior writer/associate
editor at Boston.com, and staff writer for Vocativ; she is
currently deputy editor at CAFE. As a freelancer, her work
has appeared in the Guardian, Hitfix, Death and Taxes, and
Pacific Standard, among others. This 2016 selection was part
of a Nieman Report on journalistic coverage of minority
communities that won an Eddie Award for journalistic
excellence. Morrison’s original article included the glossary
at the end, and we have retained it as a useful reference. As
you read, notice the spots where Morrison is seeking to
educate other journalists on how to avoid reinforcing
stereotypes as they write.
Covering the Transgender Community: How Newsrooms Are Moving
Beyond the “Coming Out” Story to Report Crucial Transgender
Issues
SARA MORRISON
In March of 2014, Jorge Rivas, Fusion’s national affairs
correspondent, was working on a story about undocumented
immigrants when he heard about a transgender woman being
held in a men’s detention center. “She was stuck in a detention
center surrounded by men, often experiencing the same type of
harassment she was fleeing in the first place,” Rivas says.
Rivas told investigative reporter Cristina Costantini, his cowriter on the story, what he’d heard. It sounded familiar. Their
colleague, Kristofer Ríos, recently told Costantini he had heard
1015

similar things about transgender detainees during his own
immigration reporting. The three teamed up for a six-month
investigation into the treatment of transgender people in
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) detention
centers. “Why Did the U.S. Lock Up These Women With Men?”
was the headline. The story received an award for outstanding
digital journalism from GLAAD (formerly the Gay & Lesbian
Alliance Against Defamation), and, in June of 2015, ICE
announced it would implement new guidelines for transgender
detainees.
This past year has been a watershed for media coverage of
transgender issues. In 2014, ESPN’s Grantland [a blog] was
sharply criticized for a piece that outed a transgender woman
and may have contributed to her suicide, while talk show hosts
Katie Couric and Piers Morgan were derided for insensitivity
toward transgender guests on their respective programs.
In 2015, in contrast, ABC News produced a deeply researched,
widely praised educational special in which Caitlyn Jenner
came out as transgender. The Washington Post profiled a
transgender woman who until recently had been out of work
and homeless. In a story focused on a transgender man who is
Muslim, the Los Angeles Times looked at conflicts between an
individual’s religion and gender identity. And in a series of
editorials the New York Times called for changes in the
treatment of transgender people and invited the transgender
community to tell its own stories on the Times website. In May,

1016

VIDA: Women in Literary Arts announced that it would include
statistics on the number of articles written by LBTQI (lesbian,
bisexual, transgender, queer, and intersex) writers and writers
with disabilities in its next annual VIDA Count of bylines in
literary publications.
Transgender people—models, actors, musicians, authors,
athletes, a former Army soldier serving time for espionage—
have increasingly entered the public consciousness. With this
increased visibility has come increased media coverage. Kris
Hayashi, executive director of the Transgender Law Center in
the San Francisco Bay Area, remembers how when he came out
as transgender in the late 1990s there was very little to be found
in the mainstream media about people like him. Now, he says,
the transgender community is covered with a frequency that
was “unimaginable” even three years ago.
Says Meredith Talusan, who in 2015 became BuzzFeed’s first
openly transgender staff writer and covers transgender issues
for the website, “Now, it’s actually possible to gain knowledge
about trans issues from mainstream media sources. More of
those sources have been willing to respect the ways in which
trans people want to be addressed and portrayed, though
there’s still a lot to be done.”
Despite this progress, the general population still knows
relatively little about the transgender community. In a recent
survey by the Human Rights Campaign (HRC), the largest LGBT

1017

civil rights organization in the U.S., only 22 percent of
respondents said they knew a transgender person. This lack of
knowledge, combined with the rapid rise in visibility for
transgender people, has created unique challenges for
newsrooms. Very few newsrooms have any openly transgender
staffers.
How do journalists cover a community, which has been for so
long maligned and voiceless, in ways that are considerate of
that community’s needs as well as those of readers, some of
whom need basic concepts explained? Most coverage to date
has tended to focus on one transgender person’s pre-transition
life and gender reassignment surgery, while rarely reporting on
the wider transgender community. Stories have also often used
terminology and pronouns that were objectionable to the
transgender person. Reporters writing about the transgender
community, for which violence and discrimination are major
concerns, have to educate themselves about terminology and
spend extra time building the rapport that can lead to nuanced
coverage.
That was certainly the case with the Fusion investigation of
transgender detainees in federal immigration facilities. Rivas
and his Fusion colleagues needed to talk to transgender people,
some of whom were victims of sexual assault, whose shaky
immigration statuses landed them in ICE detention centers. Any
of these three factors on its own could make a source wary of
going public. In addition, the Fusion reporters needed people

1018

who were willing to tell their stories on camera. Apart from the
reporting challenges, Rivas says, the team wondered how much
readers who weren’t transgender would care about their
subjects, members of a long-stigmatized community.
Before Rivas could meet with Barbra Perez, a transgender
detainee featured in his Fusion piece, he met with Olga
Tomchin, whose work at the Transgender Law Center focused
on advocating for transgender people in immigration detention.
The process of developing a relationship with a source or a
source’s representative wasn’t different from any other story
except for one thing: Tomchin asked if Rivas was going to film
any of the transgender sources putting on makeup. Tomchin
explained that this trope in coverage of transgender women is
widely considered a superficial demonstration of femaleness to
which cisgender women are rarely subjected. Rivas hadn’t
intended to shoot that kind of footage, but learning that it was
considered a cliché was “a lesson” for him. “We do try very hard
to avoid putting our clients in situations where they feel
exploited by media or that their story was manipulated,” says
Jill Marcellus, senior communications manager at the
Transgender Law Center.
trope
here, a recurring theme. In discussions of rhetoric, the term often refers to a figurative or
metaphorical use of language. (See the discussion of tropes in Chapter 13 on style.)

More and more reporters are educating themselves on how to
adequately cover transgender people. Couric and Morgan drew

1019

criticism for lines of questioning perceived as insensitive. Both
Couric, who interviewed actress Laverne Cox and model
Carmen Carrera, and Morgan, who interviewed writer Janet
Mock, asked about their guests’ genitals, questions many
transgender individuals and advocates regard as an invasion of
privacy. “People ask trans people all the time, ‘So, have you had
the surgery?’ ” says Dawn Ennis, a news editor at the Advocate,
the oldest LGBT-interest magazine in the U.S., who is
transgender. “People are curious about it because it’s so
unusual, but it really is a violation of people’s privacy to ask
those questions.”
Laverne Cox
American actress best known for her role as Sophia Burset in the Netflix series Orange Is
the New Black, for which she received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination. She later
received a Daytime Emmy Award for Laverne Cox Presents: The T Word.
Carmen Carrera (1965– )
American media personality who has appeared on RuPaul’s Drag Race and, on occasion,
called him out on what she considers to be transphobic remarks or behaviors.
Janet Mock (1983– )
American writer, TV host, and transgender activist. Her first book, Redefining Realness,
became a bestseller.

Couric responded to the subsequent backlash by inviting Cox
back on her ABC show to discuss what she had done wrong,
saying she’d now have to hold up her show as an example of
how not to report on transgender people. Morgan invited Mock
back on his show for a contentious interview in which he
demanded to know why he’d been “viciously abused” on social

1020

media by the transgender community after he said he had
shown support for transgender people by promoting Mock’s
book and calling her a woman.
After the Fusion reporters won the trust of Tomchin, the
Transgender Law Center representative, they had to win the
trust of the women they wanted to profile. Johanna Vasquez’s
story was probably the hardest to tell. After being brutally
sexually assaulted in her native El Salvador, she fled to America.
But she was beaten by her male cellmate in an ICE detention
center and then locked in solitary confinement for seven
months because guards didn’t know where else to put her. Rivas
and Costantini say they met with her several times without a
camera or even a notebook so they could establish the level of
trust Vasquez needed to tell her story.
The Fusion team also needed data to show the scope of the
problem. While a Government Accountability Office report
stated that from October 2009 to May 2013, three of the 15
victims in cases of “substantiated allegation of sexual abuse” in
ICE detention were transgender, ICE told the journalists it didn’t
have a count of the total transgender detainee population.
Costantini consulted with the Williams Institute at the UCLA
School of Law, a think tank that researches LGBT law, public
policy, and demographics, and has produced transgender
population estimates. The Williams Institute’s oft-cited number
puts America’s transgender population at nearly 700,000, but

1021

this is largely based on surveys from two states: Massachusetts
and California. Gender identity is rarely included on official
forms from which this kind of data is usually drawn.
Determining statistics on violence perpetrated against
transgender people—a very real concern in the community,
especially for women of color—is similarly difficult. Most states
don’t require that crimes based on gender identity be reported
as hate crimes, and the police may simply report victims as
whatever sex and the gender identity that traditionally
accompanies it is on their legal IDs, which may not be accurate.
This is also a problem when it comes to reporting on violence
against transgender people; journalists may rely on police
reports that refer to the pre-transition gender expression of the
victim. “There’s still a ton of misgendering, often of victims of
violence, which is particularly awful,” says BuzzFeed’s Talusan.
GLAAD has recommendations for how the media should cover
transgender victims of violence, including referring to them by
the name and pronouns consistent with how they identified at
the time of the incident, and refraining from salacious and
unnecessary details about the victim’s appearance or gender
identity. “In major cities, we’ve seen a lot of growth in terms of
media understanding and ability to think beyond just what the
plain old police report says,” according to the Advocate’s Ennis.
salacious
exhibiting irrelevant or inappropriate interest in matters related to sex.

1022

A big uptick in stories about transgender people occurred after
April 2015, when Caitlyn Jenner came out as transgender in a
two-hour special on ABC’s “20/20.” ABC News producer Sean
Dooley says the show was a unique opportunity not just to tell
Jenner’s story, but also to educate a largely uninformed
television audience, some of whom wouldn’t normally watch a
special about a transgender person but watched this one
because of Jenner’s fame as an Olympic athlete or reality show
star.
Caitlyn Jenner (1949– )
a retired gold-medal Olympic decathlete who later became an American television and
film personality.

Dooley says ABC News spoke with several advocacy groups and
experts, including GLAAD and the National Center for
Transgender Equality, to prepare for the special. Susan Stryker,
an associate professor of gender and women’s studies at the
University of Arizona and director of the school’s Institute for
LGBT Studies, says she was on the phone with producers three
times a week for about a month.
That effort was evident when the special aired. Host Diane
Sawyer didn’t just use Jenner’s chosen pronoun, she also noted
that she was doing so and explained why. Allowing transgender
people to decide which pronouns should be used in referring to
them is an important issue for the transgender community. This
was especially important as, at the time, Jenner’s pronoun
preference was male, which could potentially lead people to

1023

think it’s acceptable to refer to all transgender women with
male pronouns. And Sawyer didn’t just ask which surgical steps
Jenner might take in her transition, she also noted that it was
Jenner’s choice to discuss this, and that, generally, asking a
transgender person about their genitals is inappropriate.
The special was largely well received—and watched by about 17
million people that night, more than twice as many people as
usually watch the network in that time slot. Many transgender
advocates, worried that a profile of a reality show star on
mainstream television would be sensationalist and exploitative,
applauded the program.
A couple months later, Vanity Fair ran a cover story about
Jenner. While the release of the cover broke Vanity Fair’s
single-day online traffic record with 9 million unique visitors,
Buzz Bissinger’s accompanying profile was criticized for his use
of male pronouns when referring to her pre-transition, which
GLAAD’s media guide says should be avoided. Transgender
advocacy groups recommend referring to a transgender person
by their post-transition name and pronoun, even when
describing the person pre-transition. Stryker compares it to
writing about Malcolm X; though he was born Malcolm Little,
journalists rarely call him that when writing about him as a
child.
Malcolm X (1925–1965)
African American Muslim and human rights activist who was highly critical of white racism
in American society. He converted to the Nation of Islam and took the family name X while
in prison in the late 1940s, noting of his birth name, Little, that “the white slavemaster . . .

1024

had imposed [it] upon [his] paternal forebears.” After his travels to the Arab world in 1964,
including making the hajj, or Muslim pilgrimage to Saudi Arabia, he took the name el-Hajj
Malik el-Shabbaz, forsaking the Nation of Islam for Sunni Islam and emphasized black selfdetermination and pan-Africanism.

As a contrast to Jenner’s story, Washington Post feature writer
Monica Hesse profiled Sara Simone, a transgender woman in
her 50s a few years into her transition who was, until very
recently, unemployed and homeless.

Sara Simone hugs a friend who provided shelter when she was homeless.

According to the National Transgender Discrimination survey,
carried out in 2011 by the National Center for Transgender
Equality and the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force (now
1025

known as the National LGBTQ Task Force), 15 percent of
transgender people and gender-nonconforming people
surveyed said they earned less than $10,000 annually, compared
with just 4 percent of the general population. Transgender
people are also twice as likely as the general population to be
unemployed, and one in five said they had experienced
homelessness at some point in their lives because of their
gender identity.
Simone was willing to share details about her financial troubles
for the profile. She was not willing to share her birth name,
however.
While Hesse and her editor, Post senior editor at large Ann
Gerhart, needed to know Simone’s birth name for fact-checking
purposes—verifying that she served in the armed forces, for
instance—they saw no need to include it in the story. “One of
the ways we looked at it was, this is her legal name now,” Hesse
says. “When we write about women who have taken on their
husband’s names and those are their legal names, do we then
make sure to include their maiden names? No, we don’t do
that.”
Similarly, they didn’t see a need to dwell on Simone’s life before
her transition. This was a story about Simone’s life now. At the
same time, Gerhart says, Simone had lived as a man for five
decades: “Journalistically, I had questions about how she dealt
with that. What are the ways you can reconcile the person who

1026

you had been and who you are relieved you aren’t anymore, and
integrate that into your experience now?” A chance encounter
at Simone’s workplace gave the story insight into those
questions.
Simone worked at a nonprofit that helped homeless veterans.
While meeting with one of those veterans, she noticed that he’d
been stationed in the same place as Simone around the same
time. Simone faced a decision. She could tell him about her own
service, possibly helping her bond with the client. But that
would mean revealing that she served under another name,
opening her up to harassment for being transgender. Fear of
harassment and violence from people who discover Simone is
transgender is a recurring theme in the story. In the end,
Simone didn’t reveal her military service to the veteran.
Simone’s fears are well grounded. Transgender women,
especially women of color, are often targets of violence. A 2015
report from the HRC and the Trans People of Color Coalition,
which advocates for transgender people of color, estimates that
transgender women are 4.3 times more likely than cisgender
women to be the victim of a homicide, and half of all
transgender people will be sexually assaulted in their lifetimes.
As of this past November, at least 21 transgender people—a
majority of whom were transgender women of color—had been
murdered in 2015.
cisgender
relating to someone whose sense of gender identity corresponds to the sex they were

1027

assigned at birth (Latin cis- “same side as” + gender); the complement of transgender.

“It’s a real clear crisis that’s happening, but it’s not a new crisis,”
says the Transgender Law Center’s Kris Hayashi. While some
outlets have covered this issue, he says, it hasn’t gotten
anywhere near the attention that Jenner has. Stryker, the
University of Arizona professor, says it’s important for the
media to remember that the transgender community is diverse,
and not everyone in it will have the same experience. The
progress that has been made may be beneficial to some, mostly
white people of means, but not necessarily all, especially
transgender women of color or people living in poverty.
Simone’s comments on social media are also quoted throughout
the Post story, something Hesse and Gerhart say was crucial
since it allowed them to let Simone talk about herself and her
experience unprompted. In a video post in which she describes
an abusive past relationship, Simone says, “This man tried to
destroy me, but he didn’t destroy me.” “I am very, very lovable,”
she writes in another update. “I am not a loser. I am lovable.”
Simone friended Hesse on Facebook, which gave Hesse
unexpected insight into her own reporting process. In the
beginning, Simone would often say things on Facebook that she
apparently didn’t yet feel comfortable saying to Hesse. “Every
time I would go home, she would post on Facebook an analysis
of how she thought I had done that day,” Hesse recalls. “What
questions I had asked that she thought were stupid, or what she
was afraid I wasn’t getting. It was really interesting to see your
1028

reporting reviewed in real time that way.”
It also gave Hesse a measure of how much her subject grew to
trust her over the week they spent together. As time went on,
the things Simone said on Facebook began to match what she
told Hesse. To help foster a trusting relationship with Simone,
Hesse had sent her a few articles she had written, including a
profile of an agender (someone who doesn’t identify as male or
female) teenager. She didn’t take any notes on the first day. By
the end of the week Hesse spent following Simone to work, to
her home, and even going out with friends, Simone trusted
Hesse enough that she let Hesse meet her brother, someone
she’d initially been reluctant to include in the story. Hesse
thought the brother was necessary to the story because she felt
she needed another scene of Simone interacting with someone
who knew her well, and who was the closest family member
Simone had at the time.
Unlike Hesse, Los Angeles Times reporter Garrett Therolf
wasn’t looking to write a story about a transgender person when
he covered the Los Angeles Pride parade in June 2015. But then
he met Alex Bergeron, who was there as one of three winners of
the Colin Higgins Youth Courage Award, given out by the Colin
Higgins Foundation to LGBTQ people under 21 who advocate
for their community. Therolf and Bergeron got to talking, and
Bergeron mentioned struggling to reconcile being transgender
with being Muslim, a subject Therolf had not seen covered
before. Therolf had never written about transgender issues, but

1029

he had spent time reporting in Iraq and Egypt and was familiar
with that region’s conservative views toward LGBT people.

Alex Bergeron struggles to reconcile being transgender and Muslim, an issue
explored in a Los Angeles Times story.

Therolf found an expert on transgender issues and Islam in
Emory University professor Scott Siraj al-Haqq Kugle, who has
written multiple books about the subject of LGBT issues and
Islam. “He helped me to realize how lonely it can be for folks
trying to find their way and just how very nascent this
movement [of LGBT Muslims] still is,” Therolf says. “And he
helped me understand the theological underpinnings for the
work that is just beginning.”
Therolf wrote in his story that in America “mosques tend to be
conservative, and visits to the local imam or mosque committee

1030

chairman usually draw stern rebukes for LGBTQ Muslims.”
rebuke
sharp criticism or disapproval.

Therolf was unsure whether he made the right call when it
came to the pronouns he used for Bergeron. Bergeron’s
preferred pronoun is “they,” because, as Therolf’s article
explains, Bergeron sees gender identity as a spectrum, rather
than a binary. People who prefer gender-neutral singular
pronouns, then, must either use invented terms like “ze” or the
plural pronoun “they” as a singular. Both options are potentially
confusing to reporters and readers who aren’t used to seeing
them.
Therolf got permission from the copy desk to use “they” and
wrote a draft of the story, but ultimately he found it was too
confusing to use a plural pronoun for an individual. “It is
technically ungrammatical and it can be quite cumbersome and
distracting for readers in a news story,” Therolf says. “I don’t
know if we made the right call by reverting back to ‘he,’ but I
will point out that Alex himself uses ‘he’ pronouns most of his
day and so do the people around him.” The Transgender Law
Center, in its “Trans Youth” guide to reporting on transgender
and gender-nonconforming young people, notes that many in
that community use “they” as a pronoun.
Henry Fuhrmann, an assistant managing editor who oversees
the Los Angeles Times copy desk, says Therolf’s decision to use

1031

“he” instead of “they” this time should not indicate that’s what
the paper will do if the issue comes up again. “We’ll consider
then what we think will work best for the story and its intended
audience,” Fuhrmann says. “We’ll need to balance sensitivity to
a subject against the risk of confusing readers.” Therolf says he
thinks that as the concept of using “they” as a singular genderneutral pronoun becomes more prevalent, it’ll be less confusing
to readers.
In just the few months since Therolf’s story was published, both
the New York Times and the Washington Post have used new
gender-neutral terms. At the beginning of December, Post copy
editor Bill Walsh sent out a memo stating that “they” could be
used as a pronoun for people who did not identify as male or
female. In late November, the New York Times used “Mx.” as an
honorific—to much notice.

Kristin Beck, a transgender former Navy SEAL, shares images from her past during
a talk at an FBI office in Clarksburg, West Virginia.

1032

In the spring of 2015, the New York Times ramped up its
coverage of the transgender community, launching a series of
editorials, “Transgender Today,” focusing on relevant policy
issues. “A lot of people were paying attention to transgender
people in a way that we hadn’t really seen in the past,” says
editorial board member Ernesto Londoño. “We thought that we
would do a public service by outlining some of the policy issues,
some of the unresolved issues that are hugely important for this
community—that, for a lot of people, are a matter of life and
death.”
More than 20 people—from developers to designers to
photographers to editorial writers—helped get the series off the
ground. Londoño had written about a transgender person
before, but some members of the team had not. “It was an
education for a lot of us,” Londoño says. Much of that education
took place in the early stages of the project, when the team
spent a lot of time discussing what was sensitive and what
wasn’t, not just in the writing, but also in photography and
design choices. This, says Transgender Law Center’s Marcellus,
is an important but often overlooked component in coverage. A
reporter can be extremely knowledgeable about the correct
terminology, but an article can be completely undermined if it’s
accompanied by an insensitive photo caption or headline.
For the series, Londoño says advocacy groups were helpful in
identifying issues the transgender community faced and
providing necessary historical context and case law. There’s

1033

also a significant contribution from transgender people, in their
own words and images. “We thought it would be very important
to find a way to let transgender people tell their own stories and
be their own advocates,” Londoño says.
To do this, the paper created a “storywall” for the series,
allowing readers to submit their own experiences in text, photo,
or video form, or a combination of all three. Brynn Tannehill’s
video starts with the former Navy pilot describing when she
realized she wanted to fly planes, and how she ultimately had to
make a choice between her military career and coming out as
transgender. Jesse writes about how he came out as transgender
and began his transition while working as an educator in
Louisiana—and how his students and co-workers have been
largely supportive. Scott writes about being fired from his job at
a software company in the San Francisco Bay Area after coworkers found out he was a transgender man. Katherine
Bradford writes about being transgender and a parent, and
sometimes explaining this to her children’s new friends or their
parents.
Londoño wasn’t sure how eager transgender people would be to
share their stories so publicly. He says the paper hoped for 50
stories by the end of the year. It got 40 by the end of the first
day.
“One of the things that struck me when we started getting
submissions was a lot of them were from veterans and people

1034

who talked about how hard it had been to wrestle with their
gender identity and their career in the military,” Londoño says.
“A lot of those people were discharged or saw no option but to
leave the service. Those voices, I think, were very valuable for
me and for us as we set out to make the case for a new policy in
the military that allowed open transgender service.”
That editorial was published in June, and Londoño, who worked
on the article with the LBGT organization Service Members,
Partners, Allies for Respect and Tolerance for All, which
specializes in military issues, says it’s the one of which he’s
most proud. In July, the U.S. Department of Defense announced
that it was working on new policies that would allow
transgender people to serve openly in the military.
Reporting on the transgender community has come a long way
in a very short time, but transgender individuals and advocates
say there is still much work to be done. Among other things,
BuzzFeed’s Talusan would like to see more stories about
transgender people that aren’t just about their gender identity,
stories where being transgender is not a subject’s defining
characteristic.
“I would just like to see stories about what trans people are
doing with their lives and in many ways not focusing on their
transgender-ness unless it’s relevant somehow,” says the
University of Arizona’s Stryker. “I think we’re just getting to that
point.”

1035

Transgender Terminology
Covering the transgender community involves a specific
vocabulary, from pronoun usage to medical descriptions. A
glossary:
Cisgender Used by some to describe people who are not
transgender. Cis- is a Latin prefix meaning “on the same side
as,” and is therefore an antonym of trans-.
Gender dysphoria The American Psychiatric Association’s
description of the condition in which the sex someone is
assigned at birth does not match their gender identity. Some
transgender advocates believe a medical diagnosis is
necessary for health insurance that covers treatments
recommended for transgender people.
Gender expression External manifestations of gender,
expressed through names, pronouns, clothing, haircut,
behavior, voice, or body characteristics. Typically,
transgender people seek to make their gender expression
align with their gender identity, rather than the sex they
were assigned at birth.
Gender identity The internal, deeply held sense of one’s
gender. For transgender people, their own internal gender
identity does not match the sex they were assigned at birth.
Gender-nonconforming Used to describe those whose
gender expression is different from conventional
1036

expectations of masculinity and femininity.
Genderqueer Used by some who experience their gender
identity and/or gender expression as falling outside the
categories of male and female.
Pronouns The Associated Press style guide says to refer to
an individual by their preferred gendered pronoun, or, if it’s
not possible to ask for a preference, the pronoun that is
most consistent with an individual’s gender expression.
Many major publications follow this rule but the usage of
gender-neutral pronouns—the singular “they” or new terms
such as “ze” or “xe”—varies and is changing rapidly. The
Washington Post recently announced that it would allow the
singular “they,” while the New York Times recently allowed
the honorific “Mx.,” although standards editor Philip Corbett
wrote that the paper doesn’t have a set rule on genderneutral terms and has avoided using “nontraditional”
pronouns. BuzzFeed, on the other hand, says it will use any
preferred pronoun, possibly accompanied by a short
explainer if the term is less familiar.
Sex reassignment surgery (SRS) Refers to doctorsupervised surgical interventions, which not all transgender
people choose, or can afford, to undergo. Also known as
gender reassignment surgery or gender affirming surgery.
Transgender An umbrella term, often abbreviated as
“trans,” for people whose gender identity and/or gender
expression differs from what is typically associated with the
sex they were assigned at birth. A transgender man is

1037

someone whose assigned sex at birth was female but
identifies and lives as a man. A transgender woman is
someone whose assigned sex at birth was male but identifies
and lives as a female.
Transition Altering one’s birth sex is a complex process that
occurs over a long period of time and may include medical
and legal steps, using a different name and new pronouns,
dressing differently, hormone therapy, and surgery.
—GLAAD’s “Media Guide on Transgender Terminology”

RESPOND●

1. As this selection makes clear, the last few years have seen a
great deal of public discussion about transgender issues, and
part of this discussion has included a focus on language and on
various forms of negative stereotyping. What specific
observations related to language and various forms of
stereotyping does Morrison make? How many of these were
new to you? Why, do you think?
2. As explained in the headnote, Morrison clearly positions
competent journalists as learners, that is, they understand and
appreciate that throughout their careers, as they cover various
communities, they will need to learn about those communities
in order to avoid representing them in terms of inaccurate and
offensive stereotypes. Where do you see evidence of Morrison’s
positioning? In short, where do we see journalists learning
specific information about the transgender community, how to
interact with transgender individuals, and how to avoid

1038

stereotyping?
3. Chapter 14 discusses visual rhetoric and the roles that images
can play in supporting an argument. How do the images that
are part of this selection contribute to the selection’s overall
argument? Do they pass the test of avoiding negative
stereotyping? Why or why not?
4. THINKING CRITICALLY In a profound sense, this selection focuses
on undoing stereotypes, that is, in finding ways to fight against
stereotypes of a group by avoiding one-dimensional
representations of them, a topic touched on in the introduction
to this chapter. How does Morrison achieve this goal without
directly criticizing or blaming her colleagues? In your opinion, is
this a more effective strategy than other options Morrison
might have had? Why or why not?
5. Choose a group that you are part of that you believe is unfairly
stereotyped on at least some occasions or in some contexts.
Write an essay in which you explain to outgroup members
(those who do not belong to the group) how you understand
your group to be negatively stereotyped and how they might
avoid repeating such stereotypes when commenting on your
group. While your essay could take many forms, it will likely
have aspects of definitional, evaluative, and proposal
arguments, treated in Chapters 9, 10, and 12, respectively.

1039

CHAPTER 24 How Does What We Eat Define
Who We Are?

According to many commentators, the United States is in the
midst of a food revolution. Americans are concerned—and
some would argue obsessed—with what we eat and where it
comes from in ways we have not been in the past, at least not
the recent past. We eat and eat out more than we ever have
before. We consume a wider variety of foods and flavors
associated with a broader range of cultures than we ever have
before. We choose, often dogmatically, among a wider range of
diets—vegan, vegetarian, pescatarian, carnivorous, paleo,
gluten-free, and the list goes on. We can watch cooking shows
on TV 24/7. And at the same time, a considerable number of
Americans, including college students, live with the reality of
food insecurity, not certain if there will be enough to eat or if
what we have to eat is sufficiently nutritious. The selections in
this chapter encourage you to think about how what we eat
reflects and ultimately defines who we are—and aren’t.
In the chapter’s opening selection, Sophie Egan reminds
1040

readers how intimately linked food and foodways are with
culture. A major focus of this selection is the way that American
culture has long adopted and adapted the foods of its immigrant
communities, which, in turn, respond to American food culture
in various ways. She likewise examines some of the factors
encouraging the Americanization of what some continue to
refer to as “ethnic” foods, which are, in fact, well on their way
to becoming as American as apple pie—if they are not purely
American creations.
The second selection relies on visual arguments to carry most of
the load in examining how Americans’ dietary habits have
changed over the past several decades. Given the format in
which the data are presented, you’ll see that it also provides an
opportunity to consider how constraints like medium and
context influence what makes for an effective visual argument.
Rob Greenfield’s arguments against veganism, the third
selection, are especially interesting because he is a committed
vegan. What advantages might there be to admitting the
potential limitations of one’s own position and acknowledging
the validity of alternative positions? Greenfield’s argument, it
turns out, may have a lot to teach us all about topics other than
veganism, especially at this moment in our very polarized
society.
The chapter’s fourth and fifth selections take on a topic that has
received a lot of recent press, especially with Americans’

1041

growing hunger for novel tastes from around the world. The
question is that of cultural appropriation, particularly with
regard to food. Can foodways rightly be said to belong to any
culture or any one? In what sense of belong? Does it matter if
the question is preparing “somebody else’s” food in your own
kitchen or doing so for commercial purposes? Is it fine for just
anyone to open a food cart or restaurant selling West African
chicken with peanut sauce or Tunisian tajine (not to be
confused with the very different Moroccan dish of the same
name)? Why or why not? Jess Kapadia can’t understand what
the fight is about. At first glance, she contends anyone can
“own” and even sell any food; a careful study of her comments,
however, indicates that she may impose limits on her own
claims. Briahna Joy Gray sees things quite differently; for her,
we always need to consider issues of exploitation and cultural
disrespect. You’ll get to evaluate these authors’ positions on this
knotty set of issues.
The chapter closes with a research report by James Dubick and
two coauthors on food insecurity on college campuses. For
some readers, the results of this survey may be shocking; for
others, it may be daily reality. Does your campus have a food
bank, as a growing number do? Should it? After reading this
report, perhaps you’ll be challenged to learn more about these
issues on your own campus and act on what you learn. If so,
that’s persuasion in action.

1042

In this selection from her 2016 book Devoured: How What
We Eat Defines Who We Are, Sophie Egan explores American
foodways, particularly the way that American cuisine has
long incorporated and adapted foods from around the world
and continues to do so. (It should, of course, be obvious that
when foods travel, they will change at least minimally
because different varieties of vegetables will be grown in
different places, and even the same variety will taste different
because of the soil and climate. Lovers of wine are obsessed
with the notion of the terroir, the French term meaning
literally soil or earth and, by extension, the environment in
which the grapes are grown and the wine bottled.) To achieve
her goal, Egan focuses in particular on Italian American
cuisine and ways that it differs from, say, Chinese American
cuisine in terms of how the respective immigrant
communities responded to their new American environment.
Egan also considers the recent rise of fusion cuisine and its
contribution to our country’s foodways. As you read, consider
how your own ways of eating are like and not like those of
your parents and grandparents and what influences have
shaped them.
The American Food Psyche
SOPHIE EGAN
American food culture is the set of customs, values, and
behaviors related to eating and drinking. These form the
scaffolding of daily life.

1043

Here are some examples of American food culture:
Fast food. This is arguably the best-known feature of our
food culture, and the one we’ve exported most widely
around the globe. Not just the food but the way it’s
consumed, at drive-thrus or taking it to go.
When we watch movies, we eat popcorn.
At state fairs, food is fried. Foods you didn’t even know
could be fried are fried.
In the summer, we invite friends over for barbecues.
Unlike in Britain, Canada, or Ireland, in the United States,
bacon is supposed to be crispy.
Don’t eat anything when riding the subway.
Eat pizza. All kinds. Any time.
When eating pizza, adhere to some very important
rules regarding the delivery of the slice into your
mouth: New York style = fold it. Chicago deep dish =
fork and knife. Otherwise, no utensils involved. Unless,
of course, you want to look like an Italian, in which
case: Pinkies up. . . .
Michael Pollan, author of The Omnivore’s Dilemma: A Natural
History of Four Meals and many other books about food, has
said that, given Americans’ multiethnic makeup and our
relatively new status as a nation, we have never had a stable
food culture—as in passing on customs of eating from one
generation to the next. This leaves us vulnerable to marketing
and the latest nutrition study, “willing to throw it all out every
few years,” as he once said in an interview.

1044

In other words, without an enduring set of social norms around
eating, we are constantly reinventing them. The support for this
idea is in strong supply, but there is an untapped layer that
deserves inspecting: how this unstable food culture is shaped by
our core values as a country. . . . They help explain why we eat
the things we eat and the ways we eat them—and they equip us
to understand how we might eat in the future. . . .
A melting pot is defined as “a place where a variety of races,
cultures, or individuals assimilate into a cohesive whole.”
Americans take immense pride in this notion. How this concept
influences our eating relates to the term’s second definition: “a
process of blending that often results in invigoration or
novelty.” This means that the hope for the future of food in
America sits on the positive side of the coin of reinvention. It’s
why we are willing to embrace new norms around dining, like
wine for the masses, food trucks, Tex-Mex, and Italian food that
is really a distinct Italian American genre, without which there
would be no “American” food to speak of. . . .

When Americans order takeout and delivery, Chinese, Mexican,
and Italian top the list; when we eat at a restaurant, the most
popular types of international cuisines are sushi, Thai,
Vietnamese, Brazilian/Argentinian, Greek, and Southeast Asian.
That’s according to a 2015 study conducted on behalf of the
National Restaurant Association, entitled “Global Palates:
Ethnic Cuisines and Flavors in America.”

1045

But historians and food studies experts point to Italian food as
the original symbol of a broader phenomenon: the gradual
incorporation of foreign cuisines into traditionally bland
American palates. Two-thirds of Americans now eat a greater
variety of cuisines from around the world than they did just five
years ago. The vast majority of us enjoy eating these types of
food both at restaurants that serve only that type of food—what
you might consider the more authentic experiences—and as
part of “mainstream menus,” as the study called them, at other
types of restaurants.

Spaghetti and meatballs: standard Italian-American fare

Spaghetti and meatballs is a great case study of our ever-moredaring tastes, and the quests for culinary adventure, that today
1046

define American appetites. The dish reveals the making of a
true fusion cuisine in American culture.
fusion
joining two or more things to create something new and different; with respect to food,
the term refers to the blending of the elements of two or more culinary traditions to create
a way of cooking that previously didn’t exist—for example, kimchi grilled-cheese
sandwiches, which are available at a Portland, Oregon, food cart.

In the culinary community, “fusion” gets a bad rap. It tends to
be taken as meaning the food has no identity. But this is
misguided. I’m referring to our cuisine at large.
And when I ask the question, What does our food show about
who we are?, the story of spaghetti and meatballs suddenly isn’t
just about Italian American food. It’s the story of the melting
pot, and the novel, distinctly American cuisine that bubbles up
out of it. Spaghetti and meatballs is merely one of countless
dishes and ways of eating that never existed anywhere else. And
collectively, these comprise a national food culture. One you
might call Immigrant American.
Chinese immigrants also found certain dishes that could appeal
to American tastes—General Tso’s chicken not least among
them. This adaptation, the mixing and compromising to create
entirely new foods, was much the same. One difference
between Italian food and other immigrant cuisines in America,
though, is the way Italian Americans responded to its
Americanization. Chinese Americans, as Harvey Levenstein
writes in Food in the USA, “generally found the concoctions
1047

served in ‘ chop suey’ houses and made-in-Minnesota canned ‘
chow mein’ to be abominations,” while “Italian-Americans
generally shared the native-born WASP’s enthusiasm for the
Americanized version of their cuisine.” They were proud that
non-Italian Americans gave their food recognition.
chop suey, chow mein
two popular dishes of American Chinese cuisine consisting generally of stir-fried meat,
celery, perhaps other vegetables, and a cornstarch-based sauce; the dishes are served
over rice or noodles.
WASP (White Anglo-Saxon Protestant)
an acronym originally used to refer to those well-to-do white Protestant Americans
descended from the country’s founders who shaped the country and its political culture,
the term is now often used to refer broadly, and often pejoratively, to the elements of
American culture associated with the dominant ethnic group, composed of European
Americans.

Not long ago, Harvey Levenstein points out, many Americans
“equated tacos and frijoles refritos with stomach cramps and
diarrhea.” Consider, for a moment, that by 1991 salsa outsold
ketchup in retail stores. By $40 million. Now, Chipotle is the
envy of every restaurateur in the land.
frijoles refritos
a dish associated with Mexican and Tex-Mex cuisine made of pinto beans that have been
cooked and mashed. Sometimes—not generally, though—the beans are fried or baked.
Thus, the name (a literal translation from Spanish of refried beans; that is, beans that have
been thoroughly fried) is, in fact, not an accurate representation of the dish itself.

“In 2009, the dollar share of ‘ethnic’ frozen meals (Asian,
Mexican, etc.) surpassed the dollar share of traditional
American recipes (e.g., beef Stroganoff, Salisbury steak, mac
1048

and cheese, etc.),” reads a presentation slide by the Hartman
Group. . . . Hartman also notes that a little fewer than one in
eight adult meals eaten at home involves an “emerging global
food,” while at a restaurant it’s more than one of every five
meals.
beef Stroganoff, Salisbury steak
respectively, a dish of Russian origin composed of narrow strips of beef often sautéed with
mushrooms and onions and served in a sour-cream sauce over egg noodles; an American
dish, generally sold fully cooked, in which the “steak” is composed of ground beef (which
can include pork), egg, seasonings, vegetables, and mushrooms. Many baby boomers
associate these dishes with frozen TV dinners from the 1960s.

What’s driving the accelerated integration of global cuisines
into mainstream culture, then, is the increased number of
meals we eat outside the home. The greater percentage of the
total bites we eat in a given day or week that are made by
someone else. Why not give lamb adobo a try on your
Munchery app? Chicken tikka masala from the Trader Joe’s
prepared food section looks whirl-worthy. What these and other
new food-service models have done from an innovation
standpoint, from an industry disruption standpoint, is make
foreign dishes more accessible to the masses.
adobo
Spanish, meaning “marinade,” “seasoning,” or “sauce”; a method of preserving meat and
fish and enhancing their flavor by marinating them in a sauce of paprika, garlic, salt,
oregano, vinegar, and soy sauce. The tradition arose in Spain and Portugal and spread
during the colonial period to what is today Latin America and the Philippines, developing
regional variants in various locations.
chicken tikka masala
a South-Asian-inspired dish composed of chicken that has been marinated in a spicy

1049

yogurt sauce, cooked in a tandoori oven, and flavored with tomatoes and the spice
mixture masala. Cooks or chefs in several countries—India, Britain, and Scotland—claim
to have invented it. It is particularly popular in Great Britain.

It’s the silver lining, if you will, that comes from our not
cooking as much anymore.
Two novel business models have dramatically heightened the
pace at which—and the fervor with which—American
consumers embrace the exotic: food trucks and the Chipotle
format of fast-casual dining. Some people are happy
committing a whole Saturday night to trying a family-run
Himalayan restaurant, or driving to a retail district where they
don’t recognize the letters on the signs. But some people are
not. It’s far easier to shift, say, one turkey sandwich you’d
normally have for lunch on Tuesday to a kati roll if the food
truck is parked right outside your office. The same thinking
goes for everything from Indian “ nanini” and Filipino pork
sisig rice bowls to Vietnamese banh mi and Austrian schnitzel.
The speed and price point of food truck food—you’ll be on your
way for under ten dollars in under ten minutes—further reduces
barriers to consumption.
kati roll
originally street food in Kolkata, a kebab (chunks of meat, often chicken, roasted on a
skewer) wrapped in a flatbread such as Indian roti along with coriander chutney, egg, and
bits of vegetable.
nanini
a combination of the words naan, an Indian flatbread, and panini, a grilled Italian
sandwich. (It’s worth noting that the Italian term for the sandwich is panino; panini is the
plural in Italian. English has borrowed the plural form and uses it as the singular. Thus, an

1050

American might ask for a panini.)
sisig
a dish of Filipino origin made from pig’s head and liver, seasoned with a local citrus fruit
and peppers.
banh mi
a sandwich of Vietnamese origin consisting of a small baguette (or loaf of bread) filled,
traditionally, with pork sausage, coriander leaves, and pickled carrots, radishes, and
cucumbers, as well as mayonnaise and pâté, a paste made of cooked ground meat and
fat. The latter two ingredients, like baguettes, have their origin in French cuisine. The
French directly colonized Vietnam from 1887 until 1954. Hence banh mi serves as a clear
example of fusion cuisine.
schnitzel
originally from Austria, a main dish of veal tenderized by pounding and coated with egg,
flour, and bread crumbs, before being fried. As it has traveled around the globe, the term
has come to refer to any piece of pounded meat that is breaded and fried.

Fast-casual restaurants with the create-your-own format—also
offering that ten-dollar, ten-minute mark—have a similar effect:
You start with a base, pick a protein, and add sauces and
toppings as you like. Importantly, that cheffing includes
tailoring the spiciness and complexity of flavors to your comfort
level.
cheffing
working as a chef.

As the author John Hooper notes, there is a crucial distinction
between diversity and disunity. We are a country of political,
cultural, and ideological diversity, spread across many farreaching geographic subsections. But there are features that
1051

reveal themselves in the foods we eat that characterize us
broadly as a people.
Various arguments try to explain why Americans like “foreign”
food, such as increased international travel, shifts in
immigration policies that have altered our country’s
demographics, and so on. But it comes down to one uniquely
American value: As a people, we are curious, open to the new—
the unknown or lesser known. We care about discovery.
All within certain limits of course, because don’t forget, all this “
mutant mash-up food,” as Anthony Bourdain has called it, is
happening alongside an only deepened popularity of our old
standbys: the Five Guys and Shake Shacks selling burgers and
milkshakes, except better (apparently), or the craft beer boom
with brewpubs selling Reubens and grilled cheese and fries,
except with, you know, truffle seasoning. All at a time when the
average American still eats three hamburgers a week.
mutant
a deviation, often with the very negative connotation of monstrosity.
truffle
a highly valued and expensive fungus that grows underground.

1052

Banh mi

American fare is far from a thing of the past. It’s just a matter of
how American fare is defined. So it’s not as if we’ve hopped on
another bandwagon entirely—we’ve welcomed a whole caravan
of new wagons into our fleet.

In 2014, Bon Appetit’s Andrew Knowlton featured a restaurant
in San Antonio, Texas, called Hot Joy, an Asian fusion joint he
called “rule-breaking” and “trendsetting.” Knowlton writes:
“Chef Quealy Watson has never been to Asia. Everything he
knows about Chinese, Japanese, Indian, or the rest of that vast
region’s cuisine he picked up from cookbooks and the Internet.
But who cares anymore? Authenticity and rigid adherence to
1053

tradition are overrated. Deliciousness is king.”
So it turns out that one of our biggest problems as eaters, our
unstable food culture, is also one of our greatest strengths: The
idea that anything goes—that in throwing it all into the mix
something wonderful emerges—is why we have culinary gems
you can’t find anywhere else.
Korean tacos and naan pizza and California rolls. Some might
consider these horrors. Sullied versions of the true cultural
entities. But not us. In America, collisions are commendable.
sullied
stained, damaged, polluted, spoiled.
commendable
praiseworthy.

RESPOND ●

1. How effectively do you think Egan has described American food
culture? In short, do her characterization and examples of
American food culture in the opening paragraphs capture your
understanding of the food-related practices Americans engage
in? Can you add additional items to the list of examples she
gives?
2. A major concern of Egan’s is the changing nature of Americans’
tastes—literally, the foods we prefer to eat, the ingredients that
make them up, the ways we prefer our foods to be seasoned,
and even the methods of preparation. Can you find evidence in
your own life of the changing nature of America’s preferences
with regard to food? Are there foods you eat now that you

1054

didn’t eat as a child? Are there foods you enjoy that your
parents or grandparents do not? What might account for these
differences?
3. One reviewer characterized Egan’s writing style as “breezy.”
Based on this selection and specifically the passages below,
what might the reviewer have meant? What adjectives might
you use to describe her style? (The discussion of style in
arguments in Chapter 13 should prove helpful in responding to
this question.)
In the culinary community, “fusion” gets a bad rap. It
tends to be taken as meaning the food has no identity. But
this is misguided. I’m referring to our cuisine at large.
And when I ask the question, What does our food show
about who we are?, the story of spaghetti and meatballs
suddenly isn’t just about Italian American food. It’s the
story of the melting pot and the novel, distinctly American
cuisine that bubbles up out of it.
It’s the silver lining, if you will, that comes from our not
cooking as much anymore.
4. THINKING CRITICALLY Looking at the first quoted passage in the
previous question, what changes would you need to make in
order to paraphrase it for an academic paper? In other words,
what changes in vocabulary and sentence structure would you
need to make in order to convey Egan’s content while avoiding
plagiarism, on the one hand, and ensuring that the language
you use would be appropriate for an academic context, on the
other? In addition to paraphrasing the passage, write a healthy
paragraph about which features of it you changed and why.

1055

(The information in Chapter 21 on plagiarism and academic
integrity, Chapter 17 on academic arguments, and Chapter 13
on style in arguments will be useful here.)
5. Agreeing with Michael Pollan, Egan contends that Americans
have “never had a stable food culture—as in passing on
customs of eating from one generation to the next” (paragraph
11). In a sense, Egan is arguing that the only thing stable about
American foodways is change. Reflect on your response to
Question 2 above, and write an argument of fact in which you
describe differences in the food culture between you or your
generation, on the one hand, and your parents or
grandparents, on the other. In planning this essay, you may
want to conduct an interview to get useful information. You
might, for example, interview older members of your family (if
they are alive and available) or other older people you know
about how they ate as children. From a different angle, you
might interview someone who owns or works in a restaurant or
in a food cart about what they have observed about
generational differences in taste or how tastes have changed
across time. Another possibility is to do some research on the
growth of so-called “ethnic” grocery stores or restaurants in
your area over time; you might, for instance, examine ads in
print newspapers or telephone books for such establishments
at five-year intervals for the past thirty years. (Chapter 8
provides information on arguments of fact, while Chapter 18 on
finding evidence includes information on conducting
interviews.)

1056

In seeking selections for this chapter, we were grateful
to find the incredibly detailed data available on the United
States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Web site. Among
other topics, the USDA tracks food availability, food
consumption, nutrient availability, diet quality, and food
prices—factual information that is relevant to the tasks of
government at various levels, to industry, and to the
public. Out of the scores of specific foods tracked by the
USDA, we have chosen almost thirty to illustrate how
Americans’ food habits have changed since 1970, when the
data was first collected. While showing all foods on such a
chart would be far too large for this book, we have
provided all the data instead in the format of a table, with
the goal of making apparent some basic aspects of the
power of visual displays of information.
Of course, many sorts of factors have shaped the data. The
increase in Americans’ consumption of fresh vegetables
and fruit in the past few decades isn’t just about changing
taste. It also reminds us that immigration, globalization,
and trade deals like NAFTA have had consequence for the
availability of these foods in particular, and Americans
have gladly seized those opportunities. When data were
first collected in the 1970s, high-fructose corn syrup was
just being introduced, and its presence in foods and
carbonated beverages, in particular, has increased
exponentially because of its low cost and availability.

1057

As with all statistical data, readers have to beware when
interpreting them. A huge increase or decrease in the
percentage of consumption of a particular item may not
represent a large increase or decrease in actual
consumption. If Americans weren’t consuming much of a
particular food in the early 1970s, even a modest increase
in consumption would represent a great increase in terms
of percentage.
As you study the chart and the table that we’ve created
from a selection of the complete data, consider the power
of visual arguments and the changing dietary habits of
Americans over the past several decades.

How Do Your Eating Habits Differ from Your Grandparents’?
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

1058

1059

1060

1061

1062

1063

RESPOND ●

1. What was your response to the information presented in
these visual displays of information? Did you find any of the
information surprising? Encouraging? Distressing? Why?
2. Given the sort of data presented here, why is a bar chart a
logical way of displaying the information? Why would these
data not be a good candidate for, say, a pie chart?
3. As Chapter 14 on visual rhetoric explains, writers can use
visuals to create pathos, support ethos, and/or support
logos. Which of these functions could this chart serve and

1064

why?
4. THINKING CRITICALLY Study the chart that we have created,
comparing it to the accompanying table, which contains all
the data. Aside from the different amount of information
presented, what other differences do you see in terms of
the two visual displays of information? In short, which
specific features of the chart make it much more effective
than the table in terms of demonstrating aspects of the
changes in Americans’ diets? In what ways is it less
effective? By the way, did you notice that there is a break in
the vertical axis between 600 and 4000, as indicated by the
two lines at an angle? Obviously, this was done because of
space constraints. Indicating the scale from -200% to
4,000% would have required a foldout—visually impressive,
but very expensive to produce. A common way that those
creating bar charts misrepresent information is to use a
break in the vertical axis. In what ways could such a break
mislead those who are not reading carefully? (The
information in Chapter 14 on visual rhetoric may prove
helpful here.) Likewise, consider these questions: Would
the table or the chart be effective on a PowerPoint slide?
Why or why not? How does the use of color in the table
make it easier for someone to find trends in the use of a
particular food group?
5. A very common task in academic writing is describing
visual arguments in the text. In other words, writers don’t
generally simply insert a chart or table with no comment.
Instead, they refer to the table by name, explain to the
reader what the chart or table shows, and then relate that
information to the ongoing argument being made. Write a
description, that is a factual argument, that might

1065

accompany the table that we have constructed from the
USDA data. Be sure to refer to it by name, tell readers how it
is formatted (how many columns? what information do
they give readers?), and explain the information contained
in the table, including generalizations we can draw from
the data. Your description should be a healthy paragraph of
several sentences.

1066

Rob Greenfield (1986– ) is an adventurer,
environmental activist, humanist, and entrepreneur who
often uses what one source terms “attention-grabbing
tactics” to make his arguments. In his own words, he’s
gone from being a “drunk dude” to “a dude making a
difference.” Giving up an early focus on becoming a
millionaire by 30, at age 24, Greenfield began to pursue a
much simpler life as he came to realize the role his own
behavior played in many of the world’s problems. He is
known for having 111 possessions, all of which fit in his
backpack; for living off the grid in a 50-square-foot house
as a Teeny Greeny (he auctioned off the house and raised
$10,000 to build ten tiny houses for San Diego’s homeless);
and for projects like Food Waste Fiasco. For the latter, he
“dove into more than two thousand dumpsters across the
United States to demonstrate how nearly half of all food in
the U.S. is wasted while 50 million (1 in 7) Americans are
food insecure.” This 2015 blog posting is from his Web site
RobGreenfield.TV. As you read it, notice how carefully he,
as a vegan, seeks to offer arguments for veganism while
acknowledging its limits and admitting that certain
carnivores (people who eat meat) may be living healthier
and more environmentally friendly lives than some
vegans.

An Argument against Veganism . . . from a Vegan

1067

ROB GREENFIELD
The topic of meat eating can be quite controversial and often
becomes pretty heated. So whether you eat meat or not,
please take a deep breath and chill out for a second.
To the vegans reading this, I want to be upfront that I utterly
support veganism. It is my first recommendation to anyone
who asks me how to live a more earth-friendly life. I eat an
almost completely plant-based diet myself; about 95–99% of
what I eat is plant-based.
To the meat eaters reading this, please read this fully before
you quickly use this blog as an excuse to blindly eat food that
is detrimental to the earth, to other species, and to you.
This is my argument against veganism by someone who
strongly supports veganism.
We live on a planet that is home to seven billion people, and
amongst that massive population there are many, many
different cultures. Some are vegetarian by nature, some
vegan by nature, and others eat a lot of meat and animal
products. I write this argument, in part because some
people believe that veganism is the one and only way, no
exceptions. That’s totally understandable given many of the
horrifying practices that are taking place in our current
industrial agriculture system.

1068

There’s the factory farming with complete disregard to
animals being living beings. Chickens are grown too big for
them to walk. Female chicks are debeaked shortly after
birth, and the male chicks are thrown into the trash. Pigs are
grown in cages so small that they never get to stand up.
Cows never get to graze in the field and barely see the light
of day.
There’s the fact that eating a vegan diet is the single largest
thing that an American can do to decrease their
environmental impact. Raising meat is the single largest
contributor to our increasing droughts and our resource
depletion. A hamburger takes over 600 gallons of water to
produce.
There’s the rainforest deforestation that takes place to raise
soy and grains to feed the animals that we eat.
There’s the health risk of eating meat as well. We are
pumping our animals full of dangerous hormones and
antibiotics that are doing a huge injustice to the human race.
The list goes on and on as to why we should all give up meat
and animal products. We’d be doing a great service to the
earth, to the other species we share the earth with, and to
ourselves. But there is another side to the story that many
vegans and vegetarians often leave out. There are cultures of
people who eat meat and animal products in a manner that
causes less harm to earth and animals than some vegan diets
1069

do.

Packaged vegan foods like these take a toll on the environment.

All vegan diets are not created equal. I would argue that a
person who lives off the land and includes meat in their diet
can have a smaller environmental impact than a person who
lives in the city and eats all vegan food that’s been packaged
and shipped in. Vegan diets often include food that is
shipped from halfway around the world, food that is covered
in packaging which is very resource-intensive (whether it’s
recycled or not), and food that contains harmful ingredients
like palm oil. There’s also the fact that increasing cropland
to grow plant-based food displaces animal populations and
kills many of them. A vegan diet made up of industrially

1070

produced food is likely killing animals or harming animals
one way or another. Of course, diets that contain meat can
do all of the above as well; so below, I’ve included some
examples of diets that incorporate meat that may actually
have a smaller environmental impact than an urban vegan
diet.
palm oil
oil derived from the fruit of certain species of palm trees, especially those found in
Africa. Palm oil is commonly used in commercial foods; however, environmentalists
increasingly oppose its use because its production contributes to the deforestation of
tropical areas. Likewise, the nutritional consequences of palm oil consumption are a
subject of debate among scientists.

I spent time in Louisiana and found it is a state with
many self-sufficient people. For many of them, the
bayou is their bloodline and they live off this land. Their
diets include alligators, crayfish, fish, rabbit, deer and
so much more. These swamps are absolutely teeming
with life and I believe that when they hunt it
responsibly, these folk can eat a more earth-friendly
diet than an urban vegan that purchases everything in
packages at the supermarket.
There’s the exploding wild boar population in Texas that
is causing serious environmental problems. They are
one of the most destructive invasive species in the US
today displacing native species populations, devouring
crops, and tearing up the land they roam. I think that
hunting and eating these boars has a much smaller
environmental impact (and likely even a positive

1071

impact) than just about any vegan food you can buy at
the supermarket.
Hunting deer in your own neck of the woods, like my
friends in Wisconsin do, can also be far less destructive
than being dependent on large-scale production of any
food. These deer live wild, eating grasses their whole
life, and no unsustainable resources must be used in
their existence. Plus, by having to hunt their food
themselves, these hunters can be much more connected
to their food than the urban vegan.
The Inuit people live primarily on animals that they
hunt and trap locally. Imagine if they instead had all
their food shipped in from warmer lands where it could
be grown. That would be so much more detrimental
than living off their land.
bayou
slow-moving stream, marshy outlet, or wetland; or a stream or creek containing
brackish water whose direction reverses daily as the tides change. The bayou region
in the Gulf Coast comprises areas of the Mississippi Delta, Louisiana, and eastern
Texas.
Inuit
the indigenous peoples of the Arctic regions of the United States (Alaska), Canada,
Greenland, Russia, and Denmark. In Canada and increasingly in the U.S., the term is
used instead of Eskimo, which these groups do not use to refer to themselves and
which some of them consider pejorative.

Those are just a few examples of why I would argue against a
blanket statement for veganism. To say that everyone should
be vegan I think would discredit many of the societies and
cultures that are living in harmony with the earth to a far
1072

greater extent than many of today’s urban vegans.
But after all that, many people would say that we’ve become
an advanced enough society to know that it is inhumane to
eat meat. Gandhi said, “The greatness of a nation can be
judged by the way its animals are treated.” I completely
agree. We do have a moral obligation to cause no pain or
suffering now that we’ve learned that we can live very
healthy lives (seemingly healthier) without killing any
animals. We absolutely must practice complete humanity
towards all species. However, some would follow that line of
thought and say that we have become so elevated that even
just the death of an animal by our hands is inhumane.
(Mahatma) Gandhi (1869–1948)
leader of the struggle for Indian independence from Britain in the second quarter of
the twentieth century. Gandhi employed the methods of nonviolent civil
disobedience, inspiring movements for freedom around the world. (Dr. Martin Luther
King Jr. was greatly affected by Gandhi’s methods and employed them in the U.S.
Civil Rights movement.) Like Hindus generally, Gandhi was vegetarian.

That thought has one huge flaw in my mind though. I
believe that idea separates the human species from all other
species on earth. It is saying that we are not a part of the
circle of life like other species are. A wolf can kill a deer, and
that is nature—but if we were to hunt a deer, many of us
would not consider that nature. Humans are still animals
and we are a part of nature, and a part of the natural cycle of
life. Yes, we are unique, but so is every other species. We are
not above all other species, or any species for that matter. I
1073

believe that it is this separation thinking that has gotten us
into much of the trouble that we are in. We know that we
have only one earth. We know that everything on earth is
connected. Rather than think of us as separate creatures,
above all others, I think we should remember that we are
animals too and we are a part of the food chains on earth.
We can be the predator and we can be the prey. But if we are
to be predators, we must use the knowledge we’ve gained to
be ethical predators.
Vegans should absolutely continue promoting vegan diets,
and they should pursue it with great passion. We are in dire
times, and reducing meat consumption is something that we
can all do today to lessen our burden on the earth and other
species. I commend all activists and organizations out there
campaigning for meat-free diets. I commend everyone out
there who is reducing his or her meat consumption. I
commend all vegans and vegetarians.
One recommendation I would make to vegans and
vegetarians is to be compassionate to all humans too, not
just all animals. We live in a messed up time and it’s very
challenging to make ethical decisions. It’s not easy in this
country to do the right thing. So much of mainstream society
stacks the odds against us leading environmentally-friendly
lifestyles. So campaign hard and lead by example, but
remember that all people have feelings too and have their
own challenging circumstances.

1074

I’m going to continue eating a plant-based diet myself. There
really are very few arguments against the evidence—across
cultures, a diet high in plants and low in animals is the most
beneficial to human health. I used to eat a lot of meat but
since I stopped a few years ago, I’ve seen so many benefits.
I’m absolutely healthier than ever before. My body naturally
stays fit with little need for exercise. I feel great about
myself knowing that I’m not supporting any unethical
businesses or practices. I’m living in alignment with my
morals and beliefs.
I live in San Diego now, and it seems to currently not be
possible to support a meat-eating population ethically or
sustainably in this city or any other densely populated area.
So as long as I’m here, you probably won’t find me eating
meat—unless I’m down at the pier to catch and take home a
small fish. If I move out of the city to live off the land,
however, or if I am on a long trek through the wild, it could
be a different story.
We all have a unique situation, so doing what is right for
you, all creatures, and the earth is going to take some
thinking and some resourcefulness. We can all make
improvements no matter where we are today, but only you
can decide to do this for yourself. To be of help to you, here
are my top ten recommendations to make your diet more
Planet Friendly in relation to meat.
1. Eat a plant-based diet, which means no meat or animal
1075

products.
2. If you do eat meat or animal products, do it in
moderation. A few times per week is plenty. If you eat a
lot of meat currently, start by eating one animal-free day
per week (such as Meatless Monday) or one animal-free
meal per day.
3. If you do eat meat or animal products, get to know your
farmer or hunter and get it locally.
4. Be certain that the animal is ethically raised/harvested.
Purchasing organic will help with this a lot, but not all
organic is equal. Small organic farms typically trump
large-scale organic production.
5. If you eat meat or animal products, try to raise it or hunt
it yourself. Start with raising chickens for eggs, which
can be done even in large cities.
6. Choose dairy and eggs over meat. It is far more
environmentally friendly to choose these over meat.
7. Choose sustainably farmed chicken over beef and pork.
Chicken has a far smaller environmental impact than
beef or pork. Beef is the most environmentally taxing
and often the unhealthiest, so choose this last.
8. Use every part of the animal and waste nothing. The
liver and bone marrow are two of the most nourishing
parts of the animal.
9. Make a list of goals and take it one step at a time. Don’t
be overwhelmed by all the things that you may want to
change. Instead, make short-term and long-term goals
and have fun checking them off the list.
10. Realize that this will not be more expensive. Although it
may appear to be to the untrained eye, eating vegan and
1076

healthier food is not more expensive. Simple plantbased food, such as a meal of rice, beans, and veggies, is
far less expensive than meat. My meals at home usually
cost me between $1 and $2. There’s also the money
saved in health costs, gym memberships, diet plans, and
the many other ways we waste money to make ourselves
look better which won’t be needed when you take
control of your diet.
RESPOND ●

1. What is your response to Greenfield’s argument? How
convincing a case does he make that there are valid
arguments against veganism even though he is a
committed vegan?
2. How would you characterize Greenfield’s audiences in this
blog posting? In other words, which group(s) would
constitute his intended or ideal readers, his invoked
readers, and his real readers? Cite specific evidence from
the text—anything from word choice to kinds of appeals to
evidence offered—for the first two of these categories. (See
Chapter 1 on kinds of audiences.)
3. As Chapter 1 explains, rather than being dogmatically
oppositional, Rogerian argumentation seeks to build on
common ground. How do we see Greenfield seeking to find
common ground and build on it as he argues that veganism
isn’t necessarily the best option in all cases? As he seeks to
argue that other options are indeed sometimes more
healthy and environmentally friendly? How do these
strategies relate to his ultimate goals and to his multiple

1077

audiences (see Question 2)?
4. THINKING CRITICALLY One of the most interesting things about
this selection is how rarely we see such arguments in
contemporary American culture. When, for example, was
the last time you heard someone acknowledge the
limitations of their own position and concede that those
taking a very different view might, at least in certain cases,
be able to claim the higher moral ground? What does it say
about our society at this moment that it is rare to find such
arguments on any topic, if possible at all? How might our
society be different if we, as individuals and as members of
various groups, began creating such arguments? What, if
anything, might motivate us to do so?
5. Choose a cause you are devoted to in much the same way
that Greenfield is devoted to veganism, and write a
proposal argument much like his in which you seek to
convince those who share your commitment to that cause
of the potential limitations of that position and the possible
moral or ethical advantages that those you often see as
“the other side” might ultimately hold. (See Chapter 12 on
proposal arguments.)

1078

Jess Kapadia is a New York–based digital content
creator, currently serving as senior editor at Food
Republic, a Web site that seeks to serve as “the global hub
for news and information about the new culture of food
across a multitude of media platforms.” This selection first
appeared there in June 2017 in response to debates about a
pair of young women in Portland, OR, who had opened a
food cart selling burritos. Like many online pieces, this
one reminds us that digital texts today are parts of a chain
of texts, each commenting on earlier texts and each
paving the way for future responses. As you read this
selection, consider how Kapadia uses ethical arguments as
the basis for some of her claims.

I Still Don’t Understand the Cultural Appropriation of Food
JESS KAPADIA
Last week, the Washington Post published a Portland, ORcentric story titled “Should White Chefs Sell Burritos?” The
story explains the mounting accusations of appropriation
against Portland chefs who become famous for and profit
from the cuisine of cultures that are not their own. The Post
asserts that these accused chefs aren’t harming anyone’s
culture by disseminating facets of it—in fact, they’re more
ambassadors of the culture they’ve chosen to represent than
anything else.
1079

Like those chefs, the best part of my food career has only
ever been sharing—sharing the labors of our Test Kitchen
with colleagues and friends, the knowledge of the
extraordinary chefs we work with and the little secrets that
will help nervous home cooks become confident culinary
enthusiasts. As a result, I’m having trouble even interpreting
the term “ cultural appropriation” with regards to food.
Actually, that’s an understatement: I don’t understand the
cultural appropriation of food at all. Case in point: I had a
freaking sushi doughnut the other day and wasn’t mad at it.
Sushi. Doughnut. (Sushi McDoughnut?)
disseminate
spread.
cultural appropriation (sometimes cultural misappropriation)
the use of elements of a minority culture—clothing, foodways, music, etc.—by the
majority culture, often to the benefit of members of the majority culture and
denigration of the source culture. To appropriate something is to borrow and use it
without permission.

1080

One of the white burrito makers accused of appropriation

It’s easy to say “cultural appropriation” the same way it’s
easy to say “racist” or “ignorant.” It feels good to say
“cultural appropriation”—it rolls off the tongue nicely,
sounds intellectual and all of a sudden you’re on the road to
moral superiority. The moment you get the opportunity, you
need people to know that you’ve cultivated and discerned
yourself, and you’re not like those meat-and-potatoes people
at all, so don’t associate you with those people! . . . Except
we’re not, nobody is.
I’d venture to say that this many years into the age of pop
food media and recipe-sharing, no food belongs to anyone
anymore. I for one refuse to fight about food or believe
anything edible belongs to me or either of my cultures (I’m
bi-racial). Not when our school lunches are fashioned from

1081

ketchup and breadcrumbs, a few corporations pay millions
to lobbyists to keep their monopolies legal and massproduce the majority of our food, and one in six Americans
is food-insecure. So in an earnest attempt to help unify the
food media community and its consumers, I’d like to share
some instances that could be conceivably viewed as cultural
appropriation of food, but aren’t.
Ahem!
My mother, a professional Indian chef and certified white
blonde Jewish lady from Long Island, learned the endless
complexities of South Asian food by immersing herself in
residential kitchens around India, where my dad is from
(often to the utter perplexity of the cooks, none of whom
spoke English). She learned some of her best-loved dishes
from my uncle’s mother, who is Indian, via Pakistan, via
Afghanistan.
Speaking of my mother, I ended up hanging out in-utero for
more than a week longer than anticipated. To get things
moving, my mom sought a fiery solution from a family
friend who is a fifth-degree karate black belt of Jamaican
and Chinese heritage. No, he didn’t roundhouse kick me out
of her; but he did promise that his extra-spicy goat curry
recipe would shake me loose in no time flat. I was born later
that evening. I told that story to a week-overdue pregnant
friend who’s been doggedly learning to make authentic

1082

Yorkshire pudding for her British husband.
Yorkshire pudding
a traditional English accompaniment to roast beef made of eggs, flour, milk or water,
and often drippings from the meat. It much more resembles a popover, or puffy
pastry, than anything Americans refer to as pudding.

Our lead recipe developer Paul Harrison makes phenomenal
Mexican food, having worked as a prep cook for years in a
small Michoacán restaurant in the Los Angeles area.
Where’s Michoacán, you ask? Ask him, he’s done the
research and grunt work, soaked the chilis, blended up the
salsas and marinades, churned out thousands of tortillas,
fed the staff and spoken the Spanish.
My fiancé was
formerly married
to a Japanese
woman. As a result,
he makes the
okonomiyaki in
our house, grating
slippery mountain
yams by hand

Okonomiyaki

(which any
Japanese person will tell you is a labor of love and source of
itchy red hand sores). I was formerly married to a Swedish
guy, via Iraq. As a result, I make the biryani in our house.
That’s a win-win, right there, a house with killer
okonomiyaki and biryani. Come over for dinner any time!
1083

okonomiyaki
savory Japanese pancake made of flour, grated yams, water or stock, shredded
cabbage, and other ingredients.
biryani
South Asian main dish made of rice, spices, and meat.

The best Korean taco I’ve ever had was in Korea.
The best Chinese food I’ve ever had was not in China, but in
India.
The best Indian food I’ve ever had was not in India, but
Singapore.
The best Singapore chow mei fun I’ve ever had was not in
Singapore, but in New York.
chow mei fun
Southern Chinese dish made of pan-fried rice noodles, meat, vegetables, and spices,
including curry powder.

And the best street hot dog I ever had was not in New York,
but in Amsterdam. There may have been some contributing
factors involved, but it certainly speaks to the point that
these assertions are all subjective and relative anyway.
None of these examples ever agitated feelings of theft, fraud
or any of the sentiments behind public outcries of cultural
appropriation, and all come back to my original idea of
sharing as a kind of protective status. While profiting off the
longstanding craft honed by another culture might sound
1084

like a convenient livelihood, it’s not like most chefs are
making enough money to leave their kitchens for cookbook
tours. Working hard for the purpose of nourishing minds
and bodies has to be exempt from negativity, doesn’t it? We
can’t exactly share some white dude’s Chinese tattoo that
means “perseverance” (hopefully) or his sweaty, molting
feather headdress at a music festival. We can only throw
him side-eye and hope he gets with it at some point. But if
he decided to devote his time to learning how to make killer
pao de queijo from his Brazilian girlfriend’s grandmother
and start a food truck, called, I dunno, “Pao Pao Pao!” I’d
have nothing but admiration.
side-eye
a glance out of the side of one’s eyes, often expressing disapproval, scorn, or
contempt.
pao de queijo
Brazilian “cheese bread” (literally, in Portuguese). This popular snack is less a
traditional bread than a cheese puff made from tapioca or cassava flour, eggs, milk,
oil, and grated cheese.

That said, if we still need to decide whether this chef or that
individual is guilty of what sounds more and more like the
largely fabricated charge of cultural food appropriation, let’s
apply some more reasonable criteria than “Is it authentic?”
One: has this person learned the recipes and techniques
from a primary source out of a passion for cooking? Two: is
this person diluting the potency of the source itself or
willfully diverting diners away from a primary source? And
1085

finally: what precisely would be accomplished by bringing
up this facet of “call-out culture” after all is said and done
and the dishes are washed? Of all the issues the greater food
community has been tasked with solving, is a white chef’s
(delicious, mind you) ethnic food honestly worth a headline?
Including this one?
RESPOND ●

1. What does Kapadia understand the term cultural
appropriation to mean, specifically with regard to foods
associated with particular ethnic or cultural groups? Why
does she reject such a notion in this context? Do you agree
or disagree with her stance? Why or why not?
2. Make a quick list of the arguments or evidence Kapadia
makes to support her position. What sorts of evidence does
she offer? How convincing do you find it? Kapadia relies
largely on the trope of copia (Latin for abundance) in
supporting her thesis—that is, she piles up many examples
of a very similar kind. (For more on tropes, see Chapter 13.)
What are the advantages and disadvantages of such a
rhetorical strategy?
3. In what ways does Kapadia rely on ethical appeals as part
of her argument, specifically in terms of the evidence she
provides and which you listed in response to Question 2?
For example, to what extent does she seek to boost the
strength of her evidence by citing personal examples or
those from people she knows? Is it relevant that Paul
Harrison (paragraph 8) has “spoken the Spanish”? Why or
why not? Should it be? What sorts of hypothetical examples

1086

does she cite? How convincing are they?
4. THINKING CRITICALLY Kapadia obviously believes there are
instances in which cultural appropriation is, in fact,
inappropriate, as indicted when she writes, “We can’t
exactly share some white dude’s Chinese tattoo that means
‘perseverance’ (hopefully) or his sweaty, molting feather
headdress at a music festival. We can only throw him sideeye and hope he gets with it at some point” (paragraph 15).
What distinction is Kapadia making between the examples
of a “white dude” having certain tattoos from a language
he (presumably) does not know or wearing a feather
headdress from an indigenous group he (again,
presumably) is not part of and claims made about the
appropriation of foodways? Considering Kapadia’s
argument as an evaluative argument, what appears to be
the criterion or criteria for claiming that the notion of
cultural appropriation makes no sense with respect to
foodways?
5. A careful reading of Kapadia’s argument demonstrates,
first, that she believes that cultural appropriation can occur
and, second, that it doesn’t make sense to apply that
notion to foodways, even of cultures one is not a part of. At
the same time, her examples fall into those categories that
are limited to one’s private life—who makes the biryani and
who makes the okonomiyaki—and those involving
commercial ventures, where someone is seeking to make a
profit from knowledge, however obtained, of a culture of
which they are not a part. Write an evaluative essay in
which you agree or disagree with Kapadia’s stance, dealing
explicitly with these two categories of examples. Are these
two categories of situations the same—or should they be—

1087

or they clearly distinct? If they are the same in your eyes, on
the basis of what criteria do make such a claim, or if they
are distinct, where do you draw the line and why? (See
Chapter 10 on evaluative arguments.)

1088

Briahna Joy Gray is a contributing editor for the bimonthly
magazine Current Affairs: A Magazine of Politics and Culture,
where this selection first appeared in print in September
2017. Gray also co-hosts the podcast SWOTI (Someone’s
Wrong on the Internet). Here, Gray examines the current
debate about the appropriation of foodways by
contextualizing it as part of larger ongoing debates about
cultural appropriation in areas like music and art. As you
read this selection, consider how Gray is, in fact, seeking to
construct a definitional argument that ultimately redefines
how we think about cultural appropriation.
The Question of Cultural Appropriation
BRIAHNA JOY GRAY

Big Mama Thornton

1089

The trouble with Elvis’s version of “Hound Dog” is not that it is
bad. It’s that it doesn’t make any goddamn sense. Big Mama
Thornton’s original 1952 version of the song is sleazy and
defiant. In a bluesy growl, she tells off the low-down guy who
keeps “snooping round her door.” It’s a declaration of
independence by a woman who is sick and tired of having a
“hound dog” of a man take her for granted. The lyrics are full of
dirty double-entendres: “You can wag your tail, but I ain’t gonna
feed you no more.” In Elvis’s version, sanitized for a pop
audience, the line is changed to “You ain’t never caught a
rabbit, and you ain’t no friend of mine.” Drained of its original
meaning, the song seemingly becomes about . . . an actual dog.
Yet Elvis’s version of “Hound Dog” sold 10 million copies and
became his single best-selling song. It’s ranked #19 on Rolling
Stone’s list of the 500 Greatest Songs of All Time.
Elvis Presley (1935–1977)
American singer, actor, and sex symbol, often referred to as the “King of Rock and Roll,”
who sang in a range of genres, including rock and roll, country, blues, and gospel.
Willie Mae “Big Mama” Thornton (1926–1984)
American rhythm-and-blues singer whose style was influenced by the African American
gospel music she heard as a child.

The term “cultural appropriation,” a pejorative used to criticize
certain types of ostensibly illegitimate borrowing from other
people’s cultures, gets a lot of people into a lot of arguments.
That’s especially true now that it is used to describe an everwidening set of acts. What constituted “cultural appropriation”
might once have been relatively clear: if you wore a ceremonial
1090

Native American headdress without actually being a Native
American performing a ceremony, you were disrespectfully
appropriating a culture that was not your own. But nowadays,
the notion can be far more expansive in its scope. “Cultural
appropriation” has been taken to mean that only blacks are
entitled to create art about black historical figures: white artist
Dana Schutz was boycotted and protested after displaying a
painting of Emmett Till’s body, on the theory that black
suffering was not a fit subject matter for nonblack painters. It’s
also infamously been invoked to suggest there’s something
wrong with people making foods from cultures other than their
own.
Emmett Till (1941–1955)
Chicago-born African American teenager who was lynched by local white men while
visiting relatives in Mississippi. When his body was returned home, his mother insisted on
an open-casket funeral, permitting everyone to see the violence her son had endured. The
widespread publication of images of Till in the coffin galvanized black communities across
the country and helped convince many white Americans of the need to address African
Americans’ lack of civil rights nationwide.

1091

Elvis Presley

Emmett Till

1092

Open Casket, by Dana Schutz

If the definition of “appropriation” had stayed narrow, it would
be easy enough to defend. It’s obvious why it’s insulting and
upsetting for a white person to casually sport a feathered
headdress: they are items of deep symbolic meaning to the
people who originated them, bestowed in recognition of great
achievements. Treating them like party hats cheapens and
dishonors them, and slights those people who have the same
feelings about their tribal regalia that military members have
about the sanctity of medals and uniforms. If “don’t culturally
appropriate” just means “don’t treat things that are sacred to
other people with ignorance and mockery,” critics of the
concept could easily be dismissed. The demand to be permitted
to appropriate would simply be the demand to be able to act like
a jackass without social consequence, and if there is one thing
jackasses inarguably deserve, it is social consequences.
1093

But as the “appropriation” concept has been used to object to
many formerly innocuous forms of cultural mixing, certain
criticisms of the term become increasingly credible. The more
things are stuffed under the “cultural appropriation” tent, the
more legitimate the concern that it may put limits on creativity,
cultural exchange, and innovation. If taken to its logical
extreme, critics of the concept delight in pointing out, the
consequences would be outlandish: only Asians could use
chopsticks and only Italians could play the violin. (And
apparently, as one man deeply ignorant in the history of science
urged on Twitter, only whites could use “technology.”)
It should be obvious that there is no such thing as a “pure”
culture. Any “technology” the oblivious tweeter might have had
in mind relies on a numerical system invented by Arabs. We
wear textiles from central Asia; we eat “Italian” pasta brought to
Europe from China in the 13th century; and we developed our
earliest legal framework from East Africans. (And that “Italian”
violin is a Persian derivative.) So many of humankind’s most
exciting achievements result from centuries of crosspollination, and if the term cultural appropriation is to have any
meaning, it can’t simply function to condemn the very
exchange of ideas on which all progress depends.
“Appropriation” also suffers from an inherent theoretical
difficulty: it depends on having a clear notion of cultural
“ownership.” The term tends to be defined as “the adoption or
use of the elements of one culture by members of another

1094

culture”—often with the added proviso “without permission.”
But how can a cultural group give “permission” to take or use a
cultural product? It’s not as if each ethnic group has a council or
bureaucratic agency that processes requests for cultural
exchange like ASCAP licenses music. Anyone claiming to give
“permission” is adopting authority they do not have; after all,
what happens if other members of the culture disagree? Do we
put it to a majority vote? Once we accept the core idea of
“cultural appropriation,” that there is a coherent concept of
cultural “ownership” that operates the way other forms of
property rights do, all kinds of impossible questions are raised.
These go beyond the usual “Can white men sing the blues?” (to
which the answer remains, as always, “Yes, but usually not
well.”) What do we do, for example, about New Orleans’ Mardi
Gras Indians, who are black rather than Native American, but
who wear elaborate feathered garb including—yes—
headdresses and adopt tribal names? The Mardi Gras Indian
tradition is meant to honor Native Americans, but it certainly
never received “permission” from the U.S.’s indigenous
population. If we accept the notions of ownership underlying
“appropriation” analysis, we seem destined for either absurd
logical extremes or arbitrary line-drawing.
ASCAP
American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers, an organization that protects
members’ copyrights by collecting licensing fees for performances that are then
distributed as royalties to its members for their intellectual property.

1095

Mardi Gras Indians

And yet: discarding the concept entirely also seems like a
mistake. Certain patterns of cultural exchange do seem to entail
a kind of “theft,” and in considering whether cultural
appropriation is a helpful idea, we should be careful not to
throw a useful analytical baby out with its muddy conceptual
bathwater, so to speak. A “property rights” framework doesn’t
actually fit culture very well. Its boundaries are too amorphous,
its creation too much a collective enterprise, for us to be able to
divide up rights of proprietorship like parcels of land. But if we
abandon the “appropriation” idea altogether, it becomes hard to
describe what feels wrong about the misuse of tribal artifacts or
the commercialization of artistic works made by marginalized

1096

groups.
property rights framework
here, a metaphor—that of the rights accruing to the owner of property of whatever kind—
in contrast to other possible metaphors for thinking about questions that fall under the
broad umbrella of questions of cultural appropriation.

So I’d like to propose what I believe to be a better approach than
“cultural appropriation” for understanding problems with using
other people’s culture. I think when we talk about
appropriation, we’re really talking about two separate issues:
first, an issue of cultural exploitation, and second, an issue of
cultural disrespect.
One core issue that the “appropriation” idea tries to get at is
economic exploitation. In an economic landscape where some
groups get rewarded disproportionately to others, the people
who make the culture are often not the ones who see the
rewards from it; i.e., the problem is not that white men play the
blues, it’s that white men who have played the blues have gotten
rich from it, while the black people who invented the blues
stayed poor. ( Led Zeppelin, for instance, notoriously didn’t
even give credit to the Delta bluesmen who had written their
songs, thereby depriving them of both royalties and public
recognition.) Non-white cultural products have often been
repackaged for white audiences, reaping tremendous profits,
none of which accrue to those who actually originated the
culture.
Led Zeppelin

1097

British band active from 1968 to1980 (along with several reunion tours) and known for
hard rock, blues rock, folk rock, and heavy metal.

Led Zeppelin

That brings us back to Elvis, Big Mama Thornton, and “Hound
Dog.” The issue there isn’t that Elvis shouldn’t sing “Hound
Dog.” It’s that when Elvis sang Hound Dog, it made him rich and
he became “The King,” while when Thornton sang what is—let’s
be honest—an objectively better version of the song, she didn’t
become a world-famous megastar. Elvis’s early records, the
ones that made his name, are filled with covers of songs by
black artists (“That’s All Right,” “Mystery Train,” “Milkcow
Blues,” etc.), but the life stories of early 20th-century black
musicians are stories of poverty and exploitation by a predatory
music industry that lifted their sounds and left them with
nothing. The trouble isn’t that Elvis sang the songs but that he
did so in a viciously racist economic landscape that didn’t

1098

reward black cultural innovation with black economic success.
Using cultural “ownership” doesn’t help us here—after all,
“Hound Dog” was written by white songwriters, albeit
specifically for Thornton, who added her own improvisations.
But it’s still obvious we’re dealing with a racially unequal music
industry.
Interestingly, it was the story of Elvis Presley that writer Kenan
Malik recently used in order to argue that cultural
appropriation is a good and necessary thing. Malik
acknowledges that Elvis’s success ended up overshadowing the
contributions of black rock ’n’ roll innovator Chuck Berry: “In
the 1950s, white radio stations refused to play [Berry’s] songs,
categorizing them as ‘race music.’ Then came Elvis Presley. A
white boy playing the same tunes was cool. Elvis was feted, Mr.
Berry and other black pioneers largely ignored. Racism defined
who became the cultural icon.”
Kenan Malik (1960– )
Indian-born British writer, trained as a scientist, who often writes on questions of race,
religion, and multiculturalism.

1099

Chuck Berry

But, Malik says, “imagine that Elvis had been prevented from
appropriating so-called black music. Would that have
challenged racism, or eradicated Jim Crow laws? Clearly not. It
took a social struggle—the civil rights movement—to bring
about change.” Now, let’s for a moment set aside the irrelevant
rhetorical question, which is oddly reminiscent of Hillary
Clinton’s similarly disingenuous “If we broke up the big banks
tomorrow, would that end racism?” (The answer to both is the
same: no, but the fact that something doesn’t in and of itself
“end racism” doesn’t mean it shouldn’t be done.) Malik believes
that cultural appropriation is good because it gave us Elvis, even
if that meant the eclipse of Chuck Berry, and even if that eclipse
1100

occurred for obviously racist reasons, i.e., because a white
public wanted to have black songs performed by white artists.

A protest against Jim Crow laws

Here we see why it’s more helpful to look at things in terms of
economic exploitation rather than ownership: it takes the focus
off whether Elvis was entitled to sing, and instead looks at why
Elvis had the economic success he did. Malik is right that strict
notions of cultural ownership would stifle innovation, but he
doesn’t follow through the implications of the Presley/Berry
problem: we’re talking about a system of cultural production in
which people of color produce certain sounds, which are then
taken and imitated for profit. In some cases, this was even more
blatant: in the ’50s, white pop singer Pat Boone was hired to
produce wholesome, advertiser-friendly versions of black R&B
1101

songs like Little Richard’s “Tutti Frutti.” As Richard said:
Pat Boone (1934– )
American singer, composer, and TV personality popular in the 1950s and early 1960s; his
success was second only to that of Elvis Presley during the time.
Little Richard (1932– )
the stage name of Richard Wayne Penniman, an American singer, songwriter, and actor,
whose music and performance style profoundly influenced rhythm and blues, rock and
roll, and soul music.

“They didn’t want me
to be in the white guys’
way. . . . I felt I was
pushed into a rhythm
and blues corner to
keep out of rockers’
way, because that’s
where the money is.
When ‘Tutti Frutti’
came out, . . . they
needed a rock star to
block me out of white

Pat Boone

homes because I was a
hero to white kids. The white kids would have Pat Boone upon
the dresser and me in the drawer ’cause they liked my version
better, but the families didn’t want me because of the image
that I was projecting.”

1102

Little Richard

To frame the Elvis question as Malik does, then, is akin to
asking “Well, shouldn’t Pat Boone be allowed to cover Little
Richard songs?” It misses the whole point: it’s not that black
songs should never be sung by white people, it is that there has
been a long history of people pushing black creators to the
margins while making millions of dollars off their work. If the
music business hadn’t been riddled with racism, and if the
measure of financial success was “whether a person (of any
race) had created something original and good” rather than
“whether a white person could copy and repackage an unknown
black song for a white audience more concerned with color
than content,” there would be no injustice. Music is inherently
appropriative. It thrives on creative allusions, sampling, and
embellishing the groundwork laid by earlier artists. I embrace
1103

that: after all, I’m a woman who grew up with—and still prefers
— Aretha Franklin’s version of “Eleanor Rigby,” and I didn’t
realize the song was a Beatles original until adulthood.
However, “borrowing” becomes a problem when a piece of art
is given preferential treatment because of preexisting racial
hierarchies of value—causing the work of people of color to be
devalued, and artists to be undercompensated for their
innovation.
Aretha Franklin (1942– )
American singer and songwriter, often referred to as “The Queen of Soul.”

Aretha Franklin

The “exploitation” instead of “appropriation” perspective also

1104

helps clear up some of the issues surrounding food. When two
white women shut down their Portland burrito truck after
being accused of culturally appropriating Mexican food, the
incident was used as an indictment of the absurdity of the
appropriation concept. Once you have a racial test for whether
someone can vend burritos, you might need to rethink your
theory. Yet from an economic perspective, there is a problem
with elite white yuppies opening an artisanal burrito truck:
because there are massive racial wealth disparities in the
United States, white people are disproportionately endowed
with the capital that will allow them to open successful Mexican
food restaurants; we can end up with a world full of Mexican
restaurants where food is made by Mexican workers but the
profits accrue to white owners. Just as with music, the problem
is not that a TV chef like Rick Bayless makes Mexican food, it’s
that Rick Bayless makes millions of dollars making Mexican
food while Mexican people bus tables in his restaurants. Public
prejudice and an unequal economy make Bayless
disproportionately more able to capitalize on Mexican cuisine
than a working-class Mexican immigrant would be.
“When two white women shut down their Portland burrito truck”
Here is a quotation from one of the two women who opened the truck to the interviewer
from the Willamette Week <http://bit.ly/2rfFSQ5>, which broke the story that became the
basis for the debate:
“I picked the brains of every tortilla lady there in the worst broken Spanish ever, and
they showed me a little of what they did,” Connelly says. “They told us the basic
ingredients, and we saw them moving and stretching the dough similar to how pizza
makers do before rolling it out with rolling pins. They wouldn’t tell us too much about
technique, but we were peeking into the windows of every kitchen, totally fascinated

1105

by how easy they made it look. We learned quickly it isn’t quite that easy.”
Thus, the original debate was not simply about who might “own” foodways but how those
with knowledge of foodways get it as well.
Rick Bayless (1953– )
American chef, restaurateur, cookbook author, and media personality whose specialty is
contemporary Mexican cuisine. As an undergraduate, he studied Spanish and Latin
American culture and did doctoral work in linguistic anthropology. He lived in Mexico for
six years in the 1980s while working on his first cookbook.

Rick Bayless

Across every cultural field, there are examples of white people
receiving opportunities to benefit economically from a cultural
product originating with people of color. Compare, for
example, the fate of Kayla Newman, the young black woman
who coined the term “on fleek,” with Danielle Bregoli, the
young white woman who famously used urban slang on the Dr.
Phil show (“ cash me outside howbow dah”). Bregoli now
1106

commands appearance fees of $30,000 per event, while
Newman is struggling to crowdfund a cosmetic line.
cash me outside howbow dah
phrase the 13-year-old Bregoli used to challenge the show’s audience to a fight, “Catch me
outside, how about that?”

Not only is there a difference in remuneration, but non-white
cultural products are often considered more valuable or
esteemed when performed by whites. The “ race records” made
by black R&B musicians were considered “jungle music,” while
the white covers were innocuous “pop.” We can even see it in
hairstyles, too. Those associated with black Americans, like
cornrows, are seen to reflect lower-class status, ugliness, and
even criminality, until they are adopted by particular celebrities
like Kim Kardashian or Katy Perry, at which point they are
rebranded and called “new.” Contrast the New York Post’s
breathless treatment of the “new” style they termed “Boxer
Braids”—e.g., cornrows or French plaits—with Fashion Police’s
Giuliana Rancic’s critique of young half-black actress Zendaya’s
locs as “probably” smelling “like patchouli or weed.” That
difference in perception can have real-world consequences: a
black 12-year-old was recently threatened with expulsion for
refusing to cut her natural afro-textured hair, and just this past
May, two black students at a charter school in Malden,
Massachusetts, faced detention and suspension for wearing
their hair in braids. And until this year, the military prohibited
locks, two-strand twists, and other natural (read black)
hairstyles, essentially requiring that black women either shave
1107

our heads or chemically straighten our hair to serve our
country. (It’s also easier to dehumanize people when their
cultural contributions are erased. When a people is depicted as
“savage,” their lives can be disregarded. When one conceives of
the Middle East as tribal and backward—rather than as the
wellspring of mathematics and the violin, it seems more natural
to bomb its countries; Baghdad is simply a “war zone” where
violent death is normal rather than a great centuries-old
cultural center.)
race records
78 rpm records featuring black artists performing genres of music and comedy popular in
the African American community, including jazz, gospel, and blues, and marketed to that
community from the 1920s until the 1940s.
locs
shortened or clipped form of dreadlocks, which has negative connotations in some
contexts.

1108

Zendaya

Exploitation analysis may be more helpful than appropriation
in understanding why certain kinds of cultural lifting feel
unjust. But it doesn’t get at the entirety of the issue: we still have
cases in which nobody is necessarily profiting, but where it
feels as if a particular culture is being misused—e.g., the
headdress scenario. It may be best, then, to combine an
objection to cultural exploitation with an objection to cultural
disrespect, meaning acts which flatten or diminish the original
meaning or value of the cultural product. If Native American
objects hold particular spiritual and cultural meaning, using
them purely for their aesthetic value implies a lack of interest in
1109

or empathy for the values of those who create the objects. That
would apply equally well to those who intentionally used
Christian religious objects without caring how Christians felt,
but in the case of Native Americans, it is literally an insult
added to an injury, given the country’s viciously genocidal
history.
“Cultural disrespect” also helps us appreciate good kinds of
borrowing. When a person truly tries to study and pay tribute to
a different culture, their use of it becomes less objectionable.
The most cringeworthy white blues is played by those who least
understand it, but when people have truly immersed
themselves in another culture and done their research, the
results can be moving. So Mardi Gras Indians are fine: they are
honoring a culture rather than simply cheaply replicating it.
And Rick Bayless can have a serious cultural exploitation
problem without necessarily having a cultural disrespect
problem, if his understanding of Mexican cuisines is deep and
genuine.
Like Kenan Malik, I am uncomfortable with the possibility that
a certain brand of cultural appropriation critique might inhibit
artistic creativity. The idea that only black artists have the right
to address Emmett Till’s murder through art seems wrong. The
question should never be: “Who is allowed to express their
feelings about the racially motivated murder of a child?” After
all, when Till’s mother chose to keep his casket open to show
his brutally beaten body to the press, she was doing so in order

1110

that white America could understand its own brutality. Blacks
already knew what she was showing them, but she wanted to
awaken whites’ humanity and provoke a white response. Critics
of Dana Schutz’s Till painting said that “the subject matter is not
Schutz’s,” but this seems wrong: the subject of Till’s death is
important to humanity writ large, and it should move us all to
the point where we express our feelings, whether through art or
otherwise. (There is, of course, a separate question about
whether the work was in good taste or succeeded artistically.)
Yet there was another sense, the “exploitation” sense, in which
the critics of Schutz have a point. Depicting Till is not a
problem, but using Till to garner profit and acclaim would be.
There are also serious questions about differing access to
museum space and artistic recognition: it’s both fair and
important to point out the ways in which certain people are
given a platform to tell black stories while others aren’t.
It was this dimension that novelist Lionel Shriver missed in her
infamous “sombrero speech” at the Brisbane Writers Festival.
Shriver, indignant at criticisms faced by white authors who
write from the perspective of non-white characters, said that
fiction was about “trying on other people’s hats” and writers
should be allowed to depict lives different from their own. (She
did not exactly help win over her critics by choosing to illustrate
the point by wearing a colorful sombrero.) Shriver cited the
example of Chris Cleave’s Little Bee, which is written from the
perspective of a 14-year-old Nigerian girl even though Cleave

1111

himself is white, male, and British. Shriver suggested that the
“hypersensitive” left was cramping the authorial imagination,
by prohibiting writers from exploring the perspectives of many
different kinds of characters.

Lionel Shriver

What Shriver ignored was the exploitation question. Chris
Cleave, if his portrayal is rich and well-researched, may
produce a novel that isn’t disrespectful toward Nigerians. Yet
it’s still bizarre and unfair that the people who write bestselling
books about the lives of Nigerian girls aren’t . . . Nigerian girls.
An author is welcome to use whatever source material produces

1112

the best art. But when we talk about cultural exploitation we’re
not just talking about “writing” as a pastime. We’re talking
about the publishing industry, where people make money from
writing, and in that context it’s fair to raise the question of
whether packaging and selling the richness of African life,
without Africa receiving any benefit, is exploitative. The goal is
not to stop white people from writing about black lives, but to
stop a racist economy from remunerating the white people who
write about the lives rather than the black people who live
them.
Once we clearly understand what the actual problems are, it’s
easy to see how free cultural exchange can occur without
creating injustice. The problems are largely those of economics
and respect, and if we evaluate cultural borrowing by these
measures, we can get rid of the racism without getting rid of the
borrowing itself. A few simple questions can help us think
about specific cases: (1) Is there a historic record of exploitation
between the appropriator and the originating group? (2) Is the
originating group and its culture being celebrated, appreciated,
and respected, or are they being degraded, mocked, and
accessorized? (There’s a difference between Eminem’s genuine
relationship to the environment of 8 Mile Road and his
immersion in Detroit hip hop and, say, a person wearing a
tacky, cruelly stereotypical, and cartoonish Mexican Halloween
costume.) (3) Is the appropriator actually claiming to be the
owner or innovator, or allowing the media to create a false
origin narrative? (E.g., Elvis as the “King” or Miley Cyrus’s
1113

“invention” of twerking.) (4) Is differential economic
enrichment occurring? Is the cultural product more valuable in
the hands of the appropriator, and does that have wider
financial or political consequences for certain groups?
false origin narrative
a story that misrepresents the historical origin of a practice or object to the benefit of the
one(s) creating the narrative and the detriment of the individual or group that created the
practice or object.

Both the concept of cultural appropriation and the backlash to it
are, to use a popular term, “problematic.” Rigid ideas of cultural
ownership would lead us to absurdity, but profiteering and
cultural disrespect are important to recognize. If we embrace a
strict prohibition on borrowing, as Kenan Malik says, we
wouldn’t get Elvis Presley. But if we don’t recognize how racial
inequities structure the success of different cultural products,
we might lapse into an even worse fate: listening to Elvis’s
version of “Hound Dog” rather than Big Mama Thornton’s.
RESPOND ●

1. Gray obviously relies on a series of definitions, specifically of
the terms cultural exploitation, exploitation, and cultural
disrespect. How does she define each? What sort(s) of definition
does she offer for each? How effective are these definitions in
clarifying for readers her understanding of these concepts and
distinguishing among them? How do they contribute to her
argument? (See Chapter 9 for a discussion of kinds of
definitions.)
2. Ultimately, Gray uses these definitions to offer a set of

1114

questions—criteria—that can be used as the basis of an
evaluative argument about whether cultural exchange is
occurring “without creating injustice.” Do her criteria follow
directly from her definitions of exploitation and cultural
disrespect? Why or why not? Do you find her criteria useful in
thinking about this set of issues? Why or why not? (See Chapter
10 on evaluative arguments, including criteria of evaluation.)
3. How do Gray’s criteria for evaluation compare with those given
by Jess Kapadia in the previous selection, “I Still Don’t
Understand the Cultural Appropriation of Food”? Given their
criteria and examples, how do you think each might respond to
the quotation given above in the gloss for “When two white
women shut down their Portland burrito truck”? Why?
4. THINKING CRITICALLY In what ways does Gray’s argument
complicate Kapadia’s argument in the previous selection, “I
Still Don’t Understand the Cultural Appropriation of Food”?
That is, how does Gray seek to demonstrate that the issues may
be larger than food alone and the ability of prepare it, whether
for one’s own consumption or as a commercial venture? Which
aspects of each argument do you find most compelling? Least
compelling? Why?
5. As noted about this selection and the previous one by Kapadia,
these Internet texts are part of ongoing conversations. Gray is,
in some ways, in conversation with Kenan Malik, whose original
comments <http://nyti.ms/2sB1OpJ> and response to Gray
<http://bit.ly/2C0HfUk> are readily available. Read this trio of
pieces—Malik’s original observations, Grey’s response, and
Malik’s response to Gray—and write an evaluative argument
in which you evaluate the arguments supporting and criticizing
what is generally referred to as cultural appropriation with a
focus on foodways while acknowledging that examples from

1115

other cultural domains may be relevant. (See Chapter 10 on
evaluative arguments, especially the section on developing an
evaluative argument and the guide to writing an evaluation.)

1116

Hunger on Campus: The Challenge of Food Insecurity for
College Students is a 2016 research report written by James
Dubick, Brandon Mathews, and Clare Cady. James Dubick is
Director at the National Student Campaign Against Hunger
and Homelessness (NSCAHH), while Brandon Mathews is the
Associate Director of the College and University Food Bank
Alliance (CUFBA). Clare Cady is codirector and cofounder of
CUFBA. The report was a project of four organizations:
CUFBA, NSCAHH, the Student Government Resource Center,
and the Student Public Interest Research Groups. Gathering
data from thirty-four campuses representing a range of
colleges and universities across the nation, the study seeks to
document the extent and consequences of food insecurity
among students. Although, as explained, the results are not
generalizable to the population of college and university
students as a whole, they are indicative of sorts of problems
many U.S. undergraduates face with respect to food
insecurity. The original report also examined housing
insecurity, but the excerpt presented here includes only those
parts focusing on food insecurity. Likewise, we have not
reprinted the appendices on methodology or resources for
food-insecure students. The entire report is available at
http://bit.ly/2jrwMJk. As you read the selection, consider how
aware you are of issues related to food insecurity on your own
campus or in the area where you live.
Hunger on Campus: The Challenge of Food Insecurity for College
Students
1117

JAMES DUBICK, BRANDON MATHEWS, CLARE CADY

FOOD INSECURITY IS COMMON AMONG COLLEGE STUDENTS
The most recent data indicate that 14 percent of U.S.
households experience some form of food insecurity each
year.1 No comprehensive national research has been conducted
to firmly establish the prevalence of food insecurity among
college students, but available literature suggests that the rate
of food insecurity among college students is up to four times
greater than the national average.2
Local studies performed at individual colleges and university
systems in recent years have documented extensive food
insecurity among college students at those institutions.
The Wisconsin HOPE Lab, a leading research lab at the
University of Wisconsin that aims to increase college
attainment, studied Wisconsin Pell Grant recipients in 2008
and 2009 and found that 71 percent of Pell recipients
reported changing their eating habits due to lack of funds;
27 percent said that were eating less than they should or
cutting meal sizes; and 7 percent of two-year college
students reported going an entire day without food.3
A 2011 study done at the City University of New York
(CUNY) system found that 39 percent of respondents were
food insecure.4
A 2014 study found that 59 percent of students at Western
Oregon University had experienced food insecurity at some

1118

point over the span of a year.5
A 2015 study by the Wisconsin HOPE Lab surveyed students
at 10 community colleges and found that 19 percent of
students were experiencing low food security and 20
percent were experiencing very low food security.6
A separate 2015 study by the Wisconsin HOPE Lab surveyed
low- and moderate-income students at 10 Wisconsin
colleges and universities and found that 61 percent were
food insecure at some point during the school year.7
In July 2016, the University of California published the
results of a survey conducted across their 10-campus
system. They found that 23 percent of students were
experiencing low food security and another 19 percent
were experiencing very low food security.8
Also in 2016, a study at California State University, Long
Beach found that 24 percent of students were in some way
food insecure.9
Pell Grant
a form of financial aid provided by the United States government for undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. Unlike loans, Pell Grants generally do not need to be repaid.

Currently, one of the challenges in interpreting these studies is
the variation in the way food insecurity was measured from
study to study. While the literature does not provide a clear
overall picture of the prevalence of student food insecurity, it
plainly indicates that food insecurity affects many U.S. college
students.

1119

SURVEY OF FOOD INSECURITY ON THIRTY-FOUR CAMPUSES
To better understand the extent and consequences of food
insecurity for college students, four organizations—the College
and University Food Bank Alliance, the National Student
Campaign Against Hunger and Homelessness, the Student
Government Resource Center, and the Student Public Interest
Research Groups — surveyed college students at 34 community
colleges and four-year colleges in 12 states.

HOW FOOD INSECURITY WAS EVALUATED
Staff and volunteers of the organizations used face-to-face
outreach to collect 3,765 surveys from March through May 2016.
At most schools, this was done by setting up an information
table and asking students to stop and fill out a survey on food
issues. At schools where this approach was not an option,
1120

students handed out leaflets with the survey website in
classrooms.
The participating schools included 8 community colleges and 26
four-year colleges. The collected surveys represent roughly 0.5
percent of the student population at the participating schools.
The gender, racial, and ethnic breakdown of survey
respondents closely aligns with students enrolled at these
particular campuses. However, the sample is more heavily
weighted toward younger students and students of color than
the national student population.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture measures food security
along a scale from “high food security” to “very low food
security,” with three categories to indicate levels of food
insecurity.
“Moderate food security” describes households with some
level of concern or challenge in accessing quality food
without significant decreases in quality, variety, or
quantity.
“Low food security” describes households where quality,
variety, and desirability are negatively impacted, but
quantity is not.
“Very low food security” indicates decreases in all areas
(quality, variety, desirability, quantity) as well as disrupted
eating patterns due to inability to access adequate food.10
The survey assessed the food security level of the respondents

1121

using the questions provided in the U.S. Department of
Agriculture’s Adult Food Security Survey Module.11 Based on
their responses to these questions, respondents were given a
score of zero through ten. Their food security status was then
determined based on their score:
Score of zero—High food security
Score of 1–2—Marginal food security
Score of 3–5—Low food security
Score of 6–10—Very low food security
Students with a score of three or more were considered “food
insecure.” Students with a score of six or more were considered
to be “very food insecure” and likely to be suffering from
hunger.

STUDENT FOOD INSECURITY IS WIDESPREAD
Of the respondents, 48 percent qualified as food insecure in the
previous 30 days. That figure includes 22 percent who qualified
as hungry, meaning they experienced very low food security.

TABLE 1: Food Security Level
of Survey Respondents in
Last 30 Days
FOOD SECURITY SCORE
Zero (High food security)

31%

1–2 (Marginal food security)

21%

3–5 (Low food security)

26%

1122

6–10 (Very low food security)

22%

When comparing these findings to existing research on student
food insecurity, the rates of low and very low food security are
in keeping with other studies. However, this report found a
lower than normal percentage of respondents who qualify as
highly food secure, which may suggest that the survey
oversampled students with a tendency toward food insecurity.
In their answers to the survey questions, respondents expressed
significant concern both about their ability to afford food and
their ability to afford nutritious food. . . .

TABLE 2: Responses to Initial Food Security Questions,
Last 30 Days

I worried whether my food would run out before I got

SOMETIMES

OFTEN

TRUE

TRUE

38%

16%

35%

11%

36%

18%

money to buy more.
The food that I bought just didn’t last, and I didn’t
have money to get more.
I couldn’t afford to eat balanced meals.

Respondents who showed signs of food insecurity in these
initial questions were then asked a series of follow-up
questions. Forty-four percent said that they had been forced to
cut back on the size of their meals or skip meals entirely in the
last 30 days due to lack of money, and 35 percent said that they
were hungry but didn’t eat because there wasn’t enough money
1123

for food (see Table 3).

TABLE 3: Responses to Food Security Follow-Up
Questions, Last 30 Days
YES
Did you ever cut the size of your meals or skip meals because there wasn’t

44%

enough money for food?
Did you ever eat less than you felt you should because there wasn’t enough

43%

money for food?
Were you ever hungry but didn’t eat because there wasn’t enough money

35%

for food?
Did you lose weight because there wasn’t enough money for food?

15%

Did you ever not eat for a whole day because there wasn’t enough money

20%

for food?

Note: The sample for these questions was made up of respondents who answered
“sometimes true” or “often true” to one of the initial food security questions listed in
Table 2.

In addition, a significant percentage reported more severe
levels of food insecurity. Twenty percent of these survey-takers
reported having skipped eating for an entire day due to lack of
money in the last 30 days, and 15 percent said that they had lost
weight in the last 30 days because they couldn’t afford to eat.
When the study looked at responses by demographic groups,
the results showed that food insecurity was more prevalent
among the students of color who participated in the survey.
Students who identified as “Hispanic or Latino” or “Black or
1124

African American” were more likely to be food insecure and
much more likely to experience very low food security.
The study also found that 56 percent of first-generation
students were food insecure, compared to 45 percent of
students whose parents did attend college.
first-generation students
students whose parents or guardians did not attend or graduate from college.

TABLE 4: Food Security Levels by Race/Ethnicity and
Parental Education
FOOD SECURITY LEVEL
High

Marginal

Low

Very
Low

RACE/ETHNICITY
White

38%

21%

23%

17%

Asian

34%

22%

28%

17%

Hispanic or Latino

22%

22%

31%

25%

Black or African American

22%

23%

29%

28%

Neither parent attended college

22%

21%

25%

31%

At least one parent attended

34%

22%

26%

19%

PARENTAL EDUCATION

some college

Percentages may not add to 100 due to rounding.

Food insecurity was moderately more prevalent among the

1125

community college students in the study. Twenty-five percent
of community college students qualified as very food insecure,
compared to 20 percent at four-year schools.

TABLE 5: Food Insecurity among All Respondents
at Community Colleges and Four-Year Schools
COMMUNITY COLLEGE

FOUR-YEAR COLLEGE

Food insecure

50%

47%

Very food insecure

25%

20%

The food insecure category includes respondents who had low or very low food
insecurity.

Community colleges serve a wider range of non-traditional
students and are often seen as a more affordable pathway to
higher education, so it’s not surprising that community college
students are more likely to be financially insecure and thus
vulnerable to food insecurity. . . .

FOOD INSECURITY HARMS STUDENTS’ EDUCATION
Food insecurity on college campuses has a negative impact on
the educational experience. It’s hard to concentrate in class or
to focus on your studies when you’re hungry or worrying about
financial obstacles. Whether due to nutritional deficits or the
stress and distraction of dealing with financial hardship,12 food
insecurity can compromise students’ ability to perform well in
their classes.13 In extreme cases, food insecurity can force
1126

students to take time off from school or discontinue their
education entirely.
In one recent survey of food insecure students at the University
of Massachusetts, Boston, 80 percent of respondents reported
that their food insecurity affected their class performance.
More than 55 percent indicated that food insecurity
compromised their ability to attend classes, and four percent
stated that they had to forego college for one or more semesters
due to food or housing insecurity.14
Of the food insecure students surveyed for this report, 32
percent believed that hunger or housing problems had an
impact on their education. When asked about the impact
caused by their hunger and housing problems, 55 percent
reported that these problems caused them to not buy a required
textbook, 53 percent reported missing a class, and 25 percent
reported dropping a class.

TABLE 6: Educational Impact of Food and Housing
Insecurity on Food Insecure Students, Last 12 Months
YES
Have hunger or housing problems had an impact on your education?

32%

HAVE HUNGER OR HOUSING PROBLEMS CAUSED YOU TO DO ANY OF
THE FOLLOWING?*
Done any of the following

86%

Miss a class

53%

Miss a study session

54%

1127

Miss a club meeting

37%

Opt not to join an extracurricular activity

55%

Not buy a required textbook

55%

Drop a class

25%

Not perform as well in your academics as you otherwise could have

81%

*Asked only of students who responded “yes” to the previous question about
educational impact.

FOOD INSECURITY PERSISTS DESPITE STUDENTS’ EFFORTS
Food insecurity is a problem even for students who participate
in a campus meal plan, are employed, or seek other financial or
material help.

STUDENTS WITH CAMPUS MEAL PLANS ARE NOT IMMUNE TO FOOD
INSECURITY
Ideally, participating in a meal plan with a campus dining hall
would eliminate the threat of food insecurity. Responses from
students at four-year universities (community colleges
generally do not have dining programs) show that this is not
necessarily the case. Forty-three percent of students who were
enrolled in a campus meal plan were still food insecure.
To understand this finding, consider the way that campus meal
plans are structured. At most universities, students have several
1128

options for the number of meals to buy as part of their meal
plan. For example, many students choose to buy a plan with 7
or 14 meals per week and then find their remaining meals
someplace else, either because they want to have more variety
in their eating options, they don’t want to pay for a larger meal
plan, or they can’t afford a larger meal plan.15
Fifty-six percent of meal plan enrollees reported eating nine
meals or fewer per week in the dining hall. Not surprisingly,
meal plan enrollees who were food insecure tended to eat less
often in the dining hall—69 percent reported eating nine meals
or fewer there per week. In addition, 46 percent of food
insecure students reported having run out of meal points before
the end of the term at some time in the past, compared to 33
percent of all students on a meal plan.
It seems clear that access to a dining hall meal plan is not
necessarily a cure for food insecurity.

TABLE 7: Food Insecurity among Campus Meal Plan
Enrollees at Four-Year Colleges
MEAL PLAN ENROLLEES AT FOUR-YEAR COLLEGES

YES

Experiencing food insecurity

43%
ALL STUDENTS

FOOD INSECURE

ON MEAL PLAN

STUDENTS ON MEAL
PLAN

Have you ever run out of meal points

33%

before the end of the term?
MEALS EATEN PER WEEK AT DINING HALL

1129

46%

Less than 5 meals

24%

31%

5–9 meals

32%

38%

10–14 meals

30%

22%

15 or more meals

13%

9%

THE MAJORITY OF FOOD INSECURE STUDENTS ARE EMPLOYED
Since financial problems are at the root of most food security
issues, the survey asked food insecure students about their
employment situation.
The study found that 56 percent of food insecure students were
currently employed. Of those employed students, 38 percent
worked 20 hours or more per week.

TABLE 8:
Employment among
Food Insecure
Students
YES
Currently employed

56%

HOURS WORKED PER WEEK*
Less than 5 hours

9%

5–9 hours

17%

10–14 hours

20%

15–19 hours

17%

20–24 hours

14%

1130

25–29 hours

10%

30–34 hours

6%

35–39 hours

3%

40 hours or more

5%

*This sample consisted of food insecure students who were currently employed.
Percentages may not add to 100 due to rounding.

MOST FOOD INSECURE STUDENTS RECEIVE FINANCIAL AID
Given the wide range of financial aid programs available to
students, the study investigated whether food insecure students
are utilizing these programs. The study found that 75 percent of
food insecure students received some form of financial aid.
Fifty-two percent reported receiving Pell Grants during the
current academic year and 37 percent reported taking out
student loans.

TABLE 9: Financial Aid Use among Food Insecure
Students
RECEIVED THIS ACADEMIC YEAR
Received any of the following

75%

Pell Grant

52%

Other government grant (FSEOG, TEACH, etc.)

15%

Private scholarship

18%

Stafford Loan

24%

Other government loan (Perkins Loan, etc.)

24%

Private (e.g., bank) loan

9%

1131

Other aid

24%

The study also asked food insecure students how much student
debt they had accumulated during their academic career. Fortyeight percent reported having some level of student debt.

TABLE 10: Student Loan
Debt among Food Insecure
Students
STUDENT LOANS TAKEN OUT TO DATE
No Loans

45%

$l-$4,999

11%

$5,000–$9,999

12%

$10,000–$14,999

7%

$15,000–$19,999

4%

$20,000–$24,999

4%

$25,000–$29,999

2%

$30,000–$39,999

3%

$40,000–$49,000

2%

$50,000 or more

3%

Don’t know

7%

UTILIZING ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS DOES NOT ELIMINATE FOOD
INSECURITY
There is a wide range of services available to assist students in
need, ranging from local food banks and pantries to
government programs like SNAP (food stamps). However, some
1132

students may not be taking advantage of these services, possibly
because they are unaware of some programs, are intimidated
by the enrollment process, or are avoiding these programs due
to social stigma.16
The survey asked students about their use of more than a dozen
available benefits and found that 61 percent of food insecure
students reported that their household had taken advantage of
at least one aid service in the past 12 months. The survey asked
about a wide range of benefits, with the assumption that any
benefits that address poverty might help to reduce food
insecurity.
The most widely used services were public benefit programs
like Medicaid, which was used by 28 percent, and the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), which was
used by 25 percent. These usage rates are comparable with
those found by other recent research on food insecure
students.17
In terms of other food programs, seventeen percent of food
insecure students reported utilizing a campus food pantry,
while 14 percent reported going to an off-campus food pantry or
food bank.
Given these low rates of usage, it’s likely that many of the food
insecure students in the study are missing out on benefits for
which they would be eligible, including easily accessed services
like local food banks.

TABLE 11: Use of Available Services by Food
1133

TABLE 11: Use of Available Services by Food
Insecure Students and Their Households, Last 12
Months
SERVICES USED
Used any of the following

61%

SNAP (food stamps)

25%

WIC (nutritional assistance for pregnant women and children)

8%

Free or reduced-price school meals

20%

Campus food pantry

17%

Off-campus food pantry or food bank

14%

Home in a public housing project

5%

Public housing voucher

4%

Utility assistance

6%

TANF (welfare)

6%

SSI (social security)

11%

SSDI (disability)

7%

Medicaid or public health insurance

28%

Child care assistance

5%

Unemployment compensation/insurance

6%

Transportation assistance (discounted transit fares, dial-a-ride, etc.)

12%

Tax refunds based on low-income tax credits

18%

Tax refunds based on higher education tax credits

11%

Veteran’s benefits

4%

It is also worth noting that use of these services was not
exclusive to food insecure students. For example, nine percent

1134

of food secure respondents reported making use of SNAP in the
past 12 months. This suggests that there may be some students
who are at risk but have managed to avoid food insecurity by
utilizing SNAP and other available services.

CONCLUSIONS
This study’s findings paint a picture of campus food insecurity
that raises deep concerns. The data suggests that a large
segment of the student population—nearly 50 percent—may be
food insecure, and that life for these food insecure students is
full of financial hardship and educational roadblocks.
There are many reasons for such a high percentage of students
to experience food insecurity. Today’s college students are
expected to pay both their living expenses and the cost of their
education, all at a time when their income is limited because
their classes make it difficult to work full-time. The inevitable
result of high expenses and low income is poverty. While
financial aid is meant to cover the difference, it regularly falls
short. For example, the Pell Grant—the premier aid program for
low-income students—no longer provides the level of financial
assistance necessary to meet most students’ needs.18
Additionally, this study suggests that the majority of food
insecure students are struggling to make ends meet despite
working or reaching out for assistance. Seventy-five percent
report receiving some form of financial aid, 56 percent report
working while going to school, and 61 percent report taking
1135

advantage of benefit programs like SNAP.
When a student can receive financial aid and earn a part-time
salary and still not be able to afford adequate, nutritious food,
our educational system is failing to provide that student with a
viable path to success in their higher education. Moreover, the
students who often need support the most—first-generation
college students and students of color—appear to be the most
likely to be food and housing insecure.
Ultimately, the findings of this study highlight the need for
additional research to explore a number of important questions
in greater depth. A better understanding of this issue is needed
in order to develop comprehensive solutions. The most
compelling questions that demand scrutiny include:
What percentage of U.S. students actually experience food
insecurity?
Which are the largest factors contributing to food insecurity
among college students? What can be done to prevent these
risks?
How can we increase the number of food insecure students
who utilize the existing safety net of services?
Which services or combination of services are the most
effective in meeting these students’ needs?
What is the impact of food insecurity on students’
educational success?
What is the combined impact of food and housing
insecurity?

1136

How do we specifically reduce food insecurity among
students of color and first-generation students?
Do food insecure students continue to be food insecure
after graduation?

RECOMMENDATIONS
The growing awareness of hunger and food insecurity on
college campuses has triggered a national conversation in
higher education over how to assist students in overcoming
these challenges. Reducing the number of food insecure
students will require action by colleges, universities, and
policymakers.

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES
For colleges and universities, the task of improving student
retention and completion is only becoming more difficult.
Fortunately, college and university administrations, student
organizations, and nonprofit organizations are pioneering a
wide range of programs designed to support food insecure
students.
Schools are also becoming creative in finding ways to fund
these new programs, with support coming variously from the
universities themselves, student governments, alumni
associations, local businesses, and charitable foundations.

1137

Programs That Promote Food Security
Colleges and universities should support and develop oncampus programs that directly address food insecurity. The
following are examples of successful programs that schools
should replicate.
Campus Food Pantries One of the fastest growing
movements to combat hunger on college campuses is the
development of campus food pantries. In 2009, fewer than
ten campus food pantries existed; today there are more
than 350.19 Because of their flexibility in operating styles
and limited need for physical infrastructure, campus food
pantries can be easy to establish. On-campus pantries are
easier for students to utilize, since they don’t require
students to travel off campus to receive food benefits. In
addition, because the food pantry is a campus-run
program, students seem more likely to utilize its services
because they see it as a student resource rather than a
community program.
Food Recovery Programs Programs like the Food Recovery
Network20 and the Campus Kitchens Project21 collect
unused food from campus dining halls and other sources,
then utilize on-campus kitchen space to repurpose this food
into ready-to-eat meals that can be donated to the campus
food pantry or an off-campus food program. In addition to
reducing food waste and stocking local food programs, one
benefit of these food recovery programs is that they provide
students with ready-made meals that just need warming.
The MEANS mobile app offers a different model for food

1138

recovery. Their online system allows restaurants, dining
halls, and other food donors to post a notice when they
have excess food available. Local food pantries and food
banks, including campus food pantries, can then claim the
excess food, at which time they are given the contact
information of the donor and can schedule a time to pick
up the surplus food.22
Another approach seeks to make use of excess food from
catered events on campus. At California State University,
Fresno, for example, the Catered Cupboard mobile app
notifies students when an on-campus catered event ends
and there is leftover food available.23
Dining Center Meal Donations Many campus dining hall
meal plans provide students with a set number of pre-paid
meal dollars or points to spend. If students have unused
points at the end of the term, those points are usually lost.
At many schools, programs like Swipe Out Hunger have
helped students and dining halls create systems where
students can donate some of their extra meal points.24
Depending on the agreement made with the dining hall,
these donated points are converted to money that is then
given to a local anti-hunger charity, converted to food that
is given to local food programs, or used to fund dining hall
vouchers for food insecure students.25
Improving Access to Benefits Students often do not know
where or how to access benefit programs that could provide
them with valuable assistance with needs like food, child
care, rent, utilities, and medical care. Programs like Single
Stop set up a campus location where students can stop in to

1139

learn about available benefits.26 Trained staff or volunteers
help students find out if they qualify for benefit programs,
then assist them with the application process. At Oregon
State University, the Human Services Resource Center was
established to offer many of the services described in this
section, including providing students with assistance in
applying for benefits.27
SNAP Retailer on Campus A small number of colleges and
universities have started the process to be able to accept
SNAP dollars (food stamps) in their campus stores, but the
regulatory requirements are extensive. Oregon State
University and Humboldt State University are the only two
schools that appear to have succeeded so far. At OSU, for
example, students can now use their Oregon Trail Card
(state-issued benefits card) to buy groceries at the oncampus Cascadia Market.28
Campus Community Gardens Campus community gardens
provide a way to increase students’ access to fresh produce
while also giving students a hands-on way to address food
insecurity, build community, and learn agricultural skills.
Once established, campus gardens can easily be integrated
into existing food programs by providing produce to the
campus dining halls or food pantry. At the University of
Arkansas, the campus community garden is hosted by
GroGreen, a student organization, and donates half of its
yield to the Jane B. Gearhart Food Pantry on campus.29
Campus Farmers Markets On-campus farmers markets
provide another way to increase students’ access to fresh
produce, providing them with an additional source for

1140

healthy, affordable food. For example, at Humboldt State
University, the student-run Oh SNAP! program hosts a
weekly farm stand on campus.30 Campus farmers markets
can do even more to support food insecure students by
participating in the national “Double Bucks” program,
through which farmers markets provide a $1-for-$1 match
for SNAP recipients to buy fresh produce. The University of
Utah Farmers Market, a mostly student-run operation that
provides fresh produce for sale on campus and to the
dining hall, is one of several on-campus farmers markets
that already participate in Double Bucks.31

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR POLICYMAKERS
While colleges and universities should take immediate steps to
support their students, some changes are beyond their reach.
Federal policymakers should take the following steps to
improve the situation for food insecure students.
Add Food Security Measurement to the NPSAS The
National Center for Education Statistics implements the
National Postsecondary Student Aid Study (NPSAS) each
year to examine the characteristics of the nation’s college
students, with special focus on how they finance their
education. Adding food security questions to the list of
issues assessed by the NPSAS would provide policymakers
and researchers with the data to determine the true
prevalence of student food insecurity and assess potential
solutions.32
Simplify the FAFSA The Free Application for Federal
1141

Student Aid (FAFSA) is the form that determines a student’s
eligibility for federal financial aid programs. Completing
the FAFSA can be an unnecessarily confusing and
intimidating process for students. The FAFSA includes up
to 136 questions, including detailed questions about income
and assets that are difficult to document and often have
little or no impact on a student’s eligibility for aid. There
are an estimated two million students currently enrolled in
college who are eligible for a Pell Grant but never applied
for aid, likely because they were intimidated by the process
or did not know that aid was available.33 In order to ensure
that students receive the aid they deserve, the FAFSA
should be simplified to remove unnecessary questions,
particularly for the applicants with the greatest need.34
Expand the SNAP Eligibility Requirements for College
Students College students who are enrolled in school at
least half-time are ineligible for SNAP unless they meet
certain exceptions (for example, having a child under the
age of six or working at least 20 hours per week).35 These
restrictions prevent many students from utilizing SNAP,
even though they meet the program’s income eligibility
thresholds and could benefit from the program. SNAP
eligibility requirements should be simplified for students
and the rules should be adjusted to remove the work
requirement for full-time students.36
Improve the Aid Process for Homeless Students The
federal financial aid process provides particular obstacles
for homeless students, which can cause them to miss out on
aid entirely. These students often face a confusing system

1142

which bounces them between high school and college
administrators. At both levels, administrators are often
confused about their authority to verify a student’s
homeless status or what type of documentation to require.
This bureaucratic nightmare can cause students to miss
filing deadlines and be denied aid, preventing them from
attending college. Clear guidelines should be provided to
financial aid administrators and students to explain the
process and students should be given easy access to
government records that can help establish their homeless
status.37
In addition, the process becomes more difficult with each
subsequent year, as it typically becomes harder for students to
provide documentation of their homeless status the longer they
are in college. The process should be changed to eliminate the
need for yearly redetermination of a student’s homeless
status.38

ENDNOTES
1. U.S. Department of Agriculture, “Food Security in the U.S.:
Key Statistics & Graphics,” September 8, 2015,
http://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/food-nutrition-assistance/foodsecurity-in-the-us/key-statistics-graphics.aspx.
2. Clare Cady, “Food Insecurity as a Student Issue,” Journal of
College and Character, no. 4 (2014), 265–271, doi:10.1515/jcc2014-0031.

1143

3. Katharine Broton et al., Wisconsin HOPE Lab, “Safety,
Security, and College Attainment: An Investigation of
Undergraduates’ Basic Needs and Institutional Response,”
October 2014,
http://www.wihopelab.com/publications/APPAM.Draft.10.28.20
14.pdf.
4. Nicholas Freudenberg, Healthy CUNY Initiative, “Food
Insecurity at CUNY: Results from a Survey of CUNY
Undergraduate Students,” April 2011, http://bit.ly/1MkQ2Vx.
5. Megan Patton-Lopez et al., Western Oregon University,
“Prevalence and correlates of food insecurity among students
attending a midsize rural university in Oregon,”
http://ir.library.oregonstate.edu/xmlui/bitstream/handle/1957/4
5177/PattonLopez_JNEB_foodinsecurity_11414.pdf.
6. Sara Goldrick-Rab et al., Wisconsin HOPE Lab, “Hungry to
Learn: Addressing Food & Housing Insecurity Among
Undergraduates,” December 2015,
http://www.wihopelab.com/publications/Wisconsin_HOPE_Lab
_Hungry_To_Learn.pdf.
7. Wisconsin HOPE Lab, “What We’re Learning: Food and
Housing Insecurity among College Students: A Data Update
from the Wisconsin HOPE Lab,” January 13, 2016,
http://bit.ly/2dHI8L1.
8. Suzanna Martinez et al., University of California Global Food
1144

Initiative, “Student Food Access and Security Study,” July 11,
2016,
http://regents.universityofcalifornia.edu/regmeet/july16/e1attac
h.pdf.
9. Rashida Crutchfield, California State University, “Serving
Displaced and Food Insecure Students in the CSU,” January
2016,
http://www.calstate.edu/AcadAff/documents/ServingDisplaceda
ndFoodInsecureStudetnsintheCSUJanuary20163.8.16.pdf.
10. U.S. Department of Agriculture, “Definitions of Food
Insecurity,” September 8, 2015,
http://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/food-nutrition-assistance/foodsecurity-in-the-us/definitions-of-foodsecurity.aspx.
11. U.S. Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service,
“U.S. Adult Food Security Survey Module: Three-Stage Design,
With Screeners,” September 2012,
http://www.ers.usda.gov/datafiles/Food_Security_in_the_Unite
d_States/Food_Security_Survey_Modules/ad2012.pdf.
12. Roger Hughes et al., “Student Food Insecurity: The Skeleton
in the University Closet,” Nutrition and Dietetics 2001, 68: 27–32.
13. Maya E. Maroto, “Food Insecurity among Community
College Students: Prevalence and Association with GPA, Energy,
and Concentration,” Community College Journal of Research
and Practice, 39(6), 515–526.
1145

14. Meghan R. Silva et al., “The Relationship Between Food
Security, Housing Stability, and School Performance among
College Students in an Urban University,” Journal of College
Student Retention: Research, Theory & Practice,
1521025115621918, December 14, 2015,
doi:10.1177/1521025115621918.
15. Sara Goldrick-Rab et al., The Century Foundation, “The Real
Price of College,” March 3, 2016,
https://tcf.org/content/report/the-real-price-of-college.
16. Tara Bahrampour, “More college students battle hunger as
education and living costs rise,” Washington Post, April 9, 2014,
http://www.washingtonpost.com/local/more-collegestudentsbattle-hunger-as-education-and-living-costsrise/2014/04/09/60208db6-bb63-11e3-9a05c739f29ccb08_story.html.
17. Sara Goldrick-Rab et al., Wisconsin HOPE Lab, “Hungry to
Learn: Addressing Food & Housing Insecurity Among
Undergraduates,” December 2015,
http://www.wihopelab.com/publications/Wisconsin_HOPE_Lab
_Hungry_To_Learn.pdf.
18. Sara Goldrick-Rab et al., Wisconsin HOPE Lab, “Hungry to
Learn: Addressing Food & Housing Insecurity Among
Undergraduates,” December 2015,
http://www.wihopelab.com/publications/Wisconsin_HOPE_Lab
_Hungry_To_Learn.pdf.
1146

19. College and University Food Bank Alliance, “Our Members,”
http://bit.ly/2dpDhhx.
20. Food Recovery Network, “About Us,” http://bit.ly/2dpEA0c.
21. The Campus Kitchens Project, “How We Do It,”
http://bit.ly/1bziXNb.
22. MEANS, “About,” http://www.meansdatabase.com/about.
23. Fresno State University Food Security Project, “Catered
Cupboard,”
http://www.fresnostate.edu/studentaffairs/foodsecurity/mobileapp.html.
24. Swipe Out Hunger, “About,”
http://www.swipehunger.org/about.
25. Emma Miller, “Columbia University unveils plan to feed
students who can’t afford to eat,” USA Today, September 22,
2015, http://usat.ly/1MHjDHN.
26. Single Stop, “Our Work,” http://bit.ly/2dHUGC9.
27. Oregon State University Office of Student Life, “Human
Services Resource Center,”
http://studentlife.oregonstate.edu/hsrc.
28. Oregon State University, “On-Campus Markets,”
http://bit.ly/2dpwrIV.
1147

29. GroGreen, “GroGreen: UARK Community Garden,”
http://www.facebook.com/groups/151775711209/.
30. Humboldt State University Oh SNAP!, “HSU Farm Stand,”
http://www.hsuohsnap.org.
31. University of Utah Sustainability Resource Center, “U of U
Farmers Market,” http://sustainability.utah.edu/resourcecenter/get-involved/farmers-market.php.
32. Sara Goldrick-Rab and Christopher J. Nellum, Wisconsin
HOPE Lab and American Council on Education, “Request to Add
Measurement of Food Insecurity to the National Postsecondary
Student Aid Study,” http://bit.ly/2d15to9.
33. White House Office of the Press Secretary, “Fact Sheet: The
President’s Plan for Early Financial Aid: Improving College
Choice and Helping More Americans Pay for College,”
September 13, 2015, http://bit.ly/2cR0Uta.
34. National Association of Student Financial Aid
Administrators, “NASFAA FAFSA Working Group Report:
FAFSA Simplification,” July 2015,
http://www.luminafoundation.org/files/resources/fafsasimplification.pdf.
35. Elizabeth Lower-Basch and Helly Lee, Center for Law and
Social Policy, “SNAP Policy Brief: College Student Eligibility,”
February 6, 2014, http://www.clasp.org/resources-and-

1148

publications/publication-1/SNAP_College-StudentEligibility.pdf.
36. Sara Goldrick-Rab et al., Wisconsin HOPE Lab, “Hungry to
Learn: Addressing Food & Housing Insecurity Among
Undergraduates,” December 2015,
http://www.wihopelab.com/publications/Wisconsin_HOPE_Lab
_Hungry_To_Learn.pdf.
37. U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Actions Needed to
Improve Access to Federal Financial Assistance for Homeless
and Foster Youth,” May 2016,
http://www.help.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/d16343.pdf.
38. National Association for the Education of Homeless
Children and Youth, “Financial Aid for Unaccompanied
Homeless Youth,” 2014,
http://www.naehcy.org/sites/default/files/dl/fafsasurveyreport.pdf.
RESPOND ●

1. Research-based reports like this one are typically proposal
arguments. They begin by stating a problem, offering
definitions, presenting the data collected, analyzing and
interpreting the data collected, and making representations.
How does each of these steps relate to the kinds of argument
we find in stasis theory? (See Chapter 1 for a discussion of
stasis theory.)
2. How is the term food insecurity defined in this report? What sort

1149

of definition is given? Why is such a definition necessary for
research? What are the advantages of such a definition over
discussions framed in terms of hunger? (See Chapter 9 on kinds
of definition.)
3. What was your response to the findings presented in this
survey? Were they surprising at all? Do you think students,
faculty, and administrators on your campus are aware of food
insecurity as a challenge faced by many students nationwide?
Why or why not? If they are, what has led to this awareness? If
not, what might have led to this lack of awareness?
4. THINKING CRITICALLY What is the purpose of the section entitled
“Food Insecurity Persists Despite Students’ Efforts”? How
would the report have been different—and we might argue
weaker—had this section not been included?
5. Investigate issues of food insecurity on your campus or in the
area where you live. Is any recent information available about
the current situation with regard to this challenge? Are there
available resources to assist those who experience food
insecurity? (Here, you may wish to consult the original report to
get information about the sorts of resources they provide.)
What might be done to deal with the situation? Depending on
what you discover, you may wish to write an argument of
fact, focusing on what you learn about the current situation; an
evaluative argument, considering options for dealing with
food insecurity; or a proposal argument, offering possible
courses of action. (See Chapters 8, 10, and 12 on arguments of
fact, evaluative arguments, and proposal arguments,
respectively.)

1150

CHAPTER 25 How Does Language Influence
Our World?

Perhaps more than any other trait, language makes us human.
Many animal species have complex systems of communication,
but they don’t have language—a system of communication that
permits us to talk about the past, to imagine a future, and to
create extremely complex individual and group identities for
ourselves and others. Our language defines us in multiple ways.
The way we speak or write comes to be part of our individual
style. We don’t expect someone who has lived their entire life in
a small Ohio town to sound like someone who has grown up in
Seattle—and usually, they don’t. But as the selections in this
chapter seek to demonstrate, the language we use and the
language used about us define who we are and who we aren’t,
often in more subtle ways that generally go unnoticed.
In his blog posting, Ernie Smith weighs in on a currently heated
debate about the English language, the shifting use of the
pronoun they. Since speakers and writers of English have used
it for centuries to refer to a single individual in certain cases—If
1151

anyone needs a pencil, they can borrow mine—can’t and
perhaps shouldn’t that usage be extended to situations in which
a known individual, for whatever reasons, does not wish to be
referred to as she or he?
The well-known commentator and linguist John McWhorter
tackles a different question, writing as an African American
who doesn’t “sound black.” In addition to asking the basic
question of what it might mean to “sound black” or “sound
white” or sound anything, McWhorter wants readers to
consider how we understand situations where individuals do
not fit our stereotypes of how they should sound. How can
thinking about these questions remind us that, indeed, we have
stereotypes and we use them as a way of making sense of the
world, sometimes in ways that ignore the complexity of reality
before us?
Focusing on the power of labeling, a handbook produced by the
Japanese American Citizens League challenges us to rethink
what we’ve likely been taught about the experiences of Japanese
Americans during World War II. From our history classes and
popular culture, we may have learned that during the war,
Japanese Americans were evacuated to relocation centers. How
does our understanding of that narrative change if we use more
direct and accurate language, stating that they were forcibly
removed from their homes to American concentration camps?
The chapter’s visual argument uses maps showing the
distribution of languages other than English in the United States

1152

to encourage us to think about linguistic diversity in this
country and about maps as visual arguments.
Noted essayist, novelist, and comic-book writer Roxanne Gay
challenges the press and readers to consider the ways in which
the language generally used to characterize sexual violence fails
to represent the reality of the situation, particularly for those
who suffer such violence.
Finally, Jorge Encinas explains how the growing number of
Latinos who are welcomed to the U.S. to play professional
baseball—as well as the growing popularity of the game across
Latin America—demonstrates the ways that major league
baseball has traditionally not provided sufficient language
support for these players, the forces at work to change that
situation, and their consequences.
These selections provide evidence for the claim of rhetorician
and philosopher Kenneth Burke that the words we choose
select, reflect, and deflect particular views of reality, being
arguments in themselves. The selections also invite you to
consider the ways you likely take language for granted as you
use it to construct identities and realities—yours and those of
others.

1153

Ernie Smith is a social media journalist based in
Washington, D.C. He is also the creator of the twiceweekly blog Tedium: The Dull Side of the Internet, which
he founded in 2015. Like many online blog postings, this
text is a sort of mash-up, combining not only Smith’s
words but information from other sources that work to
complement and in some ways complete the argument. In
this posting from August 2016, Smith takes on what in fact
is a much-debated question about language these days, the
use of they as a gender-neutral replacement for he and he
or she in formal writing, such as the writing you do for
college classes. While this argument has raged for
decades, some basic facts are clear. Despite the
grammatical problem of a plural pronoun being used for a
singular subject, they has been used with indefinite
pronouns like everyone, someone, and anyone in spoken
English for centuries—for example, Has everyone got their
homework? As Smith notes, such usage has shown up in
writing as far back as Chaucer, in the fourteenth century.
Smith explains how in different political and social
climates, the use of they came to be considered wrong.
While the use of they was much discussed during the
1970s with the rise of feminism, what has brought the
debate to life again in this century is the desire of some
transgender individuals (and their allies) to be referred to
as they to avoid being gendered (or misgendered). Thus,
rather than Eleanor forgot her book, many prefer to say

1154

Eleanor forgot their book in reference to a book that
belongs to Eleanor, or Zach has lost their car keys in
speaking about the keys of Zach’s car. Such usage enables
speakers to identify a subject (Eleanor, Zach) without
forcing a gender upon that subject (she, he). As you read,
you’ll want to be thinking about both sets of situations—
the campaign of earlier feminists and the current push by
transgender individuals—and the reactions you have to
them. Smith’s piece also considers the role that copy
editors ultimately have in determining what is acceptable
in various written contexts. So, as you read, you’ll also
want to be thinking about how and why copy editors came
to have such authority.

The “Cultural Contexts” box in Chapter 13 discusses the range of
personal pronouns that are in use now.
LINK TO Chapter 13, Cultural Contexts for Argument: A Note on
Pronoun Preference.

They Should Stop: In Defense of the Singular They

ERNIE SMITH
“In the past year, new expressions of gender identity
have generated a deal of discussion, and singular they
1155

has become a particularly significant element of that
conversation. While many novel gender-neutral
pronouns have been proposed, they has the advantage
of already being part of the language.”
—Ben Zimmer, the chairman of the New Words
Committee of the American Dialect Society, discussing
the group’s decision to make the singular they its word
of the year. The vote favored they in part because of
they’s increasing importance as a way to make room
for people who don’t fit a predefined gender binary. (It
helps that the word drops the added complication of he
or she.)

IS THE SINGULAR THEY A PROBLEM THAT LINGUISTS
CREATED FOR THEMSELVES?
For some word purists, the singular they is the linguistic
equivalent of an ingrown hair, but for others, the solutions
for getting around the problem are way messier.
purists
those who are committed to keeping a language pure from what they consider
contamination of any kind, which would include changes in the language (although
languages that are being spoken and written will always demonstrate evidence of
change).

For centuries, the singular they was not only accepted by the
public but by some of our most famous authors—Geoffrey
Chaucer, Jane Austen, and Shakespeare, just to name three.
1156

But around the late 18th and early 19th century, something
happened: Critics of the specific usage appeared. The reason
for this critical reassessment came about partly out of
prescriptive vibes around the English language at the time.
Long story short: We wanted English to be more like Latin,
and that meant rethinking the use of plural nouns in
singular contexts.
prescriptive
with respect to language, giving rules for how the language ought to be used. Purists
are prescriptivists, who focus on rule giving, in contrast to descriptivists, who focus on
describing how the language is, in fact, used. From a descriptivist point of view, the
use of they with indefinite pronouns like everyone and someone is acceptable in all
but the most formal of contexts because that is what most people do anyway.

In 1975, researcher Ann Bodine broke this down in a
landmark paper, “ Androcentrism in Prescriptive Grammar:
Singular ‘They,’ Sex-Indefinite ‘He,’ and ‘He or She.’” The
text, republished in the 1999 book The Feminist Critique of
Language, notes that the influence of Latin grammar played
an important role in the increase of rules around modern
grammar—and specifically gave the world the “ generic he,”
a term that followed Latin form but didn’t mesh with
modern concerns about gender equality. She added that the
then-recent attempts to ditch the generic he were really
attempts to roll back a controversial change.
androcentrism
being male-centered.
generic he
the use of he as the third-person singular pronoun when the apparent sex or gender

1157

of an individual is not clear. For example, Every student must bring his book to class,
meaning that all students must bring their books to class, would be an example of
using he generically.

“Intentionally or not, the movement against sex-indefinite
‘he’ is actually a counter-reaction to an attempt by
prescriptive grammarians to alter the language,” she wrote.
sex-indefinite he
the same as generic he in contrast to he used to refer to specifically to a male or
males.
counter-reaction
an effort to reverse something, frequently a move in a politically conservative
direction; a reaction in response to another’s reaction to an original stimulus.

And many of those grammarians who tried to remedy the
problem caused by this attempt to make English more like
Latin have tried to patch things up. For hundreds of years,
English-speakers have tried to invent words that fill the
English language’s most unsightly gap. Nearly all of them
have failed.
University of Illinois professor Dennis Baron, a longtime
supporter of the singular they, has long maintained a list of
gender-neutral pronouns that people have attempted to add
to the English language, the most recent example from 2015,
but most of the interesting ones from the 19th century.
Terms like “thon,” “e,” and “um” were among the most
prominent attempts to improve the language. Additionally,
Baron notes, complaints about the common use of the
singular they were fairly common during the 19th century.
1158

“If only occasionally found in the best writings, it is because
the proofreader interposes his correction before the
sentence reaches the public, for every editor [knows] how
often even careful writers make the mistake,” a writer for
the Findlay, Ohio, Jeffersonian wrote in 1877.
interpose
to place oneself between.

Baron, in introducing the concept in an essay, is quick to
stick a knife in its heart before it even had a chance to fly:
These pronouns fill a need, but none has been widely
adopted, hence they are the words that failed. What has
succeeded is singular they, which arose naturally in
English hundreds of years ago, and is used both by
speakers and writers concerned that their pronouns be
inclusive, and also by many who don’t give the matter
much thought at all.
Over at the dearly departed site The Toast, linguist Gretchen
McCulloch calls the root cause “a series of historical
accidents,” but suggests that the issues raised by
grammarians are practical in nature, even if the solutions
are in many ways worse than the problems in the first place.
It’s an empty space for a broken term, but who broke it?

1159

Identifying one’s preferred pronouns is becoming more common.

FIVE LANGUAGE-WORLD STANCES ON THE
SINGULAR THEY
1. “The fact that the masculine is the unmarked
gender in English (or that the feminine is unmarked
in the language of the Tunica Indians) is simply a
feature of grammar.”
—A 1971 open letter in the Harvard Crimson,
signed by 17 professors and teaching fellows,
attempting to defend the use of gendered pronouns
in the classroom, using history as a precedent for
the thought process
2. “From long habit, in any case, epicene he is
comfortably read as ‘he or she’ without much extra
thought: ‘If a customer has a coupon, he can get a
free ice cream cone’ would not be interpreted by any
1160

literate person as limiting the deal to males.”
—Iohannes Helonapë, a.k.a. “The Ozarks Latinist,”
making the case for the “generic he” from the
perspective of a Latin teacher
3. “Using ‘their’ for singular antecedents is one that I
think people need to [just give into]. As I’ve argued,
it only occurs in a very limited set of circumstances,
and those circumstances very unlikely to produce
confusion about what is meant.”
—blogger and academic Freddie deBoer, discussing
the limited use cases of the singular their
4. “Saying that singular they has been used for
centuries by respected writers, that it appears to
follow fairly well-defined rules, and that the
proscription against it is not based in linguistic fact
is descriptive; saying that people need to get over
their dislike and accept it is not.”
—Linguist Jonathan Owen, who attempts to
straddle the line between prescriptivism and
descriptivism in a 2015 blog post
www.arrantpedantry.com/2015/03/04/whydescriptivists-are-usage-liberals offering both sides
of the singular they debate
5. “Many ACES stalwarts—copy editors, journalists,
grammarians, lexicographers, and linguists—stand
ready to embrace the singular ‘their.’ But not us. We
avoid it whenever we can.”
—Mary Norris, the “comma queen” at The New
1161

Yorker, emphasizing the magazine’s hardline
stance against the singular they. Linguistics blogs
had a field day with this comment.
unmarked
in linguistics, what is expected, usual, or regular. The unmarked word order in
English is SUBJECT + VERB + OBJECT, for example, The child ran into the room.
Tunica:
indigenous language of the United States spoken by the Tunica Indians of the
Mississippi Valley. The last native speaker died in 1948.
epicene
of indeterminate sex. An epicene pronoun would not indicate the sex of the
person being referred to. In English, our first-person singular pronoun (I) and
our second-person singular pronoun (you) are epicene; that is, they do not
indicate the sex or gender of individuals about whom they are used. Some
languages, however, have different first- and/or second-person pronouns for
females and males to use.
antecedent
in grammar, the noun that a pronoun refers to. For example, in Pierre brought
his pet to class, Pierre is the antecedent for the pronoun his.
proscription
a statement or rule stating what not to do. For example, Don’t say “ain’t” is a
proscription. Proscriptions contrast with prescriptions, which are statements or
rules stating what to do; for example, Be sure that the subject and verb of a
sentence agree in number is a prescription.
ACES
The American Copy Editors Society, a professional organization for copy editors.

254: The number of languages tracked by the World
Atlas of Language Structures Online that do not make
gender distinctions in their pronouns. Of the 378
examples listed on the atlas’s website, roughly two1162

thirds, or 67 percent, have no gender distinctions at all
for their pronouns, and those that do, like English, are
most likely to use third-person singular pronouns along
gender lines.

THE REAL SOLUTION TO THE SINGULAR THEY
PROBLEM LIES IN THE HANDS OF COPY EDITORS
Last year, prominent Washington Post copy editor Bill
Walsh (who was not a football coach for the San Francisco
49ers) drew a line in the sand in favor of the singular they,
revealing in a deeply nerve-wracking blog post that he had
been wanting to make the big change for years, despite how
divisive it was for some.
“What finally pushed me from acceptance to action on
gender-neutral pronouns was the increasing visibility of
gender-neutral people,” he wrote.
Walsh, the author of some popular books read by copy
editors, is seen as something of a trailblazer on this issue,
even though he pledges his desk will use the term sparingly.
Problem is, it won’t be easy to win over everyone else in the
journalism world. The issue is that many copy editors simply
struggle with the conundrum that the word creates, some
treating it as a pet peeve even though it’s common in regular
speech.

1163

In a blog post last year, the Baltimore Sun’s John E. McIntyre
noted the lingering controversy, citing one Facebook feed
that called the singular they an “idiot epicene.”
“I know any number of editors who share this visceral
dislike of the singular they,” McIntyre wrote. “It cuts no ice
with them that linguists have demonstrated widespread use
by reputable writers for centuries . . . or that we somehow
contrive to use you in both singular and plural senses
without growing red-faced and shouting.”
visceral
from the gut; related to deep feelings rather than the intellect.

Copy editors may never find peace on this issue, even
though the American Copy Editors Society has been laying
the groundwork for such a change, last January noting with
positivity the American Dialect Society’s move to make the
singular they its word of the year.
Eventually, the Associated Press Stylebook will make a call
on this grammatical controversy, like they did when it
decided to allow “more than” and “over” to be used
interchangeably. But I wonder to myself if they’ll be the last
ones to figure out that most non-journalists are pro-they.
Associated Press Stylebook
the manual of grammar and style used by journalists working with the Associated
Press, a U.S.-based international news organization. Style manuals explain and
illustrate various rules of grammar and usage that are to be used by writers and
editors. Insofar as they tell writers and editors how to use the language, they are

1164

prescriptive.
more than vs. over
although most speakers of American English, even highly educated ones, often use
these two interchangeably, until 2014, the AP Stylebook and purists claimed we
should not—a prescriptivist stance. The Stylebook contended that over should be
used only in references to relative size—for example, She towered over her brother
—not in reference to numbers or quantities.

(Hey, at least this piece isn’t about the Oxford comma.)
Oxford comma
so called because it is mandated by the Oxford University Press in Oxford, England; a
comma used after the next-to-last element of a list and before the conjunction, as in
this sentence: Frankie brought the cake, the balloon, and the napkins. A sentence
without the Oxford comma would have no comma after balloon. Generally, in the
United States, the Oxford comma is preferred.

Perhaps the most interesting comment on this whole issue,
among the many items and eras I’ve quoted in this piece,
comes not from a vintage study or an old academic paper,
but from a Christian Science Monitor columnist who literally
wrote about this very issue last week.
Ruth Walker, the writer of the publication’s Verbal Energy
feature, makes an astute comparison between grammar and
“desire lines”—the pathways that people create on their own
when the sidewalks prove inefficient paths.
Walker isn’t exactly psyched about the singular they right
now, but she sees the case for it going forward.
“Whatever the motivation, and however we feel about it,

1165

singular they is a kind of shortcut through the traditional
grammar rules that is coming to be more accepted all the
time,” she wrote. “It’s like that shortcut at the library—which
rejoins the main path and may someday get paved.”
The tide is turning on this terminology. Whoever is getting
in the way of its progress, they should stop.
RESPOND●

1. Smith provides five “language-world stances” on the use of
singular they. Which do you find most comfortable for you?
Why is this stance more appealing than the others offered?
Which is least appealing? Why? Given your preferred
stance, how would you acknowledge the concerns of others
while supporting your own position?
2. As noted, Smith’s blog post exemplifies a mash-up, a genre
in which an author pulls together bits of information—
quotations or even visual elements from other texts, often
adding commentary of their own. (By the way, did you
notice that we used singular they in the previous sentence:
an author . . . their own? We’ll bet you didn’t, although your
instructor may have. In earlier editions of this textbook, we
likely wouldn’t have used they but his or her instead. Our
practice reflects how the language is changing.) How do the
various parts of Smith’s post work together to create an
argument? What does each contribute? What, if anything,
would be missing if any of the pieces of the posting had not
been included?
3. Of course, the current support for singular they is not the

1166

first time that efforts have been made to alter how English
is used. As Smith notes, grammarians during the eighteenth
century, in particular, sought to shape the language in
certain ways (and were highly successful with regard to
standardized written English in a number of ways).
Likewise, supporters of feminism and gender equality in the
1970s began using he and she and finding other alternatives
permitting them to avoid generic he. They also introduced
the use of Ms., which has led to the almost total
disappearance of Miss and the greatly reduced use of Mrs.
Today, most users of English understand the use of he not
to be a generic and assume those who use it that way are
sexist, and many women, married or single, use Ms. These
facts are evidence that language can and does change and
that users can intervene to seek to alter how a language is
used and understood. How do these facts challenge
prescriptivist views of language that dictate the “correct”
way of using language?
4. THINKING CRITICALLY Smith’s post does not acknowledge a
very real challenge with extending the use of they from
referring to indefinite pronouns that could be male or
female, like everybody, to referring to specific individuals,
as in Eleanor forgot their book. In such an example, the
book in question is Eleanor’s alone, so the plural they
introduces new kinds of ambiguity. How easy will it be for
speakers to understand the intent during this transitional
phrase of our language? How might they do so?
5. Return to your answer to Question 1, and use it as the basis
for writing a proposal argument for dealing with the
current situation, one where you seek to use Rogerian
argumentation as discussed in Chapters 1 and 7. Thus,

1167

rather than focusing on how other perspectives are wrong
(and certainly rather than belittling them), seek to build as
much common ground as possible and acknowledge the
validity of other perspectives even as you argue for why you
prefer the alternative you do.

1168

John McWhorter (1965–), whose primary training is in
linguistics, teaches at Columbia University, where he
offers courses in that field, philosophy, and music history.
He is also author of numerous books about language and
race/ethnicity and continues to publish in a number of
popular venues in a way that few academics do. This
March 2016 selection is from Guernica: A Magazine of
Global Art and Politics, an online volunteer-run nonprofit
magazine now in its second decade. As you read, consider
how McWhorter problematizes the link between race or
ethnicity and language that is a defining feature of
American culture.

Thick of Tongue

JOHN McWHORTER

1169

John McWhorter.

Given that I am the kind of black person who is often termed
“articulate,” it may seem surprising that I spend much of my
life feeling quite thick of tongue. I am one of those
unfortunate black people who sound white. It is, of all
things, a social handicap.
thick of tongue
here, McWhorter is using an expression that sometimes means “having impaired or
unclear speech.” He is likely also mocking a persistent racist ideology among whites
that African Americans speak as they do because they have thicker tongues than
white Americans. Such a claim is obviously false because, first, as McWhorter notes,
African Americans do not all speak in the same way and, second, there is no such
physiological difference among racial or ethnic groups In the United States or
elsewhere.

1170

“So white. . . !”, then, I seemed, years ago, to a black
administrative assistant. I was told of the assessment some
time later by an acquaintance of hers, but I could sense that
this lady couldn’t stand me as soon as we met. This was long
before I had any public notoriety for unconventional views
about race issues; I was an utterly anonymous new
professor of linguistics. That she found me so disagreeable
must have had something to do with me as a person. I
arrived into the situation with good intentions and was
interested in ingratiating myself as much as possible with
everyone there, so I have reason to assume that what
repelled her is the way I talk, which does indeed sound “so
white.”
unconventional views about race issues
McWhorter, who was at one time employed by a conservative think tank, has
characterized himself as “as cranky liberal Democrat . . . [who] disagrees sustainedly
with many of the tenets of the Civil Rights orthodoxy” in ways that few African
Americans do.

Some will say that this woman was especially narrowminded or ignorant, but she wasn’t—that’s just the thing. I
could tell countless similar stories, about the couple of black
listeners who liked my recorded linguistic courses in the
Great Courses series but complained about the way I speak,
one of them adding that a friend heard me and thought I
lacked “swagger.” When I was twelve, a cousin of mine, not
yet three, remarked that my sister and I didn’t sound like
everybody else he knew. This kind of thing, for me, is and

1171

has always been just part of living.
Great Courses
a commercially produced college-level audio and video lecture series for “life-long
learners.” McWhorter has been featured In several Great Course series about
language.

I hardly consider myself significantly oppressed on this
score. It is well documented that sounding black on the
phone makes you less likely to be shown an apartment or
house or to get a job interview. A black kid who uses Black
English in school is often criticized by teachers and thought
less intelligent. Classic experiments have shown that
people’s evaluation of someone reading a passage changes
according to whether it’s read by a white or black person.
The black voice is rated less favorably—considered less
bright, less friendly. My burden, in comparison, is a mere
personal cross to bear, worse than having a hard-to-spell
name but hardly on the order of being denied services and
thought dim. Yet to an extent that few would have reason to
know, I suffer.
a cross to bear
a burden; the metaphor is Christian in origin.

When you’re black and you sound just like a white person, it
puts a lot of black people off. The vast majority of black
Americans, including educated ones, are identifiable as
black from their speech; the “black sound” is a subconscious
but near-universal hallmark of black American culture. This

1172

means that if you are black, upon meeting you, a great many
black people will tacitly expect that the two of you will speak
more similarly to one another—at the very least in terms of
that certain “sound”—than either of you do to white people.
That similarity is an index of acceptance and warmth in a
society that looks askance on black people in so many ways.
Then it turns out that you don’t sound similar, despite your
black face. The wrong voice is coming out of you.
Although the expectation that you were going to sound black
was not conscious, the fact that you don’t is processed quite
consciously: it’s the discrepancy that elicits attention. You
are heard as talking “like that,” though you know no other
way to talk. It seems, perhaps, that you purposefully
distanced yourself from the normal black way of talking in a
quest to join whites. More certainly, you sound snooty,
chilly, not like the type anyone would want to have a beer
(or anything else!) with. To a black person who knows only
other black people who speak with the same sound, your
different sound is not just peculiar but, because it is a “white
sound,” snobbish. The matter is not one of perplexity or
discomfort, but irritation, even contempt.
Plus, these days, the “black sound” has acquired a certain
cachet in mainstream society through the popularity of hip
hop, so increasingly someone like me finds that even whites
below a certain age process him as “square.” Call it
stereotyping or call it progress, but a lot of white people

1173

happily anticipate a certain hipness, “realness,” from a black
person. We’re so “down,” so approachable, so “the shit,”
apparently. In talking to these people, just as to so many
black people, I disappoint. I offend.
cachet
a mark of value, prestige, or distinction.

One of the hardest things about this is that so many people
would be inclined to say that the problem—being read as not
sounding black—doesn’t exist.
During the O.J. Simpson trial, in response to one witness
who claimed to have heard a “black voice” at the scene of
the murder of Simpson’s wife and her friend, lawyer
Johnnie Cochran objected: “What’s a black voice?” The
mostly black jury assented. Cochran was implying that the
very idea that black speech has a particular sound is racist;
often, people making the claim insist that black people
simply talk like Southerners.
O.J. Simpson (1947–)
former award-winning pro-football running back, actor, and broadcaster. In the mid1990s, he was accused of the murder of his former wife and her then-boyfriend. In the
widely covered criminal trial, he was acquitted of the crime by a jury, but a civil court
later issued a $33.5 million judgment against him for the death of the two victims.
Johnnie Cochran (1937–2005)
attorney best known for his role in the defense and acquittal of Simpson, among
other media personalities.

Most any American knows that a white Southerner is

1174

unlikely to sound like Chris Rock while a black person is
unlikely to sound like Paula Deen. Black and Southern
English overlap, but just that. Did the Reverend Martin
Luther King and the white police officers beating and
arresting him speak the same dialect? Yet the notion of a
“black sound” smells like it could bring on accusations of
stereotyping, so one is inclined to just step around the issue.
Chris Rock (1965–)
among the most popular stand-up comedians of all time, Rock is also known for his
work as an actor in TV and film, as a producer, and as a director.
Paula Deen (1947–)
celebrity chef, cookbook author, and restaurateur from Georgia; Deen was at the
center of a controversy in 2013, having been accused of speaking in disparaging ways
about African Americans.

Black people’s own ticklish orientation when it comes to
acknowledging a black way of speech is understandable for
two reasons. The first is the racist past (and present) of this
country—so often, that which is black is trashed as deficient;
one becomes permanently wary. Then also, Black English is
primarily associated with what are considered errors—ain’t,
he be, aks, and so on. Naturally, one worries that any
characterization of black people’s speech will be a critique
rather than a neutral description. To many, the idea that
even educated black people have this sound will seem like a
prelude to the claim that even educated black people are
incapable of mastering “proper language.”
But the same people who hotly deny that there is such a
1175

thing as a black sound will notice immediately when a black
person “sounds white,” as countless black people teased
about this as children can attest to. Logic dictates that if a
black person can sound white—and this accusation is
uncontroversial in black America—then the norm must be
for black people to sound something else.
So what exactly is this “black sound” I am insisting exists?
I am not referring to black slang. Plenty of black people use
little street slang and yet still have a black sound. The
question is why you could tell most black people were black
if they read you a shopping list over the phone.
slang
informal words or phrases often associated with social groups defined by age, region,
race/ethnicity, class, etc.

Scholarship has confirmed what most of us sense intuitively:
whites and blacks are very good at identifying black voices,
even from an isolated word. The black sound is, though we
don’t usually use the term this way, an accent. It differs from
standard English’s sound in the same way that other dialects
do, in certain shadings of vowels, aspects of intonation, and
also that elusive thing known as timbre, most familiar to
singers—degrees of breathiness, grain, huskiness, “space.”
Contrary to how some may read me here, I am not bragging
about how “well” I speak. I’m not. The black sound has
nothing whatsoever to do with whether one is capable of
1176

expressing their feelings elegantly, convincing others to
their point of view, weaving an engaging story. It’s just a
matter of some vowels—it’s like the difference between one
carpet color and another, nothing more.
But why is there a black sound? Well, in actuality, there is
nothing inherently “black” about it. It isn’t genetic, of
course, and it isn’t a degradation or departure from standard
English. When English came to America, it developed in
many directions, of which today’s standard and black
varieties are but two. Black and standard English share the
relationship of two sisters, not that of a mother and her
wayward daughter. Sisters begin as different people, and
over time become even more different. Dialects of a
common language behave the same way. This is why actors
in old movies sound increasingly weird to us; people who
learned to speak in 1900 picked up sounds at a different
stage of drift than they’re at now. Fred Astaire proclaims
“This is revo-LYEW-tion!” where we would say “revo-LOOtion.” William Powell as The Thin Man prepares to round up
what he calls the “sus-PECTS” instead of the “SUS-pects.”
Sounds change. An ah might become an aw or an ay. A t
might become a d or a ch. The way a sound progresses is no
more meaningful in itself than changing hemlines, the fact
that the fade-out on pop recordings went out of fashion, or
that avocado was such a popular color in home décor for a
while. But when these random changes happen at the same

1177

time to two different dialects, over long periods, they’ll seem
more and more distinct. This is why black people have a
different sound than whites.
The differences between the white sound and the black
sound that tip an American listener off to a speaker’s race
are subtle. I am not talking here about obvious, bluesy
things, like saying thang for thing or mo for more, which are
patterns less likely of educated people. One difference is
that the eh sound before m or n sounds a little more like ih,
so that, for example, mention sounds not exactly but to a
whisper of an extent like mintion. Or, the er sound is slightly
distinct: bird will sound a touch like buh-urd—not in a
drawly way, but enough to alert the American brain. Then
there is the timbre, fine-grained differences in vocal
placement and texture that analysts have yet to characterize
in detail, though the ear and mind can pick them up easily
enough.
As dry as such details are in isolation, together they are why
you might sometimes have heard a voice on National Public
Radio and known the person was black, no matter whether
they were talking about the latest doings in Congress or
tomorrow’s weather. If you have ever had that impression,
you may well have felt guilty about it, especially if you’re
white.
The dominant conception is that only racism could create

1178

the impression that black people have a particular way of
speaking. The assumption, roughly, is that educated black
people talk just like educated white people, while less
educated black people usually (but not always) speak a
combination of Southern English and bad grammar. There is
little room in our public discourse for the reality, which is
that 1) almost all black people code-switch between standard
and Black (not Southern) English to varying degrees, 2) even
the most educated black people typically talk with vowel
colorings and a general cadence that most Americans
readily hear as “black” (and not “Southern”) after a few
sentences, and 3) there isn’t a thing wrong with that.
The result of all of this, for me, is an ongoing cognitive
dissonance in my relations with other people. Yet I stopped
bringing it up long ago. You just hit a wall trying.
cognitive dissonance
mental stress resulting from holding contradictory sets of beliefs or values; here, the
disjuncture between the things McWhorter knows as a linguist and his experience of
being in the world as an African American whose language doesn’t match the
stereotype held by many of how black Americans sound or should sound.

Though I often wish I did, I don’t have the vowels and
cadence of the “blaccent.” I have lost count of how many
times callers-in to radio shows I appeared on have assumed I
was white (including plenty of black ones) or asked whether
I was. Radio hosts often gently advise me to, when
commenting on racial issues, mention my race on air—
which indicates that it’s not evident from my voice that I’m
1179

black. Several listeners to my Great Courses lectures have
written to me and mentioned that they didn’t know I was
black until they saw my photograph. Once, answering the
phone for a white roommate, I listened as an old man
drifted, when a news event came up, into a diatribe about
“niggers” coming over the horizon; clearly, he did not hear
blackness in my voice. I barely code-switch—after drinks,
awakened in the middle of the night, talking to my
daughters, amused or angry, I sound pretty much the same:
boring Mid-Atlantic American. I have written here and there
about the fact that black Americans have a larger English
than most white Americans. Alas, my English isn’t large at
all.
My noting that I don’t have a black-sounding voice has, on a
couple of occasions, seemed to peeve the black person I was
talking to. I think they were wondering whether I was
claiming that, unlike other black people, I speak “properly.”
I mean no such thing—though much of what made it seem
like I did was surely my “white” voice and the subconscious
associations it brings up.
There has also been the occasional white person who has
sincerely suggested that I just take on a black sound if I feel
so uncomfortable. But they were unclear as to what I meant
when I referred to “sounding black.” One white woman said,
while making vaguely vernacular street gestures, “Can’t you
just, like, ‘Heyyy . . . ’?” Well, I suppose I could “Heyyy”—

1180

but, for one thing, it would be stepping outside of my
natural self. The fluently “ Ebonic ” guy expected to speak
standard English does not need to adopt a foreign code to do
so—any black person can speak standard as well as Black
English, even if they would rather dwell in the latter. I didn’t
grow up saying “Heyyy,” and Rosetta Stone offers no
materials that might instruct me in the art.
Ebonic
an adjective derived from Ebonics, a term popularized in the press in the late 1990s to
refer to what linguists more often term African American English, the variety of
English that McWhorter is contrasting with “sounding White” and standard English.
Rosetta Stone
a software company that sells well-known language-learning materials for a variety
of languages.

Accent is the hardest thing to pick up in a new way of
speaking after the age of about fourteen. The colorings that
constitute a blaccent are subtle, deeply ingrained, and even
harder to master for someone whose home base is standard
English, precisely because Black English and standard
English are so similar. And no, my being a linguist doesn’t
help: we have neither the training nor the inherent talent
that would make us better at this than other people. It’s
professional actors who wangle it— Idris Elba and Thandie
Newton have, dazzlingly, managed to learn a light blaccent
for their roles despite growing up outside of the United
States. I could no more master a subtle blaccent than I could
learn to blink, lift a fork, or laugh differently. Your accent is
your you.
1181

Idrissa Akuna “Idriss” Elba (1972–)
award-winning British-born actor, DJ, and hip-hop musician who played Nelson
Mandela in Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom (2013).
Thandie Newton (1972–)
award-winning English actress who has starred in British and American films.

Why do I sound so white when I talk? It’s a good question.
Both of my parents were black (some people ask, and they
must be spurred on by my voice, as I’m not that lightskinned). I grew up around plenty of black people—in an
integrated Philadelphia neighborhood where my friends
were all black kids, and then all-black Lawnside, New
Jersey. Most of my friends were black until adolescence; my
best friend had a working-class black Philadelphian accent
himself. Neither of my parents were given to code-switching
to full-blown Black English—but both of them used a
somewhat more Black English-inflected way of speaking
when talking comfortably with black people.
Yet somehow I came out sounding like an announcer in a
1940s newsreel. I’m tempted to say that as an inveterate nerd
I identified more with the teachers and students at the
private schools I attended, who were mostly white. But
plenty of middle-class black kids—of whom, by the 1970s,
there were more every year—went to school with whites and
played at home with blacks and emerged sounding like
home, not school.
I’m not a joiner, and people around me are more likely to
pick up speech habits from me than I am to pick up speech
1182

habits from them. But then, my sister is more of a joiner
than I am, and also had a richness of black experience at allblack Spelman College that I never had. She had an
extremely light blaccent that she developed in those years to
identify with her friends, but that was just a phase; on the
whole, she has always spoken exactly like me. Truth to tell,
I’m not quite sure why I sound like this. But I do.
Spelman College
the country’s oldest private liberal-arts historically black college for women, located
in Atlanta, Georgia.

It is more my curse than it is my sister’s. I know that,
especially in school, black girls get teased for “talking white”
as much as black boys do. But I submit that, particularly in
adulthood, not having a black voice is less of a social stain
for a black woman than a black man. Linguists have
discovered that with almost eerie consistency, across
societies, women tend to speak more “properly” than men.
Certainly women use slang and profanity and say singin’
instead of singing—but less than men do. For this reason,
the black woman’s “white” speech can be processed, for
better or worse, as “ladylike,” sophisticated. However,
sounding white is not associated with masculinity—if
anything, when it pertains to a man it can be heard as
suggesting effeminacy.
I thwart expectations in glum little ways. It comes down to
the idea that black equals funky. A white woman I dated in

1183

the nineties watched me play a semi-classical piece on the
piano and then smiled, “I’m waiting to see you really get into
it.” “Into it”? It turned out she was waiting for me to play
some blues. Of course, a black man isn’t “really” playing the
piano until he “jams.” In the same way, another woman I
dated said, about my lack of a blaccent, “I’ve been waiting
for you to do it.” To her, my actual voice was preliminary,
public, stiff. She assumed that once comfortable I would
glide from Word! into “Wuh-urd!”—from no into “naw,”
from hold on into a little “hode on.” I already was
comfortable—and was talking the way I am comfortable
talking. But to her, my vocal comfort zone constituted “not
really getting into it.”
One of the strangest things about being a white-sounding
black person is that, in one regard and only in that regard, I
would have felt more comfortable in the past. Until the
1960s, the linguistic landscape in America was prissier than
it is now. In public, language was to be presented in its
Sunday best, and casual speech was only for off-time with
intimates. Even grade school inculcated hardcore spelling
and grammar rules, such that modestly educated soldiers
during the Civil War wrote letters that sound practically
Shakespearian (and sometimes quote the man). This divide
between “high” and “low” was maintained as strictly in the
black community as anywhere else, and what it meant was
that it was not considered odd for an educated black person
to not “sound black” at all.
1184

One of the oddest things about listening to recordings of
Booker T. Washington, educator Mary McLeod Bethune,
civil rights titan A. Phillip Randolph, or operatic contralto
Marian Anderson is that, in their public speech, at least,
they did not have, or barely had, blaccents, where their
equivalents today would. This is true of countless educated
black people of the time, who surprise the modern ear
listening to oral histories and other late-in-life interviews in
that they sound so utterly white.
Booker T. Washington (1856–1915)
educator, orator, author of Up from Slavery (1901), and founder of what is today
Tuskegee University, a historically black institution in Tuskegee, Alabama. Born into
slavery, Washington was in many regards the most influential African American of the
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
Mary McLeod Bethune (1875–1955)
educator, philanthropist, civil rights activist, and advisor to President Franklin
Roosevelt. The descendent of slaves, she founded what later became BethuneCookman University, a private historically black university in Daytona Beach, Florida.
A. Phillip Randolph (1989–1979)
activist in civil rights, labor rights, and socialist politics. He organized the
Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, the first predominantly African American labor
union. His lobbying of the White House during WWII resulted in an executive order
banning racial discrimination in all defense industries. He later served as the head of
the 1963 March on Washington.
Marian Anderson (1897–1993)
one of the most celebrated vocal artists of the twentieth century, known for her
performances and recordings of art songs, operatic arias, and spirituals. A key event
in Anderson’s career and in the Civil Rights Movement was the refusal of the
Daughters of the American Revolution to permit her to sing to an integrated audience
at Independence Hall in Philadelphia early in 1939. Eleanor Roosevelt arranged for
Anderson to offer an open-air concert on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial on Easter
Sunday of that year; the concert began with Anderson singing “My Country ’Tis of
Thee.” Over 75,000 people heard the concert, and it was broadcast to millions. In

1185

1955, she became the first African American—indeed, the first black person—to
perform at the Metropolitan Opera in New York City.

The social boundaries of Black English, which has existed
since at least the early 1700s, expanded starting in the late
sixties, when the counterculture encouraged a new
informality and black activists and intellectuals taught black
America to be proud of its vernacular heritage. A friend of
mine, who was young at the time and has no blaccent,
recalls a party in 1968 during which she sensed the change
in the black linguistic landscape. Two black men of modest
education teased her for not being able to enunciate
“motherfucker” as they thought she should; she wasn’t
speaking “blackly” enough. That scene would have been
much less likely ten years earlier, and just about impossible
twenty years before that. Newly, this woman was heard as
sounding white rather than just well-spoken.
vernacular
here, relating to a culture or subculture, ordinary or popular (in the sense of “of the
people”) in contrast to elite.

I certainly do not yearn for a return to the time when one
had to work so hard on one’s speech patterns to be heard by
wider society. Or to the time when black people were subject
to such decisive segregation there was no question as to
whether any black person “knew they were black” or not, no
matter how they spoke. But I do envy that black people did
not have a tacit expectation that all people of their color,
regardless of education level, temperament, or
1186

socioeconomic background, would share a way of speaking.
I would like to be able to have a conversation with a black
person of whatever social position without worrying that he
thinks I don’t sound black or that I think I’m better than
him. I don’t think I’m better than anybody and am quite
aware that I am not white.
Am I oversimplifying the problem? Maybe—I suspect many
would say that the issue isn’t only that I sound white, but
that I am reserved. That’s true; I know black men without
blaccents who are heartier types than I am and who
probably put black people off less than I do vocally. But: a
reserved black man who does have the black vowels and
cadence is read as contained, as keeping his own counsel,
not as cold, unfriendly, classist, uptight.
Though my speaking voice often feels like a club foot, I do
not hate myself. I also have black friends who do not hear
froideur in the way I talk, sometimes because they
themselves lack blaccents, and sometimes because they are
just wired differently than that administrative assistant.
And, as I am rounding fifty, my voice will increasingly come
off as the fussiness of an “older” gent, quaint rather than
offensive. I’m already sensing this with people younger than
twenty-five. It’s the sole facet of aging I’m enjoying.
froideur
standoffishness, coolness with respect to other people.

1187

Still, when I read that Jewish immigrants at the turn of the
twentieth century learning English felt like they might open
their mouths to speak only for shards of glass to fall out, I
identify. I all but stopped doing live talks on race years ago
despite the money I could earn, out of a sense that using my
“white” voice to have such discussions was ineffective and
makes me sound disconnected from the issues. I mainly
write on race instead; on paper my vowels and cadence don’t
distort my message.
Sounding black? What’s that all about? Well, that. A minor
problem in the grand scheme, I know. But I’m just saying.
(Luckily, in print.)
RESPOND●

1. What is your response to McWhorter’s argument? What is
your visceral response, that is, how does it make you feel?
(As his essay illustrates, our responses to others’ language
—or even discussions about it—is often visceral in nature:
we have a gut response to how others sound or what is said
about how others sound.) And what is your intellectual
response to it? That is, what do you understand his main
claims to be, and how well has he provided support for
them?
2. In many regards, McWhorter’s analysis rests on definitional
arguments, including the definition of “sounding black” as
well as characterizations of the attitudes held by African
Americans and by white Americans toward not only
sounding black but also individuals who are black but who

1188

do not sound black. Make three columns, listing all the
features McWhorter gives of each of these three
phenomena: sounding black; African American attitudes
toward those who sound black and those who do not
sound black; and white attitudes toward those who sound
black and those who do not sound black. (See Chapter 9 on
definitional arguments.)
3. As the discussion of stasis theory in Chapter 1 explains,
arguments of definition rely on arguments of fact. What
factual information about language, language varieties,
and language attitudes does McWhorter present in this
chapter? How much, if any, of this information was new to
you?
4. THINKING CRITICALLY Chapter 1 and Chapter 7 discuss
invitational arguments, that is, arguments that invite us
into a space where we can consider a complex issue from
numerous perspectives. What specific issues—and there are
many—is McWhorter asking us to consider and even to
confront about ourselves and our society?
5. Some Americans increasingly argue that they do not see
color, that is, that they are “color blind” when it comes to
matters of race or ethnicity. McWhorter’s text reminds us
that, whatever we may believe about color-blind societies
as a goal or as reality, we, as Americans, hear color along
with other social categories; that is, on hearing individuals
(even on the phone) we cannot help but attribute features
to them. In short, we place people as belonging (or not) to
specific social groups based on sex or gender, sexual
identity, race or ethnicity, class, place of origin, and
educational level as well as personality traits like
likeability, competence, and trustworthiness. (Although

1189

McWhorter does not cite the research to support this claim,
he is well aware of it, and be assured that the research on
this topic is plentiful and robust. Furthermore, it is not only
Americans who engage in these behaviors; all humans do.)
With this background and your responses to the earlier
questions, write a rhetorical analysis of McWhorter’s
argument, focusing on how McWhorter seeks to prod
readers to examine some of the consequences of not
sounding black; that is, not conforming to the linguistic
stereotypes of those we might encounter in daily life. Be
sure to consider this situation from the perspective of both
the person who is stereotyped and the one who does the
stereotyping. (See Chapter 6 on rhetorical analyses.)

1190

The Japanese American Citizens League (Nikkei
Amerikajin Shimin Dōmei), founded on the West Coast in
1929, has focused primarily on civil rights issues that affect
not just Japanese Americans or even Asian Pacific Americans
but all groups that are the targets of bigotry. These issues
include interracial marriage, race-based restrictions on
immigration, and segregation. The League is also concerned
with documenting and preserving the history of the Japanese
American experience. This selection is an excerpt from a 2012
handbook published by the organization in its efforts to help
those outside the Japanese American community correct
misconceptions about what Japanese Americans endured
during the Second World War. As you read, consider how and
why word choices ultimately help construct reality as we
perceive it by thinking about the very different images that
are represented by the terms traditionally used (e.g.,
relocation) and those being suggested by the Japanese
American Citizens League (forced removal).
from The Power of Words
JAPANESE AMERICAN CITIZENS LEAGUE
“History is written by the victors” is an old saying. Is it true?
What about for those who suffered “ collateral damage” as with
Japanese Americans during World War II—because they looked
like the enemy? As the Nikkei (persons of Japanese ancestry
outside Japan) culturally Americanized over the 20th century,
were they to be forever burdened with historical accounts of

1191

their WWII experience written in euphemistic and misleading
vocabulary? It is now time to acknowledge and correct this
misleading language of the past and focus on truth and
accuracy for the future. The objective here is to suggest
vocabulary that facilitates a more accurate understanding of
events and actions experienced by the Nikkei during this tragic
time.
collateral damage
according to the U.S. military, “unintentional or incidental damage to non-combatant
[that is, civilian] casualties and non-combatant property.” (The term collateral usually
means “parallel” or “additional.”) The term dates from 1961 and began to be widely used
during the Vietnam War. Many people consider it to be a euphemism for death and injury
inflicted by the military.

Much of the U.S. government activity was shrouded in secrecy
during the war. This was implemented in the popular press and
media accounts of that time by the use of euphemistic terms by
government agencies to make these actions more acceptable to
the public. In the decades following the war, as scholars,
analysts, and historians began to probe the realities of the
WWII Nikkei experience, what emerged was that the familiar
vocabulary of the war era did not adequately describe what
actually happened. The widespread use of euphemistic terms,
such as evacuation and assembly centers, made the government
actions seem benign and acceptable in the context of wartime
(Daniels, 2005; Kashima, 2003). Their concerns about
euphemisms were underscored in the 1980’s with the release of
previously classified documents (via the Freedom of
Information Act), which revealed the scope and breadth of this
1192

misleading practice (Civil Liberties Public Education Fund,
1997).
benign
not harmful, gentle.

Language shapes the way we think.
— Benjamin Lee Whorf, American linguist (1897–1941)
Benjamin Lee Whorf (1897–1941)
American linguist who argued that the structure of a language influences how its
users conceptualize the world.

Language is the archive of history.
— Ralph Waldo Emerson, American poet (1803–1882)
Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803–1882)
American essayist, lecturer, and poet most often associated with the
Transcendentalist movement. Emerson praised the value of the individual, often
criticizing social pressures that kept individuals from expressing their true selves.

In looking to the future, we are guided by the words of Whorf
and Emerson. Like any other history, that of Japanese
Americans during WWII needs to be told accurately and fairly,
especially because the Constitutional issues that were involved
then have been revisited anew in the United States since
September 11, 2001. In compiling relevant documentation and
references, it is the hope that this document will encourage
more accurate discourse on the history of Nikkei in American
concentration camps during WWII and its relevance to

1193

contemporary events. Moreover, it is the hope that what took
place against Americans of Japanese ancestry during WWII
never happens again.

DICTIONARY DEFINITIONS AND EUPHEMISTIC TERMS

A euphemism is “a mild word or expression substituted for one
considered blunt and embarrassing” (Chantrell, 2002, p.186). It
comes from the Greek euphemismos, from euphemizein “use
auspicious words.” The formative elements are eu “well” and
pheme “speaking.” The term has been used in English since the
late 16th century (Chantrell, 2002). In more modern times,
author William Safire (1981) writes: “To some degree,
euphemism is a strategic misrepresentation” (p. 82).
William Safire (1929–2006)
American journalist, author, and presidential speech writer; he characterized himself as a
“libertarian conservative.” He is best known to many older Americans for his column for
the New York Times Magazine entitled “On Language.”

Typically in everyday polite discourse, speakers of English do
not like to talk about death. So instead of saying “he died,” we
say, “he passed away” or “he departed.” A similar example
comes from Japanese, where the word for death shi has the
same pronunciation as the number four. In conversations about
prices or numbers, speakers of Japanese generally avoid shi,
using yon, a word of a different origin having no connection
with death, instead (Hayakawa, 1964).

1194

Notice for Japanese Americans

However, euphemisms can be used for other purposes and are
often purposeful alternatives with hidden motives. During
WWII, the U.S. government used euphemistic language to
control public perceptions about the forced removal of
Japanese American citizens from their West Coast homes to
desolate American concentration camps further inland. The
public was told that Nisei and Issei [non-citizens] were being
1195

“evacuated” to “relocation centers” and “internment camps.”
Terms like “evacuation” of people sounded like they were being
rescued from some kind of disaster (like an earthquake). To
obscure the unconstitutional nature of these forced removals,
the government referred to the Nisei victims as “non-aliens”
instead of “citizens,” which might provoke public inquiries like:
“Why is the U.S. imprisoning citizens without due process of
law?” Once in camp, Nisei could earn back their citizenship by
embracing their “right” to defend their country and to serve on
the “same basis” as other Americans in the military (but in the
segregated U.S. Army 442nd Regimental Combat Team) (Lyon,
2012).
Over time, researchers and scholars, studying historical
artifacts, documents, and accounts of the period, have
increasingly pointed out the euphemistic nature of the language
employed by the U.S. government during WWII in relation to
the concentration camps in which Japanese American citizens
were incarcerated (Daniels, 2005; Kashima, 2003; Okamura,
1982). After the national trauma of the Vietnam War era, the
consciousness-raising civil rights movement, and the passage of
the Civil Liberties Act of 1988, which provided redress to
Japanese Americans incarcerated during WWII, it is compelling
to have the historical record reflect reality. While history per se
cannot be rewritten, scholars, the media, and analysts of the
future should be guided by more accurate vocabulary and
appropriate descriptors that relate to the events experienced by

1196

Japanese American children with tags

Japanese Americans during this period.

VOCABULARY RELATED TO WWII INCARCERATION OF JAPANESE AMERICANS

Bringing attention to the connotation of words and calling for
change, the Japanese American Citizens League offers a proposal
argument that has consequences for the way we describe the
incarceration of Japanese Americans during World War II.

1197

LINK TO Chapter 12, Understanding and Categorizing Proposals

We now focus in more detail on a list of words, which over time
have elicited concerns about accuracy and authenticity to the
events, actions, or reality to which they were applied—or not.
While the published record cannot be changed, current and
future analyses and assessments of historical facts will be better
served for accuracy by using the recommended word or phrase,
or explaining why they do not. In some cases, citing the word
placed in quotation marks may be appropriate.

EVACUATE/EVACUATION

The dictionary defines this verb/noun as “the process of
temporarily moving people away from an immediate and real
danger, such as a fire, flood, shoot-out, or bomb threat”
(Merriam-Webster Dictionary, 2011, para. 1). Its usage to
describe the forced removal by the federal government of over
110,000 Japanese and Japanese Americans from their homes on
the West Coast and Arizona is not accurate. They were not
“evacuated” to protect them from a disastrous environment. By
using these words, the government only made it seem that these
individuals were being “helped.”
Recommendation: The words forced removal should be used
instead. This phrase more accurately describes the lack of
choice provided to Japanese Americans who were ordered to

1198

leave their homes.

RELOCATE/RELOCATION

These terms suggest that people voluntarily moved from one
location (private homes) to another (War Relocation Authority
camp). Their usage obscures the fact that the U.S. military
forced “all Japanese persons, both alien and non-alien,” to leave
their homes and many of their belongings behind, often with
less than a week’s notice.
Recommendation: The phrase forced removal, as above, should
be used instead. This phrase more accurately describes the lack
of choice provided to Japanese Americans who were ordered to
leave their homes.

INTERNMENT

This word has a legal definition that refers to the confinement
or impounding of enemy aliens in a time of war (MerriamWebster Dictionary, 2011). Most of the several tens of thousands
of people of Japanese ancestry that were incarcerated in War
Relocation Authority (WRA) camps during World War II were
American citizens; thus, the term does not apply. A few
thousand mostly Issei [non-citizen] men were held in the Army
and Department of Justice internment camps, but with the
family reunification program and Nikkei from Latin American
countries, the total exceeded 17,000 men, women, and children.
Recommendation: The word incarceration more accurately
1199

describes those held in WRA camps. Incarcerate is generally
defined as “to confine or imprison, typically as punishment for
a crime.” This term reflects the prison-like conditions faced by
Japanese Americans as well as the view that they were treated
as if they were guilty of sabotage, espionage, and/or suspect
loyalty.

Japanese Americans behind barbed wire

ASSEMBLY CENTER

When many Japanese and Japanese Americans were initially
forced to leave their homes, they were directed to live
temporarily in “assembly centers,” officially “Wartime Civil
Control Administration” camps. (The WCCA was essentially a
branch of the U.S. Army.) These makeshift detention facilities
1200

were often crudely fashioned from animal stalls at racetracks
and fair grounds, still emitting the stench of animal waste but
surrounded by barbed wire and search lights with armed
soldiers to contain the people of Japanese descent. The
euphemistic nature of this term hid the degrading lack of
amenities and very crude living spaces in these facilities. For
example, on December 18, 1944, Supreme Court Justice Owen J.
Roberts stated that “an ‘Assembly Center’ was a euphemism for
a prison . . . so-called ‘Relocation Centers,’ a euphemism for
concentration camps” (Ishizuka, 2006, p. 72).
Recommendation: The more accurate term is temporary
detention center. A detention center is generally a place where
prisoners are temporarily held pending some further
disposition, which in the case of Nikkei civilians was being
shipped to WRA concentration camps. In certain discussions of
historical context, the phrase assembly center may be
appropriate only as part of a proper name such as the Fresno
Assembly Center. Otherwise, it is not recommended for general
usage, even with quotation marks.

RELOCATION CENTER

This term, like “assembly center,” was used by the government
to give an impression to the general public that the forcibly
moved Japanese and Japanese Americans were placed in
pleasant “summer camp-like” facilities. This somewhat
innocuous imagery was in stark contrast to the reality which
was crude tar-papered wood barracks located in harsh, desolate
1201

climates in compounds surrounded by barbed wire fences with
guard towers where the sentries pointed their weapons toward
those inside the barbed wire fences.
Recommendation: The recommended more accurate term is
American concentration camp (see discussion below).
Alternatively, incarceration camp may be used as well as illegal
detention center. In certain discussions of historical context,
the term “relocation” may be appropriate only as part of a
proper name such as War Relocation Authority (WRA).
Otherwise, it is not recommended for general usage, even with
quotation marks.

CONCENTRATION CAMP

This term was not generally used in public discourse by the U.S.
government in relation to Nikkei incarceration, even though it
has been found in non-public documents and transcriptions by
high government officials including President Roosevelt (Civil
Liberties Public Education Fund, 1997). One dictionary simply
defines concentration camp as “a facility where persons (as
prisoners of war, political prisoners, or refugees) are detained
or confined” (Merriam-Webster, 2011, para. 1). The
Encyclopedia Britannica (1977) describes a concentration camp
as an internment center for political prisoners and members of
national or minority groups who are confined for reasons of
state security, exploitation, or punishment, usually by executive
decree or military order. Persons are placed in such camps
often on the basis of identification with a particular ethnic or
1202

political group rather than as individuals and without benefit
either of indictment or fair trial.
These are different from prisons for convicted criminals,
prisoner of war camps, or refugee camps.
As the Encyclopedia notes, among the earliest examples of the
use of the term occurred during the 1901–02 South African War,
in which the British confined non-combatants of the republics
of Transvaal and Cape Colony in concentration camps. The
incarceration of Japanese and Japanese Americans during
WWII is cited as another example of non-combatant civilians in
concentration camps. German concentration camps were first
established in 1933 to confine opponents of the Nazi party.
During WWII, the target shifted to minority groups, mainly
Jews, and also became extermination centers. Most notorious
were Auschwitz, Majdanek and Treblinka in Poland and
Buchenwald in Germany. When these horrors became known
to the world, these concentration camps became synonymous
with death camps—the Holocaust.
In 1994, the Japanese American National Museum (JANM) in
Los Angeles curated a new exhibit entitled “America’s
Concentration Camps: Remembering the Japanese American
Experience,” which ran from November 11 to October 15 of the
following year. A traveling version was exhibited at the Ellis
Island Immigration Museum in New York in 1998–1999. But in
the preparation of moving the exhibit from Los Angeles to Ellis

1203

Island, a controversy over the term “concentration camps”
emerged in New York where a large Jewish population lives. A
number of Holocaust survivors and relatives expressed
sensitivity towards public confusion over “death camps” with
“concentration camps.” A meeting of representatives from
JANM and seven American Jewish organizations resulted in the
following text, which was placed at the beginning of the
exhibition and which distinguished the Nazi death camps from
the American concentration camps (Ishizuka, 2006, pp.166–
167):
A concentration camp is a place where people are
imprisoned not because of any crimes they committed, but
simply because of who they are. Although many groups
have been singled out for such persecution throughout
history, the term “concentration camp” was first used at the
turn of the century in the Spanish American and Boer
Wars.
During World War II, America’s concentration camps were
clearly distinguishable from Nazi Germany’s. Nazi camps
were places of torture, barbarous medical experiments,
and summary executions; some were extermination
centers with gas chambers. Six million Jews and many
others including Gypsies, Poles, homosexuals, and political
dissidents were slaughtered in the Holocaust.
In recent years, concentration camps have existed in the
former Soviet Union, Cambodia, and Bosnia. Despite the
1204

difference, all had one thing in common: the people in
power removed a minority group from the general
population and the rest of society let it happen.
Recommendation: Instead of relocation center, the phrase
American concentration camp is recommended. Depending on
the context, the phrase in quotation marks “American
concentration camp” may be used. Alternatives are
incarceration camp or illegal detention center. Ten types of U.S.
imprisonment centers during WWII have been described by
Kashima, 2003, p.11.

SUMMARY TABLE OF ACCURATE TERMS

The table below, based on Ishizuka, 2006, p.72, summarizes the
various euphemistic terms and their more accurate
counterparts.
EUPHEMISM

ACCURATE TERM

evacuation

exclusion, or forced removal

relocation

incarceration in camps; also used after release from camp

non-aliens

U.S. citizens of Japanese ancestry

civilian
exclusion
orders

detention orders

any or all
persons

primarily persons of Japanese ancestry

may be
excluded

evicted from one’s home

1205

native
American
aliens

renunciants (citizens who, under pressure, renounced U.S.
citizenship)

assembly
center

temporary detention facility

relocation
center

American concentration camp, incarceration camp, illegal
detention center; inmates held here are “incarcerees“

internment
center

reserve for DOJ or Army camp holding alien enemies under
Alien Enemies Act 1798

REFERENCES
Chantrell, G. (2002). The Oxford dictionary of word histories.
London: Oxford University Press.
Civil Liberties Public Education Fund. (1997). Personal justice
denied: Report of the Commission on Wartime Relocation
and Internment of Civilians 1982–83. Seattle: University of
Washington Press.
Daniels, R. (2005). Words do matter: A note on inappropriate
terminology and the incarceration of the Japanese
Americans. In L. Fiset & G. Nomura (Eds.), Nikkei in the
Pacific Northwest: Japanese Americans and Japanese
Canadians in the twentieth century (pp. 183–207). Seattle:
University of Washington Press.
Encyclopedia Britannica. (1977). Micropedia (Vol 3.), pp. 60–61.
Chicago, IL: Encyclopedia Britannica.
Hayakawa, S. I. (1964). Language in thought and action (2nd
1206

ed). New York: Harcourt, Brace & World.
Ishizuka, K. L. (2006). Lost and found: Reclaiming the Japanese
American incarceration. Urbana & Chicago, IL: University of
Illinois Press.
Kashima, T. (2003). Judgment without trial: Japanese American
imprisonment during World War II. Seattle and London:
University of Washington Press.
Lyon, C. M. (2012). Prisons and patriots: Japanese American
wartime citizenship: Civil disobedience, and historical
memory. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Merriam-Webster Dictionary. (2011). Concentration camp.
Retrieved from http://www.merriamwebster.com/dictionary/concentration%20.
Merriam-Webster Dictionary. (2011). Euphemism. Retrieved
from http://www.merriamwebster.com/dictionary/euphemism
Okamura, R. Y. (1982). The American concentration camps: A
cover-up through euphemistic terminology. Journal of Ethnic
Studies, 10, 95–109.
Safire, W. (1981). On language. New York: Times Books.

RESPOND●
1. What was your response to this selection? How familiar were
you with the events described in it? To the extent that you were

1207

aware of them, what terms did you use to characterize these
events? Did you, for example, think in terms of evacuation or
forced removal? Why, do you imagine?
2. Chapter 13 on style discusses connotation, the feeling a word
evokes, in contrast to its dictionary meaning, or denotation. To
what extent does this selection focus primarily on denotation?
On connotation? How does it illustrate the ways that
denotation and connotation can be tools for euphemism, as
defined in this selection?
3. Like strong proposal arguments generally, this selection
includes arguments based on fact, arguments based on
definition, arguments of evaluation, and causal arguments, as
well as the actual proposal. Mark the sections of the selection
that represent each of these kinds of argument.
4. THINKING CRITICALLY Read about the treatment of Japanese
Americans during World War II. (Quick references here would
include the Wikipedia entries on “Internment of Japanese
Americans” and “Japanese American Service in World War II.”)
With this information, evaluate whether the terms traditionally
used or those proposed in this selection more accurately reflect
what, in fact, happened during the war.
5. This selection is a good example of the twentieth-century
philosopher and rhetorician Kenneth Burke’s claim that once
we choose the terms for describing a situation, arguments in
some sense complete themselves. In short, the conclusions of
many arguments are little more than working out the
consequences of the labels chosen for things out in the world.
(If this claim is not clear to you, consider the difference
between the labels fetus and unborn child in terms of how they
shape individuals’ understanding of abortion.) Write a causal
essay in which you examine several of the terms discussed in

1208

this selection and the ways in which they, once chosen, lead
readers toward certain conclusions while leading them away
from others. In preparing for this assignment, study Chapter 11
carefully because effective causal arguments are quite complex
to construct.

1209

English and Languages Other Than English in the United
States
CENSUS DATA
What is today the United States has been home to
multiple languages since the first indigenous peoples
arrived here from Asia. Along with other immigrant
languages, English represents a later addition to what we
might term the linguistic landscape of the United States.
Despite the presence of other languages, however, there is
no question that English has become and will remain this
country’s national language—that is, it is the most widely
used language and the one generally expected in most
government bureaucracies and in other contexts,
especially official ones.
This selection, comprising maps and a table showing the
presence of languages other than English and the reported
ability of speakers of those languages to speak English,
encourages you to consider the country’s linguistic
diversity at the state or territory level. (Obviously, the
maps would look different if the level of analysis were the
country as a whole or the counties making up each state.)
The data on which these maps are based come from the
American Community Survey, 2009–2013, and represent
the most recent data available from the U.S. Census
Bureau. Census data are self-report data; that is,
1210

individuals report information about themselves. In this
case, an adult in the family reports the language(s) other
than English spoken by members of the household who
are five years or older and assesses their proficiency in
English, that is, stating that they speak English “very well,”
“well,” “not well,” or “not at all.” Understandably, selfreport data are problematic. Your “very well” might be my
“not well,” and for many reasons, individuals may underor over-report knowledge of languages other than English.
Despite their shortcomings, they are the best data we have
about languages in this country.
Of course, the presence and absence of other languages
tells us important things about our country’s history. The
sub-Saharan languages spoken by African slaves brought
to the United States in earlier centuries played key roles in
the development of the creoles Gullah (spoken along the
South Carolina and Georgia coasts) and Afro-Seminole
(spoken in Brackettville, Texas) and influenced the
development of African American English as well as
varieties of Southern English and American English more
broadly. (Gumbo and okra are both of sub-Saharan
origin.) Despite their legacies, those languages quickly
disappeared. The diminishing number of speakers of
Native American languages reflects a history of residential
schools that Indian children were forced to attend from
the mid-nineteenth century until the mid-twentieth
century. These children were prohibited from speaking
1211

their tribal languages and were severely punished for
doing so; furthermore, children from different tribes were
put into the same classroom to minimize the use of any
language other than English. Not surprisingly, the
indigenous languages began to disappear. And the
existence of Hawai’ian Creole English stands as evidence
of the intermixing of cultures in what is today Hawai’i.
As the table below shows, we find speakers of Italian or
German or Spanish or Arabic or other languages in areas
of the United States where immigrants from
corresponding regions of the world ultimately settled.
(Particularly in the Southwest, Spanish was spoken in the
area long before English arrived.) There is strong evidence
that immigrants to the United States become speakers of
English fairly quickly, and by the third generation, the
grandchildren of immigrants often do not speak their
heritage language at all. At the same time, some
communities find ways to preserve a language other than
English that is important to them for religious or cultural
reasons, and a growing number of language groups
continue to seek ways to maintain or revitalize their
heritage language.
By the way, the census does not ask about the use of
American Sign Language (ASL), which is a completely
distinct language from English. (In other words, its
grammatical system and word order are not those of

1212

English.) There is strong evidence that ASL is the thirdmost frequently used language in the United States after
English and Spanish.
Here we present two maps and a table. As you study these
visuals, consider what they say about the complex nature
of our nation and how they function as arguments of fact.

Percent of Population Who Speak a Language Other Than Engllish

1213

1214

Percent of Population Who Speak Another Language at Home and Speak
English “Very Well”

RESPOND●
1. Had you ever thought about the topic of languages other
than English in the United States as an aspect of American
history? Why or why not, do you think? Would you expect
others to have the same response to this question? Why or
why not? Why might many Americans not be aware of the
presence of other languages across U.S. history?
2. Which of these visuals contains the most new information
for you? Which aspects of the map or table, in particular, do
you find most effective?
3. In what sense can each of these visuals be said to be
making an argument? What argument(s) might it be
making, or which argument(s) might it play a role in
supporting?

1215

4. THINKING CRITICALLY Review the discussion in Chapter 14 of
the ways that visual arguments can be used to support
logical, pathetic, and ethical arguments. Categorize the
answers you gave to Question 3 according to these criteria.
Likewise, use these criteria as ways of thinking about
additional arguments each of the maps could be used to
support.
5. An increasingly necessary (and generally challenging) skill
for success in academic writing is writing effectively about
visual displays of information, including maps and tables.
Choose the visual you find most interesting in terms of
content or design, and write a healthy paragraph about it
that might be included in an essay. Be sure to refer to the
visual by name, describe what it shows, and explain what
the map tells readers. (Here, you may find it useful to refer
to your responses to Questions 3 and 4.)

1216

Roxane Gay teaches fiction and nonfiction creative
writing at Purdue University. Gay is the author of several
books, most recently Hunger: A Memoir of (My) Body (2017),
as well as one of the writers of the comic book World of
Wakanda, which helped inspire the 2018 film, Black Panther.
Her writing frequently examines topics related to race and
ethnicity, gender, sexuality, and identity. As the daughter of
Haitian immigrants to the United States, she is also
concerned with the immigrant experience and the ways
Americans do and don’t understand other cultures and
societies. She served as the founding Essays Editor for The
Rumpus, an online literary magazine, where this essay first
appeared in 2011; it was later anthologized in her best-selling
2016 collection, Bad Feminist. In the essays in that volume,
she writes about her own experience of being gang-raped at
age twelve, although she does not mention that episode here.
As you read this selection, consider Gay’s language—the tone
she chooses—as well as her claims: that the language we often
use about sexual violence is misdirected, encouraging us to
ignore what is really going on.
The Careless Language of Sexual Violence
ROXANE GAY
There are crimes and then there are crimes and then there are
atrocities. These are, I suppose, matters of scale. I read an
article in the New York Times about an eleven-year-old girl who
was gang raped by eighteen men in Cleveland, Texas.

1217

The levels of horror to
this story are many,
from the victim’s age
to what is known about
what happened to her,
to the number of
attackers, to the public
response in that town,
to how it is being
reported. There is
video of the attack too,
because this is the
future. The
unspeakable will be
televised.
The unspeakable will be
televised
an ironic allusion to a 1970
Roxane Gay
poem and song by Gil ScottHeron, “The Revolution Will Not
Be Televised” and the earlier use of the slogan among the U.S. Black Power movement of
the 1960s.

The Times article was entitled, “Vicious Assault Shakes Texas
Town,” as if the victim in question was the town itself. James
McKinley Jr., the article’s author, focused on how the men’s
lives would be changed forever, how the town was being ripped
apart, how those poor boys might never be able to return to
school. There was discussion of how the eleven-year-old girl,
1218

the child, dressed like a twenty-year-old, implying that there is a
realm of possibility where a woman can “ask for it” and that it’s
somehow understandable that eighteen men would rape a
child. There were even questions about the whereabouts of the
mother, given, as we all know, that a mother must be with her
child at all times or whatever ill may befall the child is clearly
the mother’s fault. Strangely, there were no questions about the
whereabouts of the father while this rape was taking place.
The overall tone of the article was what a shame it all was, how
so many lives were affected by this one terrible event. Little
addressed the girl, the child. It was an eleven-year-old girl
whose body was ripped apart, not a town. It was an eleven-yearold girl whose life was ripped apart, not the lives of the men
who raped her. It is difficult for me to make sense of how
anyone could lose sight of that and yet it isn’t.
We live in a culture that is very permissive where rape is
concerned. While there are certainly many people who
understand rape and the damage of rape, we also live in a time
that necessitates the phrase “rape culture.” This phrase denotes
a culture where we are inundated, in different ways, by the idea
that male aggression and violence toward women is acceptable
and often inevitable. As Lynn Higgins and Brenda Silver ask in
their book Rape and Representation, “How is it that in spite (or
perhaps because) of their erasure, rape and sexual violence
have been so ingrained and so rationalized through their
representations as to appear ‘natural’ and inevitable, to women

1219

as men?” It is such an important question, trying to understand
how we have come to this. We have also, perhaps, become
immune to the horror of rape because we see it so often and
discuss it so often, many times without acknowledging or
considering the gravity of rape and its effects. We jokingly say
things like, “I just took a rape shower,” or “My boss totally just
raped me over my request for a raise.” We have appropriated
the language of rape for all manner of violations, great and
small. It is not a stretch to imagine why James McKinley Jr. is
more concerned about the eighteen men than one girl.
The casual way in which we deal with rape may begin and end
with television and movies where we are inundated with images
of sexual and domestic violence. Can you think of a dramatic
television series that has not incorporated some kind of rape
storyline? There was a time when these storylines had a certain
educational element to them, à la A Very Special Episode. I
remember, for example, the episode of Beverly Hills, 90210
where Kelly Taylor discussed being date raped at a slumber
party, surrounded, tearfully, by her closest friends. For many
young women that episode created a space where they could
have a conversation about rape as something that did not only
happen with strangers. Later in the series, when the show was
on its last legs, Kelly would be raped again, this time by a
stranger. We watched the familiar trajectory of violation,
trauma, disillusion, and finally vindication, seemingly
forgetting we had sort of seen this story before.

1220

Every other movie aired on Lifetime or Lifetime Movie Network
features some kind of violence against women. The violence is
graphic and gratuitous while still being strangely antiseptic
where more is implied about the actual act than shown. We
consume these representations of violence and do so eagerly.
There is a comfort, I suppose, to consuming violence contained
in 90-minute segments and muted by commercials for
household goods and communicated to us by former television
stars with feathered bangs.

While once rape as entertainment fodder may have also
included an element of the didactic, such is no longer the case.
Rape, these days, is good for ratings. Private Practice, on ABC,
recently aired a story arc where Charlotte King, the iron-willed,
independent, and sexually adventurous doctor, was brutally
raped. This happened, of course, just as February sweeps were
beginning. The depiction of the assault was as graphic as you
might expect from prime time network television. For several
episodes we saw the attack and its aftermath, how the once
vibrant Charlotte became a shell of herself, how she became
sexually frigid, how her body bore witness to the physical
damage of rape. Another character on the show, Violet, bravely
confessed she too had been raped. The show was widely
applauded for its sensitive treatment of a difficult subject.
didactic
teaching a moral lesson.
sweeps

1221

the period during which networks are vying for viewers in highly calculated ways in order
to up their ratings (and hence their ability to attract advertisers).

The soap opera General Hospital is currently airing a rape
storyline, and the height of that story arc occurred, yes, during
sweeps. General Hospital, like most soap operas, incorporates a
rape storyline every five years or so when they need an uptick
in viewers. Before the current storyline, Emily Quartermaine
was raped, and before Emily, Elizabeth Webber was raped, and
long before Elizabeth Webber, Laura, of Luke and Laura, was
raped by Luke, but that rape was okay because Laura ended up
marrying Luke, so her rape doesn’t really count. Every woman,
General Hospital wanted us to believe, loves her rapist. The
current rape storyline has a twist. This time the victim is a man,
Michael Corinthos Jr., son of Port Charles mob boss Sonny
Corinthos, himself no stranger to violence against women.
While it is commendable to see the show’s producers trying to
address the issue of male rape and prison rape, the subject
matter is still handled carelessly, is still a source of titillation,
and is still packaged neatly between commercials for cleaning
products and baby diapers.
titillation
excitement of pleasure or interest, often by means of sexually suggestive language or
images.

Of course, if we are going to talk about rape and how we are
inundated by representations of rape and how, perhaps, we’ve
become numb to rape, we have to discuss Law & Order: SVU,
which deals, primarily, in all manner of sexual assault against
1222

women, children, and once in a great while, men. Each week
the violation is more elaborate, more lurid, more unspeakable.
When the show first aired, Rosie O’Donnell, I believe, objected
quite vocally when one of the stars appeared on her show.
O’Donnell said she didn’t understand why such a show was
needed. People dismissed her objections and the incident was
quickly forgotten. The series is in its twelfth season and shows
no signs of ending anytime soon. When O’Donnell objected to
SVU’s premise, when she dared to suggest that perhaps a show
dealing so explicitly with sexual assault was unnecessary, was
too much, people treated her like she was the crazy one, the
prude censor. I watch SVU religiously, have actually seen every
single episode. I am not sure what that says about me.
Law & Order: SVU
here, SVU stands for “Special Victims Unit.”
Rosie O’Donnell (1962–)
American television personality, actress, author, and comedian known for her willingness
to express strong opinions and for her activism for lesbian rights.

I am trying to connect my ideas here. Bear with me.
It is rather ironic that only a couple of weeks ago, the Times ran
an editorial about the War on Women. This topic is, obviously,
one that matters to me. I recently wrote an essay about how, as
a writer who is also a woman, I increasingly feel that to write is
a political act whether I intend it to be or not because we live in
a culture where McKinley’s article is permissible and
publishable. I am troubled by how we have allowed intellectual
distance between violence and the representation of violence.
1223

We talk about rape but we don’t talk about rape, not carefully.
We live in a strange and terrible time for women. There are
days, like today, where I think it has always been a strange and
terrible time to be a woman. It is nothing less than horrifying to
realize we live in a culture where the “ paper of record” can
write an article that comes off as sympathetic to eighteen
rapists while encouraging victim blaming. Have we forgotten
who an eleven-year-old is? An eleven-year-old is very, very
young, and somehow, that amplifies the atrocity, at least for
me. I also think, perhaps, people do not understand the trauma
of gang rape. While there’s no benefit to creating a hierarchy of
rape where one kind of rape is worse than another because rape
is, at the end of day, rape, there is something particularly
insidious about gang rape, about the idea that a pack of men
feed on each other’s frenzy and both individually and
collectively believe it is their right to violate a woman’s body in
such an unspeakable manner.
(news)paper of record
a major newspaper that is regarded as having high professional standards and whose
accounts are taken as authoritative.

Gang rape is a difficult experience to survive physically and
emotionally. There is the exposure to unwanted pregnancy and
sexually transmitted diseases, vaginal and anal tearing, fistula
and vaginal scar tissue. The reproductive system is often
irreparably damaged. Victims of gang rape, in particular, have a
higher chance of miscarrying a pregnancy. Psychologically,
1224

there are any number of effects including PTSD, anxiety, fear,
coping with the social stigma, and coping with shame, and on
and on. The actual rape ends but the aftermath can be very far
reaching and even more devastating than the rape itself. We
rarely discuss these things, though. Instead, we are careless. We
delude ourselves that rape can be washed away as neatly as it is
on TV and in the movies where the trajectory of victimhood is
neatly defined.
fistula
an abnormal hole that can develop between the vagina and the rectum, ureter, or
bladder. Consequences include incontinence of urine or feces, infertility, and depression,
among others.
PTSD (Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder)
a psychiatric disorder that can occur after a person is exposed to some horrific event or
series of events such as serving or living in a war zone, surviving sexual assault, living
through natural disaster, or surviving major accidents. Individuals with PTSD suffer from
mental distress, including disturbing feelings or thoughts, which can be triggered by
situations that in some way parallel the source of the original trauma.

I cannot speak universally but given what I know about gang
rape, the experience is wholly consuming and a never-ending
nightmare. There is little point in pretending otherwise.
Perhaps McKinley Jr. is, like so many people today,
anesthetized or somehow willfully distanced from such brutal
realities. Perhaps it is that despite this inundation of rape
imagery, where we are immersed in a rape culture, that not
enough victims of gang rape speak out about the toll the
experience exacts. Perhaps the right stories are not being told
or we’re not writing enough about the topic of rape. Perhaps we
are writing too many stories about rape. It is hard to know how
1225

such things come to pass.
I am approaching this topic somewhat selfishly. I write about
sexual violence a great deal in my fiction. The why of this
writerly obsession doesn’t matter but I often wonder why I
come back to the same stories over and over. Perhaps it is
simply that writing is cheaper than therapy or drugs. When I
read articles such as McKinley’s, I start to wonder about my
responsibility as a writer. I’m finishing my novel right now. It’s
the story of a brutal kidnapping in Haiti and part of the story
involves gang rape. Having to write that kind of story requires
going to a dark place. At times, I have made myself nauseous
with what I’m writing and what I am capable of writing and
imagining, my ability to go there.
As I write any of these stories, I wonder if I am being gratuitous.
I want to get it right. How do you get this sort of thing right?
How do you write violence authentically without making it
exploitative? There are times when I worry I am contributing to
the kind of cultural numbness that would allow an article like
the one in the Times to be written and published, that allows
rape to be such rich fodder for popular culture and
entertainment. We cannot separate violence in fiction from
violence in the world no matter how hard we try. As Laura
Tanner notes in her book Intimate Violence, “the act of reading
a representation of violence is defined by the reader’s
suspension between the semiotic and the real, between a
representation and the material dynamics of violence which it

1226

evokes, reflects, or transforms.” She also goes on to say that,
“The distance and detachment of a reader who must leave his or
her body behind in order to enter imaginatively into the scene
of violence make it possible for representations of violence to
obscure the material dynamics of bodily violation, erasing not
only the victim’s body but his or her pain.” The way we
currently represent rape, in books, in newspapers, on
television, on the silver screen, often allows us to ignore the
material realities of rape, the impact of rape, the meaning of
rape.
semiotic
relating to representation systems, rather than reality itself. Thus, language, music, and
visual arts—painting and photography, for example—can all be seen as semiotic systems,
which, as Gay notes, are distinct from the reality of lived experience (although they can, in
important ways, become part of lived experience).

While I have these concerns, I also feel committed to telling the
truth, to saying these violences happen even if bearing such
witness contributes to a spectacle of sexual violence. When
we’re talking about race or religion or politics, it is often said we
need to speak carefully. These are difficult topics where we
need to be vigilant not only in what we say but how we express
ourselves. That same care, I would suggest, has to be extended
to how we write about violence, and sexual violence in
particular.
In the Times article, the phrase “sexual assault” is used, as is the
phrase “the girl had been forced to have sex with several men.”
The word “rape” is only used twice and not really in connection
1227

with the victim. That is not the careful use of language.
Language, in this instance, and far more often than makes
sense, is used to buffer our sensibilities from the brutality of
rape, from the extraordinary nature of such a crime. Feminist
scholars have long called for a rereading of rape. Higgins and
Silver note that “the act of rereading rape involves more than
listening to silences; it requires restoring rape to the literal, to
the body: restoring, that is, the violence—the physical, sexual
violation.” I would suggest we need to find new ways, whether
in fiction or creative nonfiction or journalism, for not only
rereading rape but rewriting rape as well, ways of rewriting that
restore the actual violence to these crimes and that make it
impossible for men to be excused for committing atrocities and
that make it impossible for articles like McKinley’s to be
written, to be published, to be considered acceptable.
An eleven-year-old girl was raped by eighteen men. The
suspects ranged in age from middle-schoolers to a 27-year-old.
There are pictures and videos. Her life will never be the same.
The New York Times, however, would like you to worry about
those boys, who will have to live with this for the rest of their
lives. That is not simply the careless language of violence. It is
the criminal language of violence.

RESPOND●
1. Gay is angry, very angry, and she is, of course, angry at two
levels: she is outraged about sexual violence against women in

1228

this society, but she is also outraged about how we minimize
that violence through the language we use to discuss it. What
evidence does Gay offer for her claims with regard to how such
misdirected language deflects attention from the more basic
problem of sexual violence against women?
2. How would you characterize Gay’s tone? Given that she is a
professor, do you find the piece to be academic? Formal?
Stuffy? Conversational? Committed? What adjectives come to
mind for you? As noted in Question 1, Gay is angry, but, we
contend, her tone is not characterized by the ranting or raving
we often associate with anger. How and where does Gay’s
anger come out? Consider also the fact that this essay was
written for an online context. In what ways might that fact
influence the tone of the essay? In responding to this question,
be sure to point to specific points in the text as evidence.
(Chapter 13 on style may give you helpful ideas to use in
responding to this question.)
3. Since Gay wrote this essay, a number of events have enabled
freer talk among Americans about sexual violence toward
women. These events would include a number of high profile
and highly disputed incidents on campuses involving alcohol
and sex; the trial of the male university doctor who sexually
assaulted well over 200 female athletes, including Olympic
athletes, for decades; and the #MeToo movement, which
encouraged women to share their stories of sexual violence
and harassment. How would you evaluate the extent to which
American culture is willing to talk frankly about sexual violence
against women or men at this time? What sort of language gets
used to discuss these topics? What evidence would you give?
4. THINKING CRITICALLY As the headnote explains, Gay has written
quite publicly of her own gang rape as a young adolescent, yet

1229

she refers to this aspect of her past only indirectly in this text.
How, specifically, does she allude to it? What might have been
her motivation for treating her life history as she did when
writing about this subject? How would the essay have been
different had she not acknowledged that history in any way? If
she had focused the essay on her own past? How do all these
questions relate to issues of ethos? (See Chapter 3 on the
creation of ethos.)
5. Find one or two articles on a topic that matters to you for
whatever reason and examine critically the language used in
them. Then write an evaluative essay in which you assess
how language is used about this topic. Much like Gay, you may
wish to focus on an article or articles that anger you because of
the way the topic is treated. Like Gay, you will also have to
consider carefully how you will construct your ethos and how
you will provide support for your claims. (See Chapter 10 on
writing evaluative arguments and Chapter 3 on constructing
ethos.)

1230

Jorge Encinas is a freelance journalist living in Tucson,
Arizona. Following two tours of duty in Iraq with the U.S.
Army, Encinas completed his BA and MA at the University
of Arizona School of Journalism. After graduation, he
served as an intern at Code Switch: Race and Identity
Remixed, an award-winning production of National Public
Radio. Code Switch began as a blog in 2013 and added
weekly podcasts in 2016. It seeks to present stories about
aspects of race and ethnicity that offer insight into
American culture in ways that daily news programs often
do not. Its name comes from the linguistic phenomenon of
code-switching—the way speakers of multiple languages
or dialects generally move effortlessly between them as
they negotiate the social realities of everyday life, creating
complex identities for themselves in the process of doing
so. In this selection, we read about the situation of a
growing number of baseball players who are immigrants
and whose first language is not English as they seek to
create a professional image for themselves. As you read
this blog posting from 2017, consider the ways not being
comfortable speaking a language can have consequences
of many kinds.

How Latino Players Are Helping Major League Baseball Learn
Spanish
JORGE ENCINAS
1231

With the start of baseball season in sight, millions of Latino
fans in the U.S., the Caribbean, and Latin America will be
rooting for their favorite players, many of whom are
transplants from places like Venezuela, Dominican
Republic, and Cuba. But Spanish-speaking fans, millions of
whom watch Spanish-language broadcasts of baseball
games, will have little idea of the lingering challenge some
Latino players in the States have long faced: inadequate
language support from the minor and major leagues.
Much of the issues surround the inability of the Latino
players to meaningfully communicate with the press. This
can be the result of simply not speaking each other’s
language, a barrier in how cultural norms affect the use of
language, or from poor reporting on Latino players. One
such incident of lackluster coverage happened last year
when Brian T. Smith from the Houston Chronicle wrote an
article on the struggling performance of Carlos Gómez
during his season with the Houston Astros. Gómez, born in
the Dominican Republic, speaks English, but not with native
proficiency. When Smith quoted Gómez as saying, “For the
last year and this year, I not really do much for this team.
The fans be angry. They be disappointed,” the mangled
language sparked a backlash about how the media can
sometimes cover players in a way that demeans their
intelligence or leaves them embarrassed.
Adrian Burgos Jr., a professor at the University of Illinois

1232

who specializes in Latino and sports history, says there is a
history of English-language media being insensitive in the
coverage Latino players have received in the past. “The
practice of poking fun at the accents that Latino players used
has been a traditional exercise of the English-language
press,” Burgos said. He says they tend to highlight the
accents and fail to adequately convey the ideas that Latino
players are trying to express.
When the backlash against Gómez quotes began, freelance
writer Britni De La Cretaz wrote an article pointing to the
lack of diversity in newsrooms as contributing to the lack of
sensitivity from both Smith and the editors who did not
address the grammatically-poor quotes before publishing
the article. De La Cretaz pointed to The 2014 Associated
Press Sports Editors Racial and Gender Report Card which
concluded that more than 91 percent of sports editors and 85
percent of reporters are white.
“For me, what’s important is talking to journalists in the
community and trying to make sure that I am respectfully
representing people,” De La Cretaz, who does not speak
Spanish, said about covering these players. “I think the
responsibility there lies with newsrooms and that’s kind of
part of the problem, too,” she said. “Since I’m a white writer
who is writing and my editor is a white editor there’s a huge
blind spot there.”

1233

According to the 2014 AP report, there has been an increase
in people of color in sports newsrooms, but most of the
progress can be attributed to the diversity found at ESPN.
For instance, if the male columnists of color employed by
ESPN were removed from the total number of sports staffers
at the over 100 newspapers and websites AP reviewed, the
percentage of columnists of color would drop from more
than 17 percent to three percent.
Significantly, ESPN has dedicated major resources to its
Spanish-language viewers and, by extension, to the coverage
it gives Spanish-speaking athletes in general.
Freddy Rolón, vice president and general manager at ESPN
Deportes, oversees the network’s business and television’s
more than 4,500 live hours of Spanish-language content
every year. “When we look at the marketplace for the
Hispanic audience, we see actually growth in both the
English side and the Spanish-language side. And we’re
seeing a big growth in the overlap as well with the bilingual
audience,” he said.
ESPN Deportes (Spanish, “ESPN Sports”)
U.S. Spanish-language sports television broadcaster whose target audience is
Hispanic viewers. It broadcasts to some 5.5 million Hispanic households in the United
States. In addition to broadcasting from the U.S., it also broadcasts from Mexico City.

Rolón points out that while the bilingual market is growing,
Latinos tend to gravitate towards the Spanish ESPN Deportes
network for sports like fútbol, soccer, and English ESPN for
1234

American football despite the complex overlap in the
bilingual audience. That, Rolón says, is the result of each
English or Spanish side of the network having cultivated
more expertise through a longer history of covering the two
different sports.
But covering baseball is complicated, in large part because
of its astronomical popularity in and equally important fan
bases in the U.S. and Latin America. “When you speak about
baseball, it speaks to Latinos on both sides of their being,”
Rolón said. “There’s a question of identity and how that is
mixed between your country of origin and the country that
you are part of and you live in. That is very much a fabric of
baseball.”
Rolón says when ESPN Deportes launched in 2004, they
found a “huge void” at the intersection of Spanish and
baseball that was not being filled. This gap in Spanish
coverage led ESPN to realize there was an opportunity to get
that coverage from the reporters to bleed into the English
programming. “By getting more candid conversations with
the players, by letting them open up a little bit more because
we're talking to them in their native languages, we got better
stories and we were better at serving fans because we could
tell them things they might not have heard if they were just
looking at it from an English-language lens,” Rolón said.

1235

ESPN’s Pedro Gomez interviews American League All-Stars David Ortiz and
Miguel Cabrera during the 2010 State Farm Home Run Derby at Angel Stadium
of Anaheim on July 12, 2010

ESPN’s Pedro Gomez, a bilingual journalist who has covered
baseball for more than 20 years, says covering the players in
two languages has improved the reporting and how the
players express themselves. “I remember when I started
back in the late ’80s, early ’90s, I can’t think of another
bilingual reporter that existed on the baseball beat,” Gomez
said. “And now you walk into a club house, and there are
more and more bilingual reporters covering Major League
Baseball.” While there are more bilingual reporters, Gomez
says he would not go as far as agreeing that Spanishspeaking players are not comfortable enough to approach
the press more readily today than in the past.
For the 2016 season, MLB mandated that all teams provide
interpreters for players with limited or no English

1236

proficiency. Foreign-born Latinos made up a quarter of the
players on opening day of the 2016 season and come from
countries where English proficiency may be limited and
Spanish is the primary language. Gomez believes
interpreters are a step in the right direction. “Players used to
have to grab a coach, a teammate who spoke both languages
and kind of use them as a translator and of course these
people weren't trained as professional translators,” Gomez
said.
MLB (Major League Baseball)
the oldest professional sports organization in the U.S. and Canada composed of 30
teams. In 2017, MLB revenues exceeded $10 billion.

Paul Mifsud, an MLB vice president and deputy general
counsel, says the interpreters the teams are required to hire,
which are subsidized by the league and included in
negotiations with the players union, will be in place for the
next five years. “There was initial skepticism about the value
of it, but at this point all teams, I think, have really bitten
into it and find it extremely useful,” Mifsud said. “It’s really
started to improve the communication dynamic in the
clubhouse and the ability of the players who may have felt
uncomfortable talking to the media.”
Ozzie Guillén, former White Sox shortstop and manager,
said there has been improvement, but there is much still
needed to help Latinos when it comes to language. “Baseball
[has] improved a lot, but it’s hard right now to speak the

1237

Chicago White Sox manager Ozzie Guillén, left, talks with first base coach
Harold Baines in the dugout during a game in 2011

language because you don’t need to,” Guillén said. “Some
players think, ‘If I produce, I don’t need to speak English,
and they have to figure [it] out to understand what I’m
saying.’”
Guillén also joked that when you’re good you don’t need to
learn English, but if you’re not, you had better learn English.
However, he did say it was important that players learn
English. But he added that a language barrier is
accompanied by a cultural barrier in how that language is
1238

used: what is being said and how it is interpreted by the
public. Guillén says that gap in cultural translation landed
him in trouble because what is appropriate in Spanish and
his culture might not be perceived the same way in the U.S.
In one instance Guillén received backlash while managing
the White Sox for saying it was unfair for Asian players to be
given interpreters while Latinos were left without them. In
2010, USA Today reported him as saying:
“Very bad. I say, why do we have Japanese interpreters, and
we don’t have a Spanish one. I always say that. Why do they
have that privilege and we don’t?” Guillén said Sunday
before Chicago played the Oakland Athletics. “Don’t take this
wrong, but they take advantage of us. We bring a Japanese
player, and they are very good, and they bring all these
privileges to them. We bring a Dominican kid . . . go to the
minor leagues, good luck. Good luck. And it’s always going
to be like that. It’s never going to change. But that’s the way
it is.”
There was a divide in the media over what Guillén said and
how it was interpreted, leading to friction between him and
the MLB.
While there were some interpreters before the 2016
requirement was put in place, they were not mandated by
MLB and were hired at the discretion of the teams. With just
a handful of Asian players in the league and on different
1239

teams around the country, coaching staff and fellow players
were not readily available to translate.
This generalized “lost in translation” effect is being
addressed by MLB with acculturation and language lessons
to Latino players while in minor league teams. “Players who
are going to be successful major leaguers for many years,
there’s obvious advantages to having those players be
bilingual and not just speak Spanish,” Mifsud said.
Guillén agrees that there are missed opportunities for Latino
players to take up leadership roles because they cannot be
outspoken about what they feel and think. That, he says, is a
reason some great Latino players never become managers
or join a team’s leadership ranks. Guillén says learning
English and acclimating to U.S. culture are most important
for young players in the minors who have less money and
support, both on and off the field. During the 2016 Minor
League Baseball season, Latinos accounted for more than 41
percent of the players.
While long overdue, MLB’s plan to improve language
services and cultural acclimation and the press’s continued
efforts to more accurately cover Spanish-speaking players
should result in players feeling more at ease with the press
and their fans, and fans gaining more access to and insights
into their favorites.

1240

RESPOND●

1. Encinas would likely claim that he has written an argument
based on fact. What claim or thesis has he used these facts
to support? (See Chapter 8 for information on arguments
based on fact.)
2. What sorts of “hard evidence” does Encinas use to support
these claims? (Here, you might make a two-column chart,
with the categories of hard evidence in one column—facts,
statistics, surveys and polls, and testimonies and narratives
—and all the examples of hard evidence you find in the
other.) How appropriate is this evidence in terms of kind
and amount, given the argument Encinas is making? By the
way, is there relevance to the fact that MLB profits in 2017
exceeded 10 billion? Why or why not? Why might Encinas
not have mentioned this fact? (See Chapter 4 on kinds of
hard evidence.)
3. What are the short- and long-term consequences of the
language challenges faced by some baseball players who
are immigrants to the United States? (We have framed the
question as we have because some players from other
countries arrive speaking English well.) How easy do you
think it would be for you to master a new language well
enough to feel confident being interviewed on television?
How can this situation help us appreciate some of the
challenges immigrants might face more broadly?
4. THINKING CRITICALLY Study the comment in paragraph 3 by
Professor Burgos. Do you agree with his claim that the
press has traditionally “poked fun” at the accents of Latino
players? What are the consequences of such a practice? Is it
limited to Latino players? What might the consequences be

1241

of mocking and belittling the accents of those do not speak
American English natively, particularly given how few
Americans can speak a language other than English with
any degree of fluency or with a native-like accent? How is
such mocking related to issues of power?
5. Do some research on the resources available in your area to
help immigrants to the United States learn English. Here,
rather than focusing on intensive English programs that
prepare international students to study at U.S. colleges and
universities, look for information about programs that
teach English to immigrants, refugees, and asylees. How
many such programs are there? Where are they located?
How does this line up with where the immigrant
populations live? What are the fees, if any? How large are
the programs? Are there waiting lists for admission? Are the
programs adequate to meet both the community’s and the
newcomers’ needs? Why or why not? Some of this
information you may be able to find online, but you may
also need or want to interview individuals associated with
the programs—administrators, teachers, or students. When
you’ve concluded your research, present it in an essay.
Depending on what you discover, you may wish to write an
argument of fact or evaluation or offer a proposal.
(Chapter 18 on finding evidence will prove useful here,
particularly the section on collecting data on your own.
Chapters 8, 10, and 12 treat factual, evaluative, and
proposal arguments, respectively.)

1242

CHAPTER 26 Has the Internet Destroyed
Privacy?

Over the past three decades, the Internet has changed many
aspects of daily life in the United States and around the world. If
you don’t access it from your cell phone, there’s always a
laptop, tablet, or campus computer. Who can get access to your
accounts? How easily? For what purposes? Every Web page you
visit potentially leaves a trace of where you’ve been and the
device you used to get there. Who has or should have access to
this information? What might they be doing with it? Are
individuals, companies, or governments profiting from that
information? The selections in this chapter encourage you to
consider these issues and perhaps to reflect on your own online
behavior.
In a blog post, Lindsay McKenzie reports on the ways that
UMass Amherst developed a campaign to remind students
about the need to avoid weak passwords. Weak passwords are,
of course, a threat to an individual’s account—and hence their

1243

private information—and to the school’s entire computer
system. Although such a fact is obvious, McKenzie observes that
students at UMass (and perhaps your campus, too) still often
choose weak passwords like the name of their pet.
The second selection, visual arguments, presents a series of
cartoons, all of which focus on aspects of privacy online. The
third selection is composed of two short blog postings by
Lauren Salm and by Deanna Hartley from Careerbuilder.com.
Both focus on how employers use information about individuals
available online to screen applicants, whether screening them
out because of information on social media or screening them
in because of how they’ve presented their online selves to
relevant employers. The privacy issues here relate ultimately to
questions of ethos—the self-image you create for yourself (and
that others create of you) on social media and online more
broadly: based on what employers can find online, what sort of
potential employee do you appear to be?
The fourth selection, by Lauren Carroll of PolitiFact, evaluates a
claim from the nonprofit Fight for the Future (FFTF) when it
tweeted, “215 members of Congress just voted to let your ISP
spy on what type of underwear you buy and sell that data to
advertisers.” As you’ll see, Politi-Fact concludes that advertisers
can now find out private information about you that you might
never have expected, and they can use that information to their
benefit. The stark example Carroll uses—what kind of
underwear you buy or even look at—makes clear the sorts of

1244

things that are at stake when we debate issues of privacy on the
Internet.
In an excerpt from his 2017 book, World without Mind: The
Existential Threat of Big Tech, Franklin Foer explains why he
thinks the Internet—and Big Tech, in particular—are well on
their way to killing our privacy. He, however, has a proposal for
what Americans can do based on a precedent, an action we’ve
taken in a similar situation in the past.
Amanda Hess, who writes for the New York Times, contends
that privacy is now a commodity—and luxury—that only the rich
and powerful can manage to afford. She supports her claims
with an interesting discussion of the changing nature of privacy
—the word and the concept—from Ancient Greece to the
present.
As we write these words, the latest online privacy scandal
involves Cambridge Analytica, which has been accused of
scraping Facebook users’ data without permission in an effort to
sway U.S. elections, creating “Facebook’s worst crisis” and
causing many users to try to delete their accounts. Of this
situation, Mark Zuckerberg commented that when he started
Facebook in his dorm room in 2004, he would never have
imagined that fourteen years later, his biggest worry would be
stopping governments from seeking to influence one another’s
elections. This scandal will likely be history by the time you
read these selections, but challenges raised by privacy online

1245

will no doubt continue to emerge.

1246

This November 2017 selection was written by Lindsey
McKenzie, a technology writer for InsideHigherEd.com,
an online publication devoted to issues in higher
education in the United States and worldwide. It reports
on one university’s efforts to get its students to be vigilant
about a persistent problem: the use of weak passwords
that compromise their own personal accounts and the
security of the campus network as a whole. McKenzie
highlights the challenge to campus technology
professionals: figuring out a creative way to make a
compelling argument to a well-defined audience. As you
read, take note of not only the aims of argument at play
but also the additional benefits that the campaign
described here reaped. Consider as well why we chose to
begin this chapter on privacy with a discussion of
passwords on campus.

Getting Personal about Cybersecurity
LINDSAY McKENZIE
Today’s students may be digital natives, but that doesn’t
mean institutions can count on them to protect themselves
from cyberattacks.
A recent survey by the technology firm CDW-G found that
the No. 1 cybersecurity challenge facing IT professionals on

1247

campus is educating users about security policies and
practices. Among students surveyed, just 25 percent dubbed
the cybersecurity training or education efforts on their
campus as very effective.
IT
information technology.

One institution, however, may have found a way to reach
students—by making them, and their pets, the stars of a
cybersecurity-awareness campaign.
Speaking at the annual meeting of Educause in Philadelphia
this month, representatives from the University of
Massachusetts at Amherst shared how they leveraged
students’ love of social media and personalized content to
encourage them to up their cybersecurity game.
Educause
a U.S. nonprofit organization seeking “to advance higher education through the use
of information technology.”

“There was a recognition that we needed to do something
different, something fun,” said Iris Chelaru, web
communications manager at UMass. While previous
awareness campaigns had been informative, they failed to
connect with students on a personal level, said Chelaru.
Cybersecurity awareness is a bit like public health
awareness, she said—“things that we have to do but that we
don’t want to.”

1248

As students are both creators and curators of content online,
who better than them to advise and help design an
awareness campaign, Chelaru said. She and her team
worked with the student government and other campus
organizations to design an approach that was both
informative and “warm and fuzzy,” said Chelaru.
Rather than presenting information on multiple security
risks, as the university had previously, UMass officials
decided to pick just one issue—weak passwords—as the
center of their campaign. Pet names emerged as something
that students regularly use as passwords, but that can be
easily guessed, said Chelaru. With this in mind, the team
created a website where students can create posters with
pictures of their pets, underneath the tagline “My name is
not a good password.”

1249

Posters from the Getting Personal About Cyberspace campaign at UMass
Amherst

The campus Internet security professionals found that their
campaigns were more effective when they connected to their
audience—students—on a personal level.
LINK TO Chapter 1, Appealing to Audiences.

“We were thinking about things that are familiar to students
and that they know, maybe something from home that they
miss,” said Chelaru. The posters, which could be easily
shared on social media, saw much more engagement from
students than previous campaigns did, said Matthew Dalton,

1250

chief information security officer at UMass Amherst.
Though the campaign started with posters of student pets, it
quickly broadened, said Dalton. To make the campaign even
more interactive, the team created giant photo frames that
students could pose with in real life, under the same “My
name is not a good password” banner. The team set up
tables in areas with high student traffic at lunchtimes in
October as part of National Cyber Security Awareness Month
and offered prizes to encourage engagement. Soon the
football team’s mascot, Sam the Minuteman, and the
university administration were in on the campaign.
While Dalton and colleagues hailed the campaign as a
success, evaluating its impact has been tricky, he
acknowledged. They have seen a decrease in student
account breaches, but Dalton said he can’t be sure this
campaign is responsible, as opposed to other security work
the team has done. It would be difficult to track whether the
campaign had actually resulted in behavior change without
cracking student passwords to check if they contain pet
names, said Dalton. But he is planning to look at whether
password change activity has risen, he said.
Dalton said that the password campaign, now entering its
third year, continues to have an impact because it doesn’t
overload students with information. Where previously
students might have been referred to the National Institute

1251

of Standards and Technology’s guidelines on how to create a
good password (make them complicated, change them
regularly, include numbers and special characters, etc.),
now students are just being made to think about what makes
a bad password. The details come later, when the students
actually log in to change their passwords, said Dalton.
Though the impact on student behavior is not yet known,
the institution views the campaign as a success for other
reasons, said Dalton. First, all the posters and photos shared
on social media had strong institutional branding. Second,
the campaign had support and engagement from the
university administration, including backing from the vice
chancellor for information services. Third, students were
able to take ownership of the campaign. “People were
willing to become part of the message,” said Dalton. “With
any participation event, that’s key—especially with security
awareness.”
RESPOND●

1. What problem gave rise to the arguments made by the
UMass Amherst cybersecurity campaign described in this
selection? How did the IT professionals define the
rhetorical situation? How did their understanding of the
rhetorical situation shape their response? What sorts of
research did they do? Whose help did they enlist? Why?
(Reviewing Chapter 1’s discussion of the rhetorical
situation may be helpful in thinking about this question.)

1252

2. What is your response to the solution that the students at
UMass Amherst came up with? Do you think you would
likely find it convincing enough to move you to action, that
is, to pay attention to the security on your own computer
account—to make passwords complicated and not likely
predictable, to change them regularly, and to include
numbers and special characters? Why or why not?
3. How would you characterize the argument made by this
selection: is it an argument of fact, one of definition, an
evaluative argument, a causal argument, or a proposal?
Why? (The discussion of stasis theory in Chapter 1 may
prove useful here.)
4. THINKING CRITICALLY What were the unforeseen
consequences of the campaign described here? Why are
they important? What does a situation like this one teach us
about the nature of argument and its potential
consequences or benefits?
5. Imagine you were given the task of creating a proposal to
address the problem of cybersecurity on your campus by
raising student awareness of the issue. Is there a solution
that you believe might be more effective than the one used
on the UMass Amherst campus? Working individually or in
small groups, construct a proposal argument containing a
plan for addressing this challenge. (Chapter 12 offers a
discussion of proposal arguments.)

1253

Although you’ve likely never considered it, producing
an effective cartoon requires an interesting and complex
set of rhetorical skills. Cartoonists have a limited amount
of space to convey their messages. The five cartoons
included here range from a single panel to four panels, the
latter representing a widely syndicated cartoon strip. A
cartoon’s message has to be pithy—much like a tweet—and
it has to combine one or more images with words. The
words, of course, may take the form of a caption, or they
may be part of the image. The images have multiple
functions: they have to capture the reader’s attention, but
they must also thrust the reader into a narrative, a story,
one that unfolds almost instantaneously.
Cartoons likewise have to rely on the two-edged sword of
humor—always risky—to make their point. In this regard,
even simple cartoons represent sophisticated visual
rhetoric—multimodal arguments—that merit careful
attention. Furthermore, cartoons must be timely,
speaking to a current topic of interest or debate; in short,
they must seize the kairotic moment, as discussed in
Chapter 1. As you consider the five cartoons in this
selection, all of which consider aspects of privacy, use
your rhetorical skills to analyze how each of the
cartoonists manages to pack what is often an implied but
powerful argument into such a small package.

1254

Making a Visual Argument: The Issue of Privacy

Pickles is an award-winning Sunday comic by Brian Crane that has been
syndicated since 1990. The main characters, Opal and Earl Pickles,
shown in this strip, are in their seventies and were originally based
loosely on Crane’s retired in-laws. In this cartoon strip from September
2016, Opal notices that Facebook is capable of what she terms “mind
infiltration”—a noteworthy word choice! And yet very quickly Opal
goes from being offended by the alleged privacy violation to being
susceptible to the targeted advertising. . . . As you read, consider your
own responses to the way social media feeds on and reinforces our
interests, our values, our desires, and our fears.

1255

Chris Slane is an award-winning New Zealand cartoonist, illustrator,
puppeteer, and author who has been publishing cartoons since 1991.
He specializes in the topics of privacy, security, and freedom of
information, and he claims that his database on these subjects is likely
the largest in the world. His cartoons on these topics have appears in at
least nine countries and been translated into four languages,
reminding us that these subjects present challenges worldwide. As you
study this cartoon, consider how it complements and contrasts with
the message of the previous one by Brian Crane.

1256

Chris Wildt’s cartoons appear in the Cape Gazette (Delaware). As you
study this cartoon, consider how it builds on and expands the
arguments made by Lauren Salm’s and Deanna Hartley’s blog postings,
in the third selection in the chapter, about the growing role that social
media play in the hiring process.

1257

Mike Smith’s syndicated cartoon, “Smith’s World,” appears daily on
the editorial page of the Las Vegas Sun. In his work as a “geeky artist,”
he seeks to be “an equal opportunity offender,” poking fun across the
political spectrum. He reports that he is grateful for his liberal arts
degree from a Jesuit school because it taught him to “question
authority and be a person who practices critical thinking.” He has
likewise stated that “editorial cartooning is really about reading. It’s
about absorbing as much information as you can, because the spark to
the creative process is information.” This cartoon, from 2016,
comments on a specific legal question—whether a cellular phone
manufacturer should be able to hack the phones they sell in order to
provide information to a government. Since Smith’s original cartoon,
the questions have become broader—stretching to all social media—
and more urgent. Notice how deftly Smith is able to pack all that
controversy into a single cartoon.

1258

J. D. Crowe is statewide cartoonist for the Alabama Media Group, which
includes several newspapers, magazines, and Web sites, all related to
Alabama life. He has stated that he believes it is “[his] duty to weed out
numbskull politicians on the homefront before they can grow in the
national spotlight.” He likewise “generously spreads his tough love to
international and national issues based on the news of the day.” This
2017 cartoon comments on the same Congressional decision that is
discussed in a later selection, Lauren Carroll’s “Congress Let Internet
Providers ‘Spy’ on Your Underwear Purchases, Advocacy Group Says.”
As you study this cartoon, consider how its effectiveness compares
with the tweet Carroll’s group evaluates.

RESPOND●

1. Which of these five cartoons do you find most effective at
communicating the argument it is making? How does it

1259

encourage readers to think about issues of privacy in an
electronic environment? Why? (The discussion of evaluative
criteria in Chapter 10 may be useful here.)
2. Analyze how each of these cartoons works as a visual
argument, as discussed in Chapter 14. Consider the visual
design, including the images and colors used, the style of
drawing, and the relationship between the images and text
of each.
3. Choose one of the cartoons, and analyze it in terms of its
appeals to emotions, of the character of its creator, and of
the facts or reasoning the cartoon represents. These
appeals are discussed in Chapter 1 and again in Chapters 2,
3, and 4, respectively.
4. THINKING CRITICALLY Someone searching databases for
cartoons generally uses a keyword search, as discussed in
Chapter 18. Here, we’ve listed the keywords for three of the
cartoons:
Brian Crane, “Oh, My Gosh! When Did Facebook Start with
Mind Infiltration?”
advertisement, advertising, bag, by hand, comic strip,
Facebook, generous, gosh, hand, handbag, internet,
internet privacy, Italian, manipulate, manipulation,
marketing, marketing advertising, media, mind,
network, online, online advertising, online privacy, ooh,
privacy, private, purse, screen, social, social media,
social network, soft, start
Chris Wildt, “Impressive Résumé . . .”
verification, verifications, resume, resumes, social

1260

media, social medias, social network, social networks,
social networking, cv, cvs, businessmen, businessman,
profile, profiles, online, avatar, website, websites, hr,
human resources, verifying, personnel
Mike Smith, “I Agree with Apple . . .”
agree, apple, Apple Computer, cell, cell phone, cell
phone privacy, cellular, computer, computer privacy,
computer software, computer technology, data,
editorial, editorial cartoon, encrypt, encryption,
Facebook, government, government computer, hack,
information, internet, internet privacy, iPhone, media,
Mike, mobile, online, online privacy, personal, personal
data, personal information, phone, political media,
poster, privacy, private, private information, Smith,
social, social media, software, tech, technology, user
What might account for both overlap and differences in the
lists, given the content of each cartoon? Can you think of
other terms that someone might have used to search for
these cartoons? Can you imagine why they weren’t
included in the list of keywords? How can studying lists of
keywords like these help you improve your own keyword
searches?
5. Many writers struggle with incorporating a visual of any
kind—a cartoon, a figure, a table—into a text they are
writing in a way that helps readers understand the meaning
and significance of the visual argument with regard to the
ongoing argument. Imagine that you are writing an essay

1261

about the nature of privacy in electronic environments and
that you decide to use one of these cartoons to illustrate a
point you wish to make. Specify the point you wish to make
(in other words, what argument could the cartoon be used
to illustrate or support), and then write a healthy
paragraph that could be used to incorporate the cartoon
into the text. You will need both to describe the cartoon to
some degree and to explain its message or significance.
Using a phrase like “the cartoon shows . . .” or “in the
cartoon, the reader sees . . .” will help you as you describe
the cartoon. This will be factual argument of the sort
discussed in Chapter 8 because your task will be to describe
as accurately as possible the information contained in the
cartoon. The discussion of using visuals in your own
arguments in Chapter 14 should help you with this task.

1262

This selection includes two short 2017 blog postings
from Careerbuilder.com, an employment Web site
providing not only job listings from around the world but
also practical advice to help those seeking jobs. These
articles fall into the latter category. Lauren Salm explains
how employers scrutinize job candidates’ social media
profiles, while Deanna Hartley offers ways to maximize
the potential of social media when preparing for the job
market. Their advice certainly relates to Aristotle’s claim
that rhetoric is “finding the available means of
persuasion.” For job seekers, that means carefully doing
certain things online while studiously avoiding others. As
you read, consider how the advice both women offer
relates to the rhetorical notion of kairos, as discussed in
the opening chapter of this book.

70 Percent of Employers Are Snooping Candidates’ Social Media
Profiles

LAUREN SALM
Scrolling through your photos from this past weekend and
laughing at the debauchery of your Hangover-esque
charades? Ranting about your current job or co-workers
because you think you’re just among “friends?” Think again.
According to a new CareerBuilder survey, 70 percent of
1263

employers use social media to screen candidates before
hiring, which is up significantly from 60 percent in 2016. So
pause before you post—if you think it could be questionable
or inappropriate, you should go with your gut.

SO, WHAT TO FLAUNT VS. FLOP?
Social recruiting is now a “thing” when it comes to hiring
candidates—3 in 10 employers have someone dedicated to
solely getting the scoop on your online persona.
Employers are searching for a few key items when
researching candidates via social networking sites as good
signs to hire:
Information that supports their qualifications for the job
(61 percent)
If the candidate has a professional online persona at all
(50 percent)
What other people are posting about the candidates (37
percent)
For any reason at all not to hire a candidate (24 percent)
And they aren’t stopping there either—69 percent are using
online search engines such as Google, Yahoo and Bing to
research candidates as well, compared to 59 percent last
year.

THE NO-NOS WHEN USING SOCIAL NETWORKS
1264

With more than half of employers (54 percent) finding
content on social media that caused them not to hire a
candidate, why take your chances? Pause before you post
and remember these key reasons that employers were
turned off by a candidate’s online presence:
Candidate posted provocative or inappropriate
photographs, videos or information: 39 percent
Candidate posted information about them drinking or
using drugs: 38 percent
Candidate had discriminatory comments related to race,
gender or religion: 32 percent
Candidate bad-mouthed their previous company or
fellow employee: 30 percent
Candidate lied about qualifications: 27 percent
Candidate had poor communication skills: 27 percent
Candidate was linked to criminal behavior: 26 percent
Candidate shared confidential information from
previous employers: 23 percent
Candidate’s screen name was unprofessional: 22
percent
Candidate lied about an absence: 17 percent
Candidate posted too frequently: 17 percent

USING SOCIAL MEDIA TO YOUR ADVANTAGE
You don’t have to look at your online persona as problem.
There are things you can do on Twitter or Facebook that can
actually up your chances of employment. Use it as an

1265

opportunity to stand out in a positive way and showcase
your personality. In fact, more than 44 percent of employers
have found content on a social networking site that caused
them to hire the candidate.
Among the primary reasons employers hired a candidate
based on their social networking site were: candidate’s
background information supported their professional
qualifications (38 percent), great communication skills (37
percent), a professional image (36 percent), and creativity
(35 percent). But don’t avoid the stress all together by
deleting or hiding your profiles. Believe it or not, this can be
even more detrimental to your brand. Fifty-seven percent of
employers are less likely to call someone in if the candidate
is a ghost online.
The bottom line? Think before you post, because there’s
always someone watching. Don’t put anything online that
you wouldn’t want your mom, grandma, dad, uncle, best
friend’s mom or cat to see or read.

1266

Creative Ways to Get Noticed by Employers on Social
Media
DEANNA HARTLEY
From making flippant racial remarks to posting
unhygienic pictures on the job at a fast food restaurant,
there are larger-than-life instances of what NOT to do on
social media. On the flip side, social media could work in
your favor if you’re looking for a job—if you do it right.
Some savvy job seekers are leveraging it to their benefit to
catch the attention of potential employers, and you can
follow suit with these tips.
Update your social media profile. Whether you like it or
not, social media is an extension of your personal brand. Did
you know that 70 percent of employers are peeking into
candidates’ social media profiles? So clean up your
Facebook profile or make it private. Add skills and/or
recommendations to your professional social media
profiles, and make sure to use keywords wherever you can
so your profile is easily searchable.

1267

Your Facebook profile is fair game to potential employers

Use multimedia to supplement your resume. While some
job seekers have actually gone to extremes by advertising
themselves using social ads on Facebook or Google
AdWords, being over-the-top dramatic is not always
necessary to catch an employer’s attention. Consider
creating an online portfolio of your work, creating videos
that show off your skills, producing a Snapchat channel that
highlights your creativity or using other non-traditional
avenues that would give employers a sense of your
professional prowess.
Make strategic connections. While it’s great to connect with
Ron from the last networking event you went to, be

1268

proactive and seek out professionals in your field. Don’t be
afraid to ask for advice—many professionals, as busy as they
are, will be happy to help. Establish connections with
individuals who work at the company you’re applying to and
reach out to them for tips on how to get your foot in the
door.
Follow your dream employer’s social media accounts. Not
only will it help you connect with the company, but you can
also follow the social media feeds to do some more research
about the company and determine if it’s a good cultural fit.
Oftentimes, brands tend to be more authentic and engaging
on social media than other corporate channels, so look for
personality and fit.
Start interacting with corporate social accounts. The
recruiter or hiring manager at your dream company may not
return your calls or queries in a timely fashion, but chances
are you’ll have a better shot at a two-way communication
using social media. Retweet and share relevant posts. You
don’t need to be a subject-matter expert or thought leader to
reply to their tweets or comment on LinkedIn posts or
Facebook posts—but do so only if you have legitimate
feedback/opinions or something constructive to add to the
conversation.

1269

LinkedIn offers a way for job-seekers to interact with hiring companies

Personalize conversations. What you find out about a
company or hiring manager online can help you find topics
that sit well with the hiring manager so you can personalize
conversations or even thank-you notes. Keep in mind there’s
a line between being diligent (scouring for professional
insights) and creepy (looking to see how many children they
have), so don’t cross it.

RESPOND●
1. Were you surprised to learn about the findings of the
surveys mentioned in these two articles? Why or why not? If
someone scrutinized your social media accounts, might

1270

they find things that could lead to your not getting (or even
losing) a job? Do you see such things on the social media
accounts of others? Why, in your opinion, does the situation
discussed in this article persist; that is, why do people
continue to post compromising information, including
photos and videos, online for all the world to see?
2. How do these two articles ultimately treat issues of privacy
on- and offline? Do you believe that employers should be
able to scrutinize the social media accounts of employees
and job candidates? Why or why not? Do you believe that
anything online can truly be private? Why or why not?
3. Like many arguments that offer advice (a subgenre of
proposal arguments, in fact), these two arguments use
facts to create the context for and support the advice they
offer. Salm, in particular, relies heavily on fact-based
arguments. In your opinion, does such a reliance on factbased arguments strengthen her advice in comparison to
the advice offered by Hartley? Why or why not?
4. THINKING CRITICALLY How do the audience—job seekers from
a range of backgrounds—and medium—blog postings—
influence the shape and appearance of these texts? What
specific layout features can you identify? Why would the
authors have assumed these would be useful to their
readers? Can you think of other layout features that might
have been used to improve the appearance of these texts?
5. A key part of research writing is using sources effectively.
Using information from Chapter 20, write a healthy
paragraph summarizing the advice offered in these two
articles. In your summary, be sure to include at least two
direct quotations from each article as well as two instances
of paraphrase. Pay special attention to the differences

1271

between quotation and paraphrase, the correct way to
punctuate each, and the appropriate ways to credit
sources.

1272

This selection, from PolitiFact, presents an argument
within an argument from March 2017. First, we have a
tweet posted by Fight for the Future (FFTF), another
nonprofit organization, which advocates on issues related
to digital rights, including online privacy. The tweet
presents itself as an argument of fact. Then, we have what
is obviously an evaluative argument by PolitiFact, a
Pulitzer-Prize winning Web site operated by the Tampa
Bay Times and the Poyner Institute that investigates and
evaluates claims made by politicians, lobbyists, and
interest groups. As you can see, PolitiFact ultimately rates
the FFTF’s tweet as “mostly true” on its truth-o-meter. The
author of this evaluative argument was Lauren Carroll,
who was a staff writer at PolitiFact; the author of the FFTF
tweet was not identified. As you read, pay attention to the
research process that Carroll used as well as to PolitiFact’s
process for documenting the research it conducts and the
criteria it uses in arriving at its evaluative ranking.

Congress Let Internet Providers “Spy On” Your Underwear
Purchases, Advocacy Group Says
LAUREN CARROLL
Your Internet service provider has intimate knowledge
about your intimates, and a bill headed to President Donald
Trump’s desk allows them to sell that information, says
1273

Internet privacy advocacy group Fight for the Future.
Voting along party lines, Republicans in Congress recently
passed a joint resolution that reverses a landmark Federal
Communications Commission rule requiring Internet
service providers (ISPs), like Comcast or Verizon, to ask
customers for their explicit permission before handing user
data over to advertisers and other third parties. President
Donald Trump is expected to sign it into law.
“215 members of Congress just voted to let your ISP spy on
what type of underwear you buy and sell that data to
advertisers,” Fight for the Future tweeted March 28, after the
bill passed the House.

1274

A Fight for the Future tweet

Fight for the Future has the vote count right; 215 members
of the House of Representatives voted for the measure. We
decided to dig into whether the group is right about what the
bill means for online shopping.

ISPs AND THE BILL

1275

Fight for the Future’s tweet might give the misleading
impression that ISPs can’t already see their customers’
online purchases and sell that information. They can.
Congress’s action just makes this explicitly legal.
An ISP’s function is to connect its users to websites or online
apps, and so it can see nearly everything its users do on the
Internet, including what kind of underwear they buy. An
advertiser might be interested in purchasing that
information from an ISP because then it can predict whether
a given user is more likely to respond to an ad for boxers,
briefs or tighty-whities.
Beyond shopping habits, ISPs and advertisers can glean
more significant personal information about their
customers from Internet browsing patterns—like that a
spouse is contemplating divorce because he looked up “best
divorce lawyers in my area,” or that a person has a chronic
medical condition because she spent a long time reading
certain pages on WebMD.
In October 2016, the FCC established rules intended to give
consumers more control over how ISPs used their data. The
rules required ISPs to obtain explicit information from their
customers before using and sharing their web browsing
history, which would include underwear purchases.
The rule also required the ISPs to get consent before sharing
other “sensitive information,” like Social Security numbers,
1276

precise geolocation data and financial or health
information. Many Internet companies and trade
associations had already committed to requiring consumers
to opt-in before they can share that sort of information, per
guidance from the Federal Trade Commission.
But these opt-in rules never went into effect; Congress killed
them in March 2017, months before the December 2017 start
date. So ISPs can see and use customers’ web browsing data
as they always have.
“Practically speaking, I expect consumers will see no change
in how their data is collected and marketed,” said Brent
Skorup, a technology policy research fellow at George
Mason University’s Mercatus Center.
Fight for the Future Campaign Director Evan Greer said
Congress’s vote was significant because it gives ISP
companies explicit permission to engage in practices that
some privacy advocates consider “abusive,” and it gives ISPs
an incentive to invest in systems to further these practices.
ISPs have been expanding the scope of their operations,
merging with other varieties of service providers, such as
Verizon purchasing AOL, or AT&T’s planned deal to
purchase Time Warner, Inc. This, combined with Congress’s
reversal of the FCC rules, might encourage ISPs to expand
their role in online advertising, said Peter Swire, a professor
at Georgia Tech and the chief counselor for privacy during
1277

President Bill Clinton’s administration.
“There’s a lot of online advertising today,” Swire said. “Now
the big broadband companies will play more actively in that
space.”
Those who supported gutting the FCC rules argue that the
regulations put ISPs at a disadvantage compared to other
Internet companies, like search engines or social media
sites, that already sell users’ data without first getting
permission. They also say the rules stifle technology
innovation.
Privacy advocates, however, say that ISPs have an especially
large window into its users Internet habits, and this rule
could have opened up the possibility of beginning to enact
privacy regulations on other web-based companies.
“This is troublesome because of the larger question: Is
privacy opt in or opt out?” said Jamie Winterton, director of
strategy for Arizona State University’s Global Security
Initiative. “Can your browser behaviors be bought and sold?”

PRIVACY PROTECTIONS
Though they can see a lot, there are limitations to what ISPs
can see.
Some websites use encryption, so the ISP can see the

1278

domain name but not the exact page on that website the user
is browsing. A website is encrypted if the address starts with
“https” not “http.” For example, if a web user visit the Macy’s
website, which is encrypted, their ISP will know they’re
browsing the Macy’s website, but it won’t know if they’re
shopping for underwear, a prom dress or bedding. (The
article you’re currently reading is not encrypted.)
However, if someone visits MeUndies.com right after
visiting VictoriasSecret.com—both encrypted—an advertiser
can probably make an educated guess that the person is in
the market for some underwear. There are many more
sophisticated ways an ISP or third party can glean
information about a user even when the data is encrypted.
Regardless, most ecommerce sites remain unencrypted,
Swire said.
An Internet user who really does not want an ISP tracking
any of their data can use a Virtual Private Network, which,
put simply, is a way to scramble all Internet traffic so the ISP
and potential hackers can’t get at it. But this might not
completely eliminate privacy concerns because some VPNs
themselves don’t fully protect users’ data.
“If you don’t want any of your information out there, you’d
have to do all sorts of things,” Winterton said. “It’s a lot to
ask of people.”

1279

OUR RULING
Fight for the Future said, “215 members of Congress just
voted to let your ISP spy on what type of underwear you buy
and sell that data to advertisers.”
ISPs can see most of the websites their customers visit.
Congress, with 215 votes from the House, sent a bill to
Trump’s desk that codified ISPs’ ability to sell their
customers’ web browsing data, including any online
underwear purchases that aren’t encrypted.
Regulations enacted in 2016 would have required ISPs to ask
customers for explicit permission to share this data with
advertisers or other third parties. But Congress acted before
the regulations went into effect.
Fight for the Future’s phrasing—and use of the loaded term
“spy”—might lead people to think that Congress’s action
gave ISPs new freedoms, but they could always view and sell
users’ web browsing information. Now they have Congress’s
stamp of approval to do so without getting users’ permission
first.
That context is important, so we rate Fight for the Future’s
claim Mostly True.

1280

As a fact-checking organization, PolitiFact’s truth-o-meter evaluates
statements by politicians on a scale of six degrees of truthfulness, ranging
from “True” to “Pants on Fire.”

1281

By evaluating statements from politicians, lobbyists, and interest
groups, PolitiFact takes the work of “crap detection” seriously.
LINK TO Chapter 19, Practicing Crap Detection.

ABOUT THIS STATEMENT
Published: Thursday, March 30th, 2017 at 5:27 p.m.
Researched by: Lauren Carroll
Edited by: Angie Drobnic Holan
Subjects: Congress, Privacy, Technology

SOURCES
Competitive Enterprise Institute, “Six Reasons FCC Rules
Aren’t Needed to Protect Privacy,” March 27, 2017
Congress.gov, S.J.Res.34, accessed March 30, 2017
CTIA, “Internet Companies Reaffirm Consumer Privacy
Principles as FCC Reviews Flawed Wheeler Era
Broadband Rules,” Jan. 27, 2017
Email interview, Fight for the Future campaign director
Evan Greer, March 30, 2017
Email interview, George Mason research fellow Brent
Skorup, March 30, 2017
1282

Email interview, Upturn principal Aaron Rieke, March 29,
2017
FCC, “FCC Adopts Privacy Rules to Give Broadband
Consumers Increased Choice, Transparency and
Security for Their Personal Data,” Oct. 27, 2016
Georgia Tech, “Online Privacy and ISPs: ISP Access to
Consumer Data Is Limited and Often Less Than Access
by Others,” Feb. 29, 2016
New York Times, “How the Republicans Sold Your Privacy
to Internet Providers,” March 29, 2017
NPR, “As Congress Repeals Internet Privacy Rules, Putting
Your Options in Perspective,” March 28, 2017
Phone interview, Georgia Tech professor Peter Swire, March
29, 2017
Phone interview, Jamie Winterton, strategy director at ASU’s
Global Security Initiative, March 29, 2017
Proskauer, “The Clock Has Started: What ISPs Need to Do
and When to Comply with the FCC’s Broadband Privacy
Rules,” Dec. 7, 2016
Upturn, “What ISPs Can See,” March 2016
RESPOND●

1. Prior to reading this selection, how much thought had you
given to the specific issues of Internet privacy discussed
here—the sale of data about the sites you visit and the

1283

purposes for which such data might be used? What
advantages and disadvantages do you see of making user
information available? What do you think someone might
assume about you if they had access to your Internet
viewing history? (You may not wish to share your response
to this last question, but we’d contend that it bears
reflecting on.)
2. Should there be limits to who can or cannot purchase or
have access to the information discussed in this selection
or the purposes for which it could or should be used? Why
or why not? What criteria would you propose for deciding
these questions?
3. The actual bill being discussed by the FFTF tweet and
PolitiFact’s evaluation of it is “S.J.Res.34-A joint resolution
providing for congressional disapproval under chapter 8 of
title 5, United States Code, of the rule submitted by the
Federal Communications Commission relating to
‘Protecting the Privacy of Customers of Broadband and
Other Telecommunications Services.’” Obviously, the FFTF
could not have used the complete name in a tweet because
it is far longer than 140 (or even 280) characters—a
question of the medium, a tweet, influencing the form the
message or argument takes. Why might FFTF have
constructed the tweet as it did, with its use of
#BroadbandPrivacy and the example of underwear? In
other words, how does the tweet show clear evidence that
its creators at FFTF had audience and rhetorical purpose in
mind? (See Chapter 1 for a discussion of audience and
rhetorical purpose.)
4. THINKING CRITICALLY Consider how carefully PolitiFact has
constructed its evaluative argument. Don’t rely simply on

1284

the information presented here, but also investigate the
procedures PolitiFact uses by visiting the methodology
page on its website: http://bit.ly/2CiIJcI. What specific steps
does it take to demonstrate the credibility of its claims?
How trustworthy do you find its procedures? What criteria
do you find yourself using in arriving at your evaluation?
(Check out Chapter 10 on the nature of evaluative
arguments.)
5. Write an evaluative essay in which you use a research
process similar to the one that PolitiFact uses when
checking claims made by politicians, lobbyists, and interest
groups. Choose a claim—and a tweet would be an ideal
choice—made in the past few weeks by a politician,
lobbyist, or interest group you’re familiar with, and
investigate its likely veracity. You probably won’t be able to
conduct interviews as PolitiFact does, but you can certainly
seek credible sources of information to support your
evaluation. As you’ve learned in responding to Question 3,
the process PolitiFact uses is a multistep procedure
involving the author, a reviewing editor, and two additional
editors. First, a staff writer researches the claim, keeping
what researchers would generally term an “audit trail,” a
list or “map” of where the various bits of information came
from. Then, once the research is completed and written up,
an editor reviews it with the writer. Once the document has
been revised, the editor shares it with two other editors,
and all three vote on the veracity of the statement. Only
then is the “Our Ruling” section of the evaluation created.
We’d encourage you to try this process with classmates as
part of writing your evaluative essay. (Chapters 18–20 on
finding sources, evaluating them, and using them

1285

appropriately will be especially useful for this assignment,
as will Chapter 21 on plagiarism and academic integrity.)

1286

This selection comes from Franklin Foer’s 2017 book,
World Without Mind: The Existential Threat of Big Tech.
Foer, a fellow at the New American Institute and a
correspondent for the Atlantic, is former editor of the New
Republic and author of How Soccer Explains the World.
An existential threat is, of course, one that threatens our very
existence. Foer is convinced that the big technology
companies that control much of the Internet represent such a
threat to humans and especially to our privacy, among other
things Americans cherish. At the same time, Foer has a
proposal for how we can meet that threat head on and defeat
it. As you read this selection, consider how Foer examines a
common metaphor in an especially telling way and uses that
critique as the basis for his proposal.
from World without Mind: The Existential Threat of Big Tech
FRANKLIN FOER
The big tech companies believe we’re fundamentally social
beings, born to collective existence. They invest their faith in
the network, the wisdom of crowds, collaboration. They harbor
a deep desire for the atomistic world to be made whole. By
stitching the world together, they can cure its ills. Rhetorically,
the tech companies gesture toward individuality—to the
empowerment of the “user”—but their worldview rolls over it.
Even the ubiquitous invocation of users is telling, a passive,
bureaucratic description of us.

1287

atomistic
here, unconnected or fragmented into many parts.
ubiquitous
found everywhere.
invocation
mentioning or calling upon; the word often has religious connotations (a prayer to the
deity asking for help) or connotations of magic (an incantation or spell).

The big tech companies—the Europeans have charmingly, and
correctly, lumped them together as GAFA (Google, Apple,
Facebook, Amazon)—are shredding the principles that protect
individuality. Their devices and sites have collapsed privacy;
they disrespect the value of authorship, with their hostility to
intellectual property. In the realm of economics, they justify
monopoly with their well-articulated belief that competition
undermines our pursuit of the common good and ambitious
goals. When it comes to the most central tenet of individualism
—free will—the tech companies have a different way. They hope
to automate the choices, both large and small, that we make as
we float through the day. It’s their algorithms that suggest the
news we read, the goods we buy, the path we travel, the friends
we invite into our circle.
monopoly
a corporation that has exclusive control of providing a good or service; the opposite
situation would be a market where there is competition among providers.
algorithms
an unambiguous procedure for solving a problem; used here to refer to the computer
programs online companies use to make recommendations to you about information,
goods, services, and people that might appeal to you.

1288

It’s hard not to marvel at these companies and their inventions,
which often make life infinitely easier. But we’ve spent too long
marveling. The time has arrived to consider the consequences
of these monopolies, to reassert our own role in determining
the human path. Once we cross certain thresholds—once we
transform the values of institutions, once we abandon privacy—
there’s no turning back, no restoring our lost individuality. . . .

One of the clichés of our time: Data is the new oil. This felt like
hyperbole when first articulated, but now feels perfectly apt.
“Data” is a bloodless word, but what it represents is hardly
bloodless. It’s the record of our actions: what we read, what we
watch, where we travel over the course of a day, what we
purchase, our correspondence, our search inquiries, the
thoughts we begin to type and then delete. With enough data, it
is possible to see correlations and find patterns. The computer
security guru Bruce Schneier has written, “The accumulated
data can probably paint a better picture of how you spend your
time, because it doesn’t have to rely on human memory.” Data
amounts to an understanding of users, a portrait of our psyche.
Eric Schmidt once bragged, “We know where you are. We know
where you’ve been. We can more or less know what you’re
thinking about.”
psyche
the human spirit, soul, or mind.

A portrait of a psyche is a powerful thing. It allows companies

1289

to predict our behavior and anticipate our wants. With data, it is
possible to know where you will be tomorrow within twenty
meters and to predict, with reasonable accuracy, whether your
romantic relationship will last. Capitalism has always dreamed
of activating the desire to consume, the ability to tap the human
brain to stimulate its desire for products that it never
contemplated needing. Data helps achieve this old dream. It
makes us more malleable, easier to addict, prone to nudging.
It’s the reason that Amazon recommendations for your next
purchase so often result in sales, or why Google ads result in
clicks.
The dominant firms are the ones that have amassed the most
complete portraits of us. They have tracked us most extensively
as we travel across the Internet, and they have the computing
power required to interpret our travels. This advantage
becomes everything, and it compounds over time. Bottomless
pools of data are required to create machines that effectively
learn—and only these megacorporations have those pools of
data. In all likelihood, no rival to Google will ever be able to
match its search results, because no challenger will ever be able
to match its historical record of searches or the compilation of
patterns it has uncovered.
In this way, data is unlike oil. Oil is a finite resource; data is
infinitely renewable. It continuously allows the new
monopolists to conduct experiments to master the anticipation
of trends, to better understand customers, to build superior

1290

algorithms. Before he went to Google, as the company’s chief
economist, Hal Varian cowrote an essential handbook called
Information Rules. Varian predicted that data would exaggerate
the workings of the market. “Positive feedback makes the
strong get stronger and the weak get weaker, leading to extreme
outcomes.” One of these extreme outcomes is the proliferation
of data-driven monopolies.
proliferation
rapid growth or increase.

It’s a disturbing convergence: These companies have become
dominant on the basis of their extensive surveillance of users,
the total monitoring of activities, their ever-growing dossiers—
what Maurice Stucke and Ariel Ezrachi call “a God-like view of
the marketplace.” Put bluntly, they have built their empires by
pulverizing privacy; they will further ensconce themselves by
continuing to push boundaries, by taking even more invasive
steps that build toward an even more complete portrait of us.
Indeed, the threats to privacy and the competitive marketplace
are now one and the same. The problem of monopoly has
changed shape. . . .
convergence
the coming together of distinct or disparate things.

What we need is a Data Protection Authority to protect privacy
as the government protects the environment. Both the
environment and privacy are goods that the market would
destroy if left to its own devices. We let business degrade the
1291

environment within limits—and we should tolerate the same
with privacy. The point isn’t to prevent the collection or
exploitation of data. What are needed, however, are constraints,
about what can be collected and what can be exploited. Citizens
should have the right to purge data that sits on servers. Rules
should require companies to set default options so that citizens
have to opt for surveillance, rather than passively accept the
loss of privacy, a far more robust option than the
incomprehensible take-it-or-leave-it terms of service
agreements.
purge
here, remove or have removed.

This is a matter of autonomy; The intimate details embedded in
our data can be used to undermine us; data provides the basis
for invisible discrimination; it is used to influence our choices,
both our habits of consumption and our intellectual habits. Data
provides an X-ray of the soul. Companies turn that photograph
of the inner self into a commodity to be traded on a market,
bought and sold without our knowledge.
autonomy
independence or freedom outside control.

It’s a basic, intuitive right, worthy of enshrinement: Citizens,
not the corporations that stealthily track them, should own
their own data. The law should demand that these companies
treat this data with the greatest care, because it doesn’t belong
to them. Possessing our data is a heavy responsibility that must
1292

come with ethical obligations. The American government has a
special category for corporations that profit from goods that
they don’t truly own: We call them trustees. This is how the
government treats radio and television broadcasters. Those
companies make money from their use of the public airwaves,
so the government requires that these broadcasters adhere to a
raft of standards. At times, they were asked to broadcast civil
defense warnings and public service announcements; they were
asked to adhere to decency standards and were required to
provide equal airtime to candidates of both political parties. The
government, in the form of the Federal Communications
Commission, supervises the broadcasters to guarantee that they
don’t shirk these obligations. . . .
enshrinement
the act of treating something as sacred and, thus, protecting it, in this case, by making
laws or government policies about it.
stealthily
in a secret, hidden manner.

A Data Protection Authority would be the heir to this tradition.
Unlike the Federal Trade Commission, which evaluates mergers
to preserve low prices and economic efficiency, the authority
would review them to protect privacy and the free flow of
information. It would constrain monopolies as they attempt to
carry their power into the next era, creating the opening
through which challengers can ultimately emerge. . . . The
health of our democracy demands that we consider treating
Facebook, Google, and Amazon with the same firm hand that
1293

led government to wage war on AT&T, IBM, and Microsoft—
even dismembering them into smaller companies if
circumstances (and the law) demand a forceful response. While
it has been several generations since we wielded antitrust laws
with such vigor, we should remember that these cases created
the conditions that nurtured the invention of an open,
gloriously innovative Internet in the first place. . . .
antitrust
encouraging competition rather than monopolies.

The long history of regulation also shows that the project is not
nearly as futile as its critics claim. When government tries to
remodel the economy for the sake of efficiency, it has amassed
a mixed record. When government uses its power to achieve
clear moral ends, it has a strong record. There are notable
failures, for sure. But our automobiles are safer, our
environment is cleaner, our food doesn’t poison us, our
financial system is fairer and less prone to catastrophic
collapse, even though those protective provisions have imposed
meaningful costs on the private sector. . . . The Internet is
amazing, but we shouldn’t treat it as if it exists outside history or
is exempt from our moral structures, especially when the stakes
are nothing less than the fate of individuality and the fitness of
democracy.
RESPOND●

1. Foer clearly believes the Internet is killing privacy. How does he

1294

see the Internet as doing so? In other words, what, for Foer, are
the specific threats associated with the Internet, and why
should they be considered threats?
2. What is your response to Foer’s analysis of how the Internet is
killing privacy? Do you agree or disagree with Foer? Why or why
not? And what is your response to his proposal for dealing with
the threat? Do you believe it is necessary? sufficient? possible?
Why or why not?
3. As explained in the headnote, a major section of Foer’s
argument is built around his careful examination and critique
of a metaphor, that is, a comparison between two things. In
Foer’s discussion, what two things are equated? In what ways
are the two things in fact similar? Where, for Foer, does the
metaphor fall apart, that is, what are its limits? Why do these
limits matter for him and the argument he is making? What can
we, as writers, learn from considering such careful
considerations of the limits of metaphor? (See Chapter 13 on
style in argument for a discussion of metaphor.)
4. THINKING CRITICALLY As also mentioned in the headnote, Foer
proposes a way of addressing the threat he contends the
Internet poses. What specific evidence or criteria for evaluating
evidence does he use in establishing the existence of an actual
threat? What specific evidence or criteria for evaluating
evidence does he offer in support of his proposal? Evaluate
both these sets of evidence and criteria. (Chapter 10 provides
information about evaluative arguments; that information will
help you appreciate Foer’s argument and evaluate the criteria
he uses in it.)
5. Write a proposal argument in which you support or rebut
Foer’s proposal for dealing with the threat he defines. (As
Chapter 12 on proposals points out, you may well need to draw

1295

on earlier chapters about factual, definitional, evaluative, and
causal arguments.) You may wish to support Foer’s proposal
fully or to argue for a modified version of it. If you oppose his
proposal, you may wish to offer a counterproposal in addition
to demonstrating the shortcomings of the proposal he makes.

1296

Amanda Hess is a David Carr fellow at the New York
Times, where this selection appeared in the “First Words”
column of the Times’s Sunday magazine in May 2017. She
writes regularly about Internet culture, and her work has
appeared in Slate, Elle, Marie Claire, and WIRED, among
other publications. In this selection, Hess examines, first,
the extent to which privacy in American society is
commodified—that is, bought and sold—and, second (and
understandably), the ways in which it then becomes the
privilege of the wealthy alone. As you read, consider how
Hess comments on a number of issues raised by the
selections in this chapter as well as what the
consequences might be of the situation Hess describes for
you.

How Privacy Became a Commodity for the Rich and Powerful
AMANDA HESS
Recently I handed over the keys to my email account to a
service that promised to turn my spam-bloated inbox into a
sparkling model of efficiency in just a few clicks.
Unroll.me’s method of instant unsubscribing from
newsletters and junk mail was “trusted by millions of happy
users,” the site said, among them the “Scandal” actor Joshua
Malina, who tweeted in 2014: “Your inbox will sing!” Plus, it
was free. When a privacy policy popped up, I swatted away
1297

the legalese and tapped “continue.”
Last month, the true cost of Unroll.me was revealed: The
service is owned by the market-research firm Slice
Intelligence, and according to a report in The Times, while
Unroll.me is cleaning up users’ inboxes, it’s also rifling
through their trash. When Slice found digital ride receipts
from Lyft in some users’ accounts, it sold the anonymized
data off to Lyft’s ride-hailing rival, Uber.
Suddenly, some of Unroll.me’s trusting users were no longer
so happy. One user filed a class-action lawsuit. In a blog
post, Unroll.me’s chief executive, Jojo Hedaya, wrote that it
was “heartbreaking to see that some of our users were upset
to learn about how we monetize our free service.” He
stressed “the importance of your privacy” and pledged to “do
better.” But one of Unroll.me’s founders, Perri Chase, who is
no longer with the company, took a different approach in
her own post on the controversy. “Do you really care?” she
wrote. “How exactly is this shocking?”

Privacy costs often become clear only after
they’ve already been paid.
This Silicon Valley “good cop, bad cop” routine is familiar,
and we spend our time surfing between these two modes of
1298

thought. Chase is right: We’ve come to understand that
privacy is the currency of our online lives, paying for petty
conveniences with bits of personal information. But we are
blissfully ignorant of what that means. We don’t know what
data is being bought and sold, because, well, that’s private.
The evidence that flashes in front of our own eyes looks
harmless enough: We search Google for a new pair of shoes,
and for a time, sneakers follow us across the web, tempting
us from every sidebar. But our information can also be used
for matters of great public significance, in ways we’re barely
capable of imagining.
When I signed up for Unroll.me, I couldn’t predict that my
emails might be strategic documents for a power-hungry
company in its quest for total road domination. Such privacy
costs often become clear only after they’ve already been
paid. Sometimes a private citizen is caught up in a viral
moment and learns that a great deal of information about
him or her exists online, just waiting to be splashed across
the news—like the guy in the red sweater who, after asking
a question in a presidential debate, had his Reddit porn
comments revealed.
red-sweater guy
a reference to Kenneth Bone, who, after asking a televised question as part of a panel
of undecided voters during the 2016 presidential campaign while wearing a red
sweater, became an Internet meme. He was initially characterized as “all that’s right
about America.” However, his image quickly became tarnished when comments he’d
made on a range of topics, from sex to the killing of Trayvon Martin, came to light.

1299

But our digital dossiers extend well beyond the individual
pieces of information we know are online somewhere; they
now include stuff about us that can be surmised only
through studying our patterns of behavior. The psychologist
and data scientist Michal Kosinski has found that seemingly
mundane activity—like the brands and celebrities people
“like” on Facebook—can be leveraged to reliably predict,
among other things, intelligence, personality traits and
politics. After our most recent presidential election, the
company Cambridge Analytica boasted that its techniques
were “instrumental in identifying supporters, persuading
undecided voters and driving turnout to the polls” on Donald
Trump’s behalf. All these little actions we think of as our
“private” business are actually data points that can be
aggregated and wielded to manipulate our world.
Years ago, in 2009, the law professor Paul Ohm warned that
the growing dominance of Big Data could create a “database
of ruin” that would someday connect all people to
compromising information about their lives. “In the absence
of intervention,” he later wrote, “soon companies will know
things about us that we do not even know about ourselves.”
Or as the social scientist and Times contributor Zeynep
Tufekci said in a recent talk: “People can’t think like this: I
didn’t disclose it, but it can be inferred about me.” When a
peeping Tom looks between the blinds, it’s clear what has
been revealed. But when a data firm cracks open our
inboxes, we may never find out what it has learned.
1300

Big Data
here, not merely electronic data sets that are so massive that they cannot be
processed by traditional software applications, but additionally predictive analytics,
methods of extracting data and analyzing patterns In them from these large data
sets. Most of the discussions of privacy in this chapter focus on issues related to
predictive analytics applied to big data.

Privacy is increasingly seen not as a right
but as a luxury good.
Privacy has not always been seen as an asset. The ancient
Greeks, for instance, distinguished between the public
realm (“koinon”) and the private realm (“idion”). In contrast
to those public citizens engaged in political life, humble
private citizens were known as “idiotai,” a word that later
evolved into “idiots.” Something similar is true of the
English word “privacy.” As Hannah Arendt wrote in “The
Human Condition,” privacy was once closely associated with
“a state of being deprived of something, and even of the
highest and most human of man’s capacities.” In the 17th
century, the word “private” arose as a more politically
correct replacement for “common,” which had taken on
condescending overtones.
Hannah Arendt (1906–1971)
American political theorist who immigrated to the United States after fleeing Nazi
Germany and living in several other European countries. One of the most important
political philosophers of the last century, Arendt frequently wrote on the nature of
totalitarianism, direct democracy, and authority.

1301

And yet somewhere along the way, privacy was recast as a
necessity for cultivating the life of the mind. In George
Orwell’s “1984,” the proles are spared a life of constant
surveillance, while higher-ranking members of society are
exposed to Big Brother’s watchful eye. The novel’s
protagonist, Winston, begins to suspect that real freedom
lies in those unwatched slums: “If there is hope,” he writes
in his secret diary, “it lies in the proles.” In the influential
1967 book “Privacy and Freedom,” Alan Westin described
privacy as having four functions: personal autonomy,
emotional release, self-evaluation and intimate
communication. This modern understanding of privacy as
an intimate good grew up right alongside the technology
that threatened to violate it. At the end of the 18th century,
the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution
protected Americans from physical searches of their bodies
and homes. One hundred years later, technological
advancements had legal minds thinking about a kind of
mental privacy too: In an 1890 paper called “The Right to
Privacy,” Samuel Warren and Louis Brandeis cited “recent
inventions and business methods”—including instant
photography and tabloid gossip—that they claimed had
“invaded the sacred precincts of private and domestic life.”
They argued for what they called the right “to be let alone,”
but also what they called “the right to one’s personality.”
George Orwell’s
1984: a novel published in 1949 by Orwell, an English novelist (1903–1950). The book
recounted a country (clearly what had been Great Britain) where everyone was

1302

directly or indirectly under government control. The elites were under constant
surveillance via telescreens, constantly reminding them, “Big Brother is watching
you.” In contrast, the proles, a shortened form of proletariat, or working class, were
left to work and breed though their lives were under indirect control of the
government as well. The term Orwellian has come to mean unwarranted government
control and intrusion into the lives of individuals, often through mass surveillance of
varying sorts.
Samuel Warren (1852–1910) and Louis Brandeis (1856–1941)
Harvard-trained attorneys—second and first in their graduating class, respectively—
whose 1890 essay “The Right to Privacy” in the Harvard Law Review is credited with
creating the notion of a right to privacy in American legal theory and popular culture.
They defined privacy as “the right to be let alone.” After practicing law, Warren
managed the family paper mill while Brandeis, known as the “people’s lawyer,”
became the first Jewish Supreme Court justice. Brandeis’s opinions stand as some of
the finest arguments for freedom of speech and the right of privacy penned by any
justice or legal theorist.

Now that our privacy is worth something, every side of it is
being monetized. We can either trade it for cheap services
or shell out cash to protect it. It is increasingly seen not as a
right but as a luxury good. When Congress recently voted to
allow internet service providers to sell user data without
users’ explicit consent, talk emerged of premium products
that people could pay for to protect their browsing habits
from sale. And if they couldn’t afford it? As one
congressman told a concerned constituent, “Nobody’s got to
use the internet.” Practically, though, everybody’s got to.
Tech companies have laid claim to the public square: All of a
sudden, we use Facebook to support candidates, organize
protests and pose questions in debates. We’re essentially
paying a data tax for participating in democracy.

1303

The smartphone is an intimate device; we stare rapt into its
bright light and stroke its smooth glass to coax out
information and connect with others. It seems designed to
help us achieve Westin’s functions of privacy, to enable
emotional release and moments of passive reflection. We
cradle it in bed, at dinner, on the toilet. Its pop-up privacy
policies are annoying speed bumps in the otherwise
instantaneous conjuring of desires. It feels like a private
experience, when really it is everything but. How often have
you shielded the contents of your screen from a stranger on
the subway, or the partner next to you in bed, only to offer
up your secrets to the data firm tracking everything you do?
The surveillance economy works on such information
asymmetry: Data-mining companies know everything about
us, but we know very little about what they know. And just
as “privacy” has grown into an anxious buzzword, the
powerful have co-opted it in order to maintain control over
others and evade accountability. As we bargain away the
amount of privacy that an ordinary person expects, we’ve
also watched businesses and government figures grow ever
more indignant about their own need to be left alone.
Companies mandate nondisclosure agreements and
demand out-of-court arbitration to better conceal their
business practices. In 2013, Facebook revoked users’ ability
to remain unsearchable on the site; meanwhile, its chief
executive, Mark Zuckerberg, was buying up four houses
surrounding his Palo Alto home to preserve his own privacy.
1304

Sean Spicer, the White House press secretary, has defended
President Trump’s secretive meetings at his personal golf
clubs, saying he is “entitled to a bit of privacy,” and the
administration has cut off public access to White House
visitor logs, citing security risks and “privacy concerns.”
When The New York Times reported that the president takes
counsel from the Fox News host Sean Hannity, Hannity
indignantly tweeted that his conversations were “PRIVATE.”
asymmetry
here, inequality because knowledge flows in only one direction rather than
bidirectionally.
evade
avoid.
nondisclosure agreement
a binding legal agreement, usually between two parties, detailing information that is
known or can be shared among those parties but cannot be disclosed to anyone else.
Such agreements are sometimes referred to as “confidentiality agreements.”
arbitration
a method of resolving disputes out of court in which the parties agree to permit a
trained third party or parties, known as arbitrators, to decide the matter after being
presented with the facts of the case. The results of such arbitration are often required
to remain confidential, and, as noted, arbitration is frequently imposed by one party
—often a corporation—on another—often an individual.

We’ve arrived at a place where public institutions and
figures can be precious about their privacy in ways we’re
continually deciding individual people can’t. Stepping into
the White House is now considered more private than that
weird rash you Googled. It’s a cynical inversion of the old
association between private life and the lower class: These

1305

days, only the powerful can demand privacy.
RESPOND●

1. Do you agree with Hess’s claim that privacy has become a
privilege, one that only the rich and powerful can afford or
demand? Why or why not?
2. Hess’s argument is composed of three sections: paragraphs
1–7, 8–10, and 11–13. Summarize the argument made in
each section, noting how it contribute to Hess’s overall
claim.
3. An interesting aspect of this selection is its use of logical
appeals of several types: testimonies in the form of
statements made by various parties and references to
specific individuals that stand as facts as well as arguments
based on etymology (the history of a word’s meaning) or
the history of a concept, among others. Make a list of all the
logical appeals you can find in this selection, categorizing
them by type. How and why do they support Hess’s claims?
(Chapter 4 on logical arguments will be useful in
completing this assignment.)
4. THINKING CRITICALLY Hess frequently uses what Chapter 13
refers to as “special effects” in terms of choosing words or
constructing phrases both to advance her argument and to
create her own personal style. One example would be
“Years ago, in 2009, . . .” (para. 7), another would be the
phrase “petty conveniences” (4 ), and a third would be her
observation that the ancient Greek term idiotai is the
source of the English word idiots (8). Make a list of all the
special effects you can find in the selection, and discuss
how they contribute to Hess’s argument.

1306

5. Construct an academic argument about issues relating to
privacy and the Internet. Rather than treating a broad
question like “Has the Internet Killed Privacy?,” you will
likely want to focus on a narrower aspect of this topic,
either one treated in these readings or a different one that
you have become aware of. As with most academic
arguments, you will almost assuredly need to conduct
research to understand the issues and support your claims.
(Chapter 17 provides information on academic arguments
while Chapters 18–20 will help you find, evaluate, and use
sources. Be sure to consult Chapter 21 on academic
integrity and avoiding plagiarism.)

1307

CHAPTER 27 How Free Should Campus
Speech Be?

In 1994, the well-known literary critic and legal scholar Stanley
Fish published a controversial book, There’s No Such Thing as
Free Speech . . . And It’s a Good Thing Too. Fish argued that the
notion that Americans could or should be able to say anything
they like anytime and anyplace was, in fact, deeply flawed—
even on college campuses, where the idea of free and open
debate has long been held as close to sacred. The selections in
this chapter provide strong evidence that the issues that
concerned Fish still dominate campus discussions today even
though the terms in which those debates are framed have
shifted.
The chapter opens with introduction to John Palfrey’s 2017 Safe
Spaces, Brave Spaces: Diversity and Free Expression in
Education, in which Palfrey makes an impassioned plea for the
value of living in and learning from the tensions between
supporting free speech and finding ways to create campus
communities where people from all sorts of backgrounds and of
1308

all sorts of perspectives can feel they are heard. The second
selection, from a 2018 Knight Foundation survey of over 3,000
college students about issues related to free expression on
campus, provides strong evidence that a stance such as Palfrey’s
represents the views of most U.S. college and university
students. This fact-based argument demonstrates that the
overwhelming majority of students are committed to findings
ways to support free speech while promoting an inclusive
society welcoming of diverse groups. The challenge, of course,
is figuring out how to achieve such a goal.
In the third selection, comedian and actor Ben Schwartz
examines questions of free speech in light of the decision of
some well-known comedians to stop performing on college
campuses because of concerns about what one critic has
termed a “humor crisis.” This selection reminds us of both the
potential value and the danger of humor as a rhetorical tool.
The next three selections treat the topic of microaggressions.
The first visual argument is a poster designed by a consulting
firm to help students and employees in businesses appreciate
what microaggressions are and why they are harmful. The
second is a cartoon demonstrating the way that speakers’
assumptions and presuppositions can result in questions or
comments that listeners may find offensive. Next, psychologist
Scott Lilienfeld contends that although there should be no
denying the reality of prejudice in American society, he has
grave concerns about the social science research used in

1309

support of the campus programs seeking to contain
microaggressions.
Sarah Brown considers the roles that athletes increasingly play
as activists for social causes on campus, from taking a knee to
making politically charged comments to threatening to boycott
playoff games. Such actions by individuals, groups of athletes,
or entire teams raise complex questions about the possible
limits of free speech, especially for students who, as athletes,
are often seen as representing the institution.
The chapter’s final selection by professor Catherine NolanFerrell narrates how the issues raised in selections in this
chapter played out in her classroom during and after the
presidential election of 2016 at the University of Texas at San
Antonio, where nearly half the students identify as Latino.
Writing for an audience of professors, Nolan-Ferrell describes
how she and her students sought to live in and learn from the
tensions described by Palfrey in the chapter’s opening
selection. She demonstrates the complex ways in which
teaching and learning in classrooms are highly contextualized
rhetorical acts, providing multiple opportunities for examining
and applying the concepts taught throughout Everything’s an
Argument.

1310

John Palfrey (1972– ) is an educator, currently serving as
Head of School at Andover Academy, and legal scholar,
having served as executive director of Harvard University’s
Berkman Center for Internet & Society from 2002 to 2008. An
authority on law and new media, he is a strong advocate for
Internet freedom. This selection comes from the introduction
to Palfrey’s 2017 book, Safe Spaces, Brave Spaces: Diversity
and Free Expression in Education. Here, Palfrey is arguing
that “free expression and diversity are essential components
of democracy in the twenty-first century” and that that two
are ultimately compatible despite frequently being set in
opposition to one another. As you read this academic
argument, pay careful attention to how Palfrey structures it,
particularly the ways he anticipates alternative positions and
seeks to respond to them respectfully.
Safe Spaces, Brave Spaces
JOHN PALFREY
Free expression and diversity are essential components of
democracy in the twenty-first century. In the United States, our
shared commitment to both principles, especially as they
developed in the late twentieth century, ensures that a
democracy and the world at large benefit from heterogeneity.
These two concepts rely on and reinforce one another.
The arguments in favor of diversity and free expression are not
exactly the same, but neither are they unrelated. There are
reasons for diversity that have little or nothing to do with free
1311

expression; and there are reasons for free expression that have
little or nothing to do with diversity. The areas of overlap,
though, are plentiful—and they are essential to finding the best
path forward. At their essence, both of these ideals support
democracy because they mean that societies are educating
informed, engaged citizens and seeking to establish a sense of
fair play and justice in political systems. While diversity and
free expression are too often pitted against one another as
competing values, they are more compatible than they are
opposing.
The American experiment at its best calls for diversity and free
expression to coexist. That coexistence has not been easy, nor
has it been all that successful, especially for those who have had
less power. The American experience has been a lot easier for
whites, males, Christians, heterosexuals, the able-bodied, and
the wealthy in particular. And free expression has been
interpreted in ways that have tended to support those in
authority rather than all people equitably. These critiques of
the American experiment are all grounded in historical truth.
But it is also true that free expression can serve all of us.
Diversity is about self-expression, learning from one another,
working together in productive ways across differences, and in
turn strengthening our democracy. Diversity that also
encompasses and supports intellectual and academic freedom—
without condoning hate speech—has enormous force, promise,
and importance.

1312

The American experiment
a description that reminds readers that America—and indeed, every country—is an
experiment, one that can succeed or fail, depending on the actions of individuals.
equitably
a fairly, which may well not mean treating everyone the same.

WHY DIVERSITY MATTERS
Our commitment to seeking the truth and making sound
decisions, in intellectual communities and in the public sphere,
relies on the coexistence of diversity and free expression. One
of the reasons to have a diverse community—one in which we
truly welcome adults and young people with a broad range of
racial, class, ethnic, religious, cultural, and political
backgrounds, as well as people with a range of gender and
sexual orientations—is that they bring various viewpoints that
can help a community reach good, moral, and truthful
decisions. This range of viewpoints also helps communities
reach just decisions that a broad range of people will believe to
be legitimate.
As one example, consider the field of journalism and the need
for a diverse corps of reporters to serve a multicultural
democracy well. Among other things, a democracy depends on
a strong, independent field of journalism to function effectively.
Journalism enables the public to stay informed about crucial
issues in such a way that the people may determine their own
best interests. Journalism offers plentiful examples of this
concurrent need for diversity and free expression in support of

1313

democracy. A well-trained, professional team of journalists—
even if they all come from one racial background, say all
Latino/Latina—may be able to cover the stories of a large and
complex city with a reasonable degree of accuracy. But getting
to the truth of what is really going on in, say, that city’s
Chinatown section will be enhanced by someone on the staff
coming from that neighborhood or from a Chinese-speaking
background. At a minimum, that team of reporters would need
to rely on sources and informants from Chinatown in order to
tell that story with a fidelity to what actually occurred and what
it meant. In either event, a diverse set of voices—whether as
authors or sources—can lead to a deeper understanding of the
truth in a complex environment than a homogeneous group of
voices can. In turn, those who rely on this journalism have a
greater likelihood of discerning their own true interests and
acting accordingly as citizens.1
Or consider the discipline of writing and studying U.S. history,
which I teach to high school juniors and seniors at Andover. If
virtually all the authorities writing prominent history books are
white men (as they were for a long time), the likelihood is high
that their narratives would extol the great male military and
political leaders, not the women and many of the people of
color who lived then. The idea behind diversifying the ranks of
our history teachers and scholars is that a more diverse group of
authors will tell a more complete—and correspondingly more
truthful—version of what happened. The point is not to
eliminate political and military history or the lives of “great
1314

men” from our narratives but rather to include social and
cultural history—for instance, as it is told by women or people
of color, unwelcome in political and military leadership for
much of our history. The point is also not that only African
Americans can write about the lives of those enslaved or what it
was like to be subject to Jim Crow laws, but rather that having a
more diverse group of teachers and authors results in a broader
range of perspectives. As the professoriate continues to
become more diverse, the narratives that we teach in history
are becoming more diverse and richer.
professoriate
the group of people who teach at colleges and universities.

WHY FREE EXPRESSION MATTERS
Free expression, likewise, enables us to find the truth. If certain
views are unwelcome or barred, then the likelihood that
societies will find or embrace the truth diminishes. The extreme
case is an authoritarian regime—for instance, in North Korea—
where dissent is nearly impossible and the free flow of ideas is
nonexistent. If criticism of political figures, whether accurate or
not, is disallowed or strongly discouraged—as it is, for instance,
in present-day Turkey, Russia, or Thailand—then the likelihood
that the truth about their activities will emerge is much lower.
When Saddam Hussein received 100 percent of the votes cast in
the election of 2002—all 11,445,638 of them—one can reasonably
infer that the Iraqi people were not free to discuss the potential
shortcomings of the next Hussein administration.2 In the case
1315

of the urban journalists, free expression supports
understanding of the real dynamics at play in Chinatown. In the
case of the historians, free expression enables broader
consideration of events and patterns that had previously lain
uncovered—and that may have been inconvenient to unearth,
discuss, and publish. Without commitment to free expression,
the truth is much less likely to emerge. Without a route to the
truth, the likelihood of good policy decisions, fair dealing with
communities, and just outcomes of disputes is much lower.

ADDITIONAL LINKS BETWEEN DIVERSITY AND FREE EXPRESSION
Diversity and free expression are linked, too, as principles that
lead to higher levels of equity and fairness. The success of these
ideals provides legitimacy for a democratic system. One reason
to pursue a diverse environment, especially in a school or
university setting, is to ensure that every young person has a
roughly equal chance at the positive gains possible through
education. If a school admits only young people of a single race,
gender, ethnicity, faith, sexuality, or type of ability, then the
opportunities at that school are not equitably afforded to those
with other characteristics. In a knowledge-dominated economy,
access to the benefits of education is of fundamental
importance. Diversity initiatives—including but not limited to
affirmative action policies—aim to ensure that the inequities of
the past are not paid for in the future. These commitments
ensure that every member of an academic environment feels
and is valued for what they offer to the community and can
1316

accomplish while in school and afterward. The benefits of
addressing inequity on campus connect directly to the degree of
equality in the polity at large.
Free expression, in its purest form, is also a driver of equity and
justice. Free expression means that no voice is categorically
entitled to greater freedom than any other. At the level of
principle, freedom of expression is even-handed: it means that
the color of one’s skin, or faith, or sexuality should not be a bar
to expressing one’s point of view, participating in civic life
through speech, and so forth. In practice, in most societies, this
form of equity has rarely existed: some people are able to speak
louder and more freely than others.
Free expression is linked to a series of other freedoms with
similar connections to equity. In the context of the United
States, these freedoms are enshrined in the First Amendment to
the Constitution: the right to free speech and a free press, the
right to assemble peaceably, and the right to religious beliefs.
Alongside the right to free expression, these other rights also
protect those who might otherwise suffer persecution: the
unpopular minority group has the right to come together
peaceably in a community, or to pursue their faith, or to publish
their views through a specialized press, or to seek redress from
the government. Taken together, these rights have great force
on behalf of an equitable society.

SOME ARGUMENTS TO THE CONTRARY
1317

The matter, of course, is not as simple as saying that diversity
and free expression are mutually supportive concepts, on
campus and in society at large. There are serious theoretical
arguments to the contrary. There are hard cases that make
these principles difficult to reconcile. The hardest cases,
customarily involving hate speech, require balancing of
competing interests that can leave no one happy.
The most forceful argument, expressed from the political left,
against my view that these two principles should coexist comes
with the (truthful) claim that the right to free expression arose
in the context of inequality. The First Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution, for instance, was drafted by white, powerful men
of European descent—many of whom enslaved their fellow
Americans. Moreover, the interpretation of the right of free
expression in the United States has been historically carried out
by and large by male judges, often white and well off. Given this
history, the right to free expression has been a tool of
empowered people, not those who have been marginalized. As
such, this counterargument goes, the right to free expression is
flawed and less worthy of support than diversity, equity, and
inclusion, especially where these two values conflict. While I
acknowledge the force of this argument, I think it is less
compelling than the claim that the two principles, in a more
equitable historical moment, can and should be upheld in
common.
Other counterarguments take issue with either the specific

1318

application of free expression or diversity or both. It is one
thing to make a broad claim about the importance of diversity
and free expression coexisting; it is quite another to determine
how best to apply them in an actual society.
Free expression, for instance, evokes a range of possible
policies, from one in which truly “anything goes” to the
constrained version of free expression (which I favor) that is
enshrined in the U.S. Constitution. This latter vision of free
expression calls for limits to free expression in certain
circumstances, known as “time, place, and manner”
restrictions. Gender and racial harassment, fighting words,
obscenity, and libel, for instance, are not protected speech even
under the First Amendment. In the context of a campus, the
limits to free expression often take another form: disallowing
students from using hate speech targeted at another student, for
instance. None of these types of restrictions on free expression
would bar citizens or students from expressing a political
opinion, however unpopular, as long as it does not target or put
at risk another person. While some disagree with the idea of
any restrictions on free expression, others wish for speech
restrictions to further limit or ban certain additional forms of
speech.
“time, place, and manner” restrictions
the categories of restrictions that can, under current federal law, be placed on free speech
provided they are content neutral. They are narrowly tailored, and they leave open
alternative means of expression. Thus, assuming these conditions are met, a school could
likely legally limit free speech (or certain kinds of free speech) to certain times (e.g., not on
Sunday), certain places (e.g., a free speech zone), or certain manners (e.g., no PA systems),

1319

although it would need to be able to justify the need for doing so. The restrictions are from
the ruling Linmark Associates, Inc. v. Township of Willingboro, 431 U.S. 85 (1977).

A similar counterargument might take issue with the forms of
diversity that I favor in this book. As in the case of free
expression, the views fall along a broad spectrum. On the one
end, diversity extends to a strong form of equality and
inclusion, brought about by affirmative policies intended to
accomplish what proponents refer to as “social justice.” On the
other end of the spectrum falls extreme xenophobia—whether
expressed by white supremacists or by those who express
hatred toward others from a religious viewpoint. For the
purposes of this argument, I favor a form of diversity that
makes good on the promises of the American ideal: a nation
that invites those from all over the world to form a community
together, representing a range of backgrounds and viewpoints.
On campuses, this ideal means seeking young people from all
over the country and the world, from all races, ethnicities, faith
backgrounds, sexual orientations, with a range of abilities, and
from families with different political viewpoints. Here, too,
there are, and must be, restrictions of various sorts. A nation
must limit those who can immigrate in certain ways in order to
avoid systems being overwhelmed by the sheer number of
residents; similarly, enrollment on a campus ought to be
limited to a number of students who can in fact thrive in that
particular learning environment. Some might agree that this
definition of diversity is too generous; others might oppose the
limits I suggest or favor more radical policies to accomplish the
goals of diversity, equity, and inclusion.
1320

xenophobia
irrational fear or hatred of strangers and, by extension, those from other countries or
ethnic groups (Greek, xenos [stranger] + phobos [fear]).

THE CHALLENGING PARADOX
The hardest theoretical problem in holding these two ideals
together is not one of definition, as thorny as that can be—it has
to do with a paradox at the heart of this combination. One goal
of diversity, equity, and inclusion—taken together—is tolerance.
These ideals call for a community to enable all members to
enjoy equal privileges. This notion of equity is especially hard to
1321

accomplish in environments that have been the least equal in
the past—for instance, campuses that have only recently been
opened to those of a certain gender or race, where intolerance
has been the norm for a long time. The paradox becomes
evident when someone does not believe in tolerance. The belief
they hold—or the expression they wish to convey freely—is that
the very idea of tolerance is wrong.
paradox
apparent contradiction that can be resolved so that no contradiction, in fact, exists.

Must a community tolerate intolerance? It is this hard problem
that presented itself on so many campuses in the fall of 2015
and again in the presidential election of 2016, and that will
remain with us for the foreseeable future. Some campus
activists argue for no as an answer to that question. From my
perspective, the answer is yes, at least to some extent.
Tolerance must extend not only to those who believe in
tolerance but also to those who do not. In a democratic system
at large, we give votes regardless of a person’s viewpoint. As
humans and communities, we learn when we are presented
with viewpoints different from our own.
The difficulty with this idea—and the primary shortcoming of
the view that we must tolerate some degree of intolerant speech
—is that the costs of such tolerance will be borne
disproportionately by those who are the targets of the
intolerance. In America, those people are likely the same
people whose forebears have been the targets of intolerance in
1322

the past: people of color, women, those who identify as
LGBTQIA+, those who do not identify squarely on the cisgendered binary (female or male), and those with different
abilities. This argument—that we ought to hold diversity and
free expression as mutually reinforcing principles—is at its
most vulnerable when we consider the disproportionality of the
costs of extreme tolerance.
LGBTQIA+
umbrella term including lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, intersex, asexual, and
others who do not identify with the heterosexual and cis-gendered majority.
cis-gendered
having a gender identity that corresponds with the sex one was assigned at birth.

There are ways to mitigate this problem, though it may be a
long time (or a rare place) before the problem is fully
addressed. The roots of discrimination are long and run deep;
they are not easily pulled out of any soil, without trace or
likelihood of regrowth.
One form of mitigation is to limit free expression in specific
ways. There must be a point at which the tolerant should not
have to tolerate the intolerant. One limitation, sensibly included
in campus policies, is to disallow hate speech personally
directed at an individual. If a member of the community directs
hate speech at another individual (rather than at a group), the
speech can be subject to restriction and the speaker to
disciplinary measures or other recourse. Specific campuses or
communities might have narrowly tailored rules along these
1323

lines to protect those most vulnerable. It is easy to imagine that
rules at a school for young children would be even more
protective in this respect than the rules at a high school or those
at a university, given the different educational aims of these
types of institutions and different maturity levels of their
students.
Where a speaker expresses a general political viewpoint,
communities must seek to tolerate these expressions, even if
she or he preaches something inconsistent with the majority
viewpoint on campus. If this political speech is intolerant
toward some community members, the response should be to
address this intolerant viewpoint with more speech. An
affirmative obligation to speak up falls on those who oppose the
position. In a civic context, it is imperative that citizens and
political leaders speak up to defend the rights of all people in
the community. This burden must not fall just on those
threatened by the speech; those who already feel the most
marginalized, undervalued, or invisible in communities may
find it hard to voice their concerns. The burden ought to fall
less on those directly affected and more on those who are in the
favored position. In the campus context, those representing the
institution itself—a college president, a university board chair,
or a school principal—ought to establish a point of view that
favors tolerance, diversity, equity, and inclusion over hate and
intolerance. The best approach for the long run is for the
truthful, positive, values-driven viewpoint to be given the
chance to win out. The stronger argument should prove more
1324

sustainable and more broadly embraced over time if it is
contested than if it is merely insisted on without interrogation.
To impose a rule against the less tolerant political viewpoint, or
to ban that viewpoint from the commons, would have high costs
in the long run, but so too does tolerating certain hateful speech
on campuses.

NOTES
1. Alex Garcia, “Why Diversity in Media Matters in Making Free
Speech Really Free,” Medium,
https://medium.com/@Alex_Garcia/why-diversity-in-mediamatters-in-making-free-speech-really-freea25cb760bd80#.zay4kev7j.
2. “Saddam Wins ‘100% of Vote,’” BBC News, October 16, 2002,
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/2331951.stm.

RESPOND●
1. What is your response to Palfrey’s claim that “[f]ree expression
and diversity are essential components of democracy”? Of a
successful learning environment in higher education? If you do
not agree with his claims, which parts of his argument do you
have trouble accepting or agreeing with? Why do you think you
and Palfrey might disagree?
2. A major component of this selection is the extended
definitional argument focusing on the meaning and nature of
free expression and on diversity. Working in pairs or small

1325

groups, list all the ways Palfrey defines, describes, or
characterizes one of these two concepts, including the
paragraph number where that comment occurs. (Your
instructor may wish to divide the work among the pairs or
groups in the class so that more than one group considers each
concept.) Once you have completed your list, analyze the
elements of the list in terms of the kinds of definitions
discussed in “Kinds of Definitions” in Chapter 9. If there are
items that do not fit neatly into these categories, try to label
the functions those items serve in helping clarify Palfrey’s
understanding of the concept. Once your group has completed
its task, compare your findings with those of other groups in
the class, working to clarify the class’s understanding of these
concepts as Palfrey defines them.
3. Likely because of his training as a lawyer and legal scholar,
Palfrey constructs arguments in ways that closely resemble
Toulmin argumentation, discussed in Chapter 7. While there
are several ways to frame Palfrey’s argument, let us assume the
following statement encapsulates his claim: “Our commitment
to seeking the truth and making sound decisions, in intellectual
communities and in public spaces, relies on the coexistence of
diversity and free expression” (para. 4). Using the information
given in Chapter 7 and beginning with this claim, construct an
outline of Palfrey’s argument (cf. p. 150), providing any explicit
qualifications to the claim, the reason(s) for the claim, the
warrant(s) for the claim, the forms of backing provided for the
warrant, evidence for the backing, the authority or authorities
cited in support of this evidence, the conditions of rebuttal, and
possible responses these conditions might engender. If you find
that Palfrey’s argument is not a perfect Toulmin argument,
note the elements that are lacking and speculate about why

1326

they might be absent. (You will find your response to Question
2 helpful in responding to this question. You may wish to work
in small groups on this question as well.)
4. THINKING CRITICALLY A key feature of academic arguments is
making explicit the logical connections between ideas or
sentences. Examine paragraph 12, reproduced below, and
explain the function(s) of each of the italicized words or
phrases with regard to making explicit the logical connections
between ideas. (One way to think about the question is to read
the passage without these elements, making minor changes so
that the text would still make sense, and then to put them back
in.)
The most forceful argument, expressed from the political
left, against my view that these two principles [of free
expression and diversity] should coexist comes with the
(truthful) claim that the right to free expression arose in
the context of inequality. The First Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution, for instance, was drafted by white, powerful
men of European descent—many of whom enslaved their
fellow Americans. Moreover, the interpretation of the right
of free expression in the United States has been
historically carried out by and large by male judges, often
white and well off. Given this history, the right to free
expression has been a tool of empowered people, not
those who have been marginalized. As such, the
counterargument goes, the right to free expression is
flawed and less worthy of support than diversity, equity,
and inclusion, especially where these two values conflict.
While I acknowledge the force of this argument, I think it is

1327

less compelling than the claim that the two principles, in a
more equitable historical moment, can and should be
upheld in common.
5. As noted, Palfrey’s argument is very much an academic
argument in the sense discussed in Chapter 17. Write an
academic argument in response to the position Palfrey takes
in this selection, seeking to be as systematic and respectful of
other positions as he is. We assume that you will likely not
agree with all of the assumptions or claims made by Palfrey. If
you don’t agree completely with Palfrey, your argument will
focus on those areas of disagreement, and you will make
explicit the differences between your perspective and Palfrey’s,
giving support for your assumptions or claims. Should you
agree completely with Palfrey’s claims, your argument will
explain why you contend that Palfrey’s analysis is the correct
one, again providing evidence for your assumptions or claims.

1328

This selection presents excerpts from a March 2018
Knight Foundation Report on free speech issues on campus.
The survey, conducted in November–December 2017, polled
over three thousand students across the country at various
kinds of institutions of higher education on their ideas about
First Amendment issues. Here, we reproduce the report’s
summary conclusion as a background to the report’s detailed
analysis of responses to two specific questions:
1. Do you think each of the following rights is very secure,
secure, threatened, or very threatened in the country
today: Freedom of speech, freedom of religion, freedom
of the press, freedom for people to assemble peaceably,
and freedom to petition the government? and
2. How important do you consider each of the following to
be in our democracy: Protecting citizens’ free speech
rights and promoting an inclusive society that is
welcoming of diverse groups?
Building on a 2016 survey, this project was supported by five
organizations with different value orientations but with a
common commitment to First Amendment issues: Gallup, a
U.S.-based international consulting company highly
respected for its sophisticated opinion polls; the John S. and
James L. Knight Foundation, a nonprofit foundation one of
whose goals is to support high quality journalism; the
American Council on Education, a nonprofit organization of
over 1,800 accredited member institutions of higher
education; the Charles Koch Foundation, a foundation
1329

supporting libertarian and conservative causes in higher
education; and the Stanton Foundation, which supports a free
press and an informed citizenry. (The entire report is
available at http://kng.ht/2G9huqZ. We encourage you to
check it out to get additional information about the questions
included here and about other questions related to the topic
of free speech on campus.)
As you study this selection, consider the value of trustworthy
polling data on complex and controversial issues like the ones
reported on here and the ways in which they can be used to
support a range of arguments.
Free Speech on Campus: What Students Think about First
Amendment Issues
GALLUP/KNIGHT FOUNDATION

As discussed in Chapter 18, survey data, such as the data featured
in this report, can provide important information that may not
have been collected before.
LINK TO Chapter 18, Collecting Data on Your Own

College students generally endorse First Amendment ideals in
the abstract. The vast majority say free speech is important to
democracy and favor an open learning environment that
promotes the airing of a wide variety of ideas. However, the
actions of some students in recent years—from milder actions
such as claiming to be threatened by messages written in chalk
1330

promoting Trump’s candidacy to the most extreme acts of
engaging in violence to stop attempted speeches—raise issues of
just how committed college students are to upholding First
Amendment ideals.
Most college students do not condone more aggressive actions
to squelch speech, like violence and shouting down speakers,
although there are some who do. However, students do support
many policies or actions that place limits on speech, including
free speech zones, speech codes and campus prohibitions on
hate speech, suggesting that their commitment to free speech
has limits. As one example, barely a majority think handing out
literature on controversial issues is “always acceptable.”
Further, college students acknowledge that campus norms can
act to deter speech—a larger majority than a year ago perceive
that their campus climate prevents some people from
expressing their ideas for fear of offending others. Also,
students perceive that some groups on campus have a lesser
ability to voice their opinions than other groups do.
Issues surrounding the First Amendment can present dilemmas
for college officials, as they attempt to address student concerns
about campus matters in a way that does not infringe on other
students’ First Amendment rights. Some actions colleges have
taken have been perceived by students, opinion leaders, public
officials and the courts as going too far in restricting those
rights.

1331

Every year new controversies arise, driven by technological
advances in communication, evolving social mores and new
cohorts of students entering college who may have different
understandings of what the Constitution guarantees its citizens.
As such, colleges will need to continue to keep First
Amendment considerations in mind when deciding on policies
to meet these new challenges.

COLLEGE STUDENTS ARE LESS LIKELY TO SEE FIRST AMENDMENT
RIGHTS AS SECURE
As colleges across the country continue to grapple with the
issue of free speech on campus, majorities of U.S. college
students still feel the five freedoms guaranteed by the First
Amendment to the U.S. Constitution are secure in this country.
However, they are less likely now than they were in 2016 to say
each right is secure.
Compared with the 2016 survey, students now perceive the five
freedoms as significantly less secure. This includes a 21percentage-point decline in perceptions that freedom of the
press is secure and nine-point declines for free speech, freedom
of assembly and freedom to petition the government. Freedom
of the press was viewed as the most secure right in 2016, but
now it ranks only above freedom of assembly.
Students Believe All Five First Amendment Rights Are Less Secure
Do you think each of the following rights is very secure, secure, threatened, or very

1332

threatened in the country today?

MAJORITIES OF STUDENTS CONSIDER BOTH SPEECH AND
INCLUSION TO BE IMPORTANT TO DEMOCRACY
For a democracy to thrive, citizens must be able to express their
views on important issues to inform their elected leaders about
what they want them to do. But all citizens, regardless of their
background, should have the same opportunity to express their
views—something that has not always been the reality in
democratic societies, including the U.S. Students place a high
value on protecting free speech rights in a democracy: 56% say
1333

it is “extremely important” to do so, and 33% say it is “very
important.” Nearly as many say promoting an inclusive society
that welcomes diverse groups is extremely (52%) or very (31%)
important to democracy.
College Students Say Both Free Speech Rights, Inclusive Society Are Highly
Important to Democracy
How important do you consider each of the following to be in our democracy?

While Democratic and Republican students are about equally
likely to regard protecting free speech rights as important,
Democrats are much more likely than Republicans are to say
promoting an inclusive society is important. Only modest racial
and gender differences exist for the perceived importance of an
inclusive society that welcomes diverse groups.

RESPOND●

1334

1. What is your response to this selection? Were the findings at the
time of the survey or the changes since 2016 surprising in any
way, or do they reflect your experience?
2. Research-based reports like this survey represent a particular
category of argument of fact. Rather than searching for
evidence to support a claim, as discussed in Chapter 8, the
researchers analyze the data collected, seek to interpret them,
and then work to draw conclusions based on the data. At the
same time, the trustworthiness of such reports is a matter of
ethos. Consider how the authors of this report seek to create an
ethos that encourages readers to believe the information
presented. Likewise, consider matters of word choice (both the
language used and language that might have been used but
was not), the formulation and inclusion of the questions asked,
and the interpretation of the data presented. (The discussion of
surveys and polls in Chapter 4, which treats appeals to logos,
will help you respond to this question.)
3. Reports of survey data like this one frequently include visual
arguments. How effective and helpful do you find these visual
displays of data to be? How, for example, do they help readers
appreciate the meaning of the data being analyzed in ways that
words alone might not? (Chapter 14 on visual rhetoric and the
discussion of design and visuals in Chapter 8 on arguments of
fact may prove useful in responding to this question.)
4. THINKING CRITICALLY How do the data and analysis presented in
this selection call into question or provide support for claims
made by John Palfrey in the previous selection, the
introduction to his recent book Safe Spaces, Brave Spaces:
Diversity and Free Expression in Education? How do they call
into question or provide support for your own opinions about
freedom of speech on campus?

1335

5. A challenge for all but the most experienced writers is
summarizing sources for use as part of a longer text they are
creating. Using information presented in Chapter 20 on
synthesizing information, write a healthy paragraph
summarizing the response to each of the two survey questions
included in this excerpt of the Gallup/Knight Report. In each
paragraph, be sure to include direct quotations, using them
strategically; paraphrases; and appropriate signal words. The
best responses will construct paragraphs that, in fact, support
a claim or argument of fact, as discussed in Chapter 8.

1336

Ben Schwartz (1981– ) is an actor, comedian, and
author who is especially interested in the history of humor
in America between WWI and WWII. This selection
appeared in June 2015 in the “Word Factory” column of the
Baffler, a print and digital magazine that analyzes culture,
business, and politics. In it, Schwartz is ultimately asking
questions about permissible and impermissible comedy:
an issue of the possible limits of free speech. As you read,
consider where you draw a line about which subjects, if
any, can’t be treated humorously. Likewise, consider
whether and how context matters. Does the identity of the
performer matter? The identity or identities of the
audience? Should they? Do you draw the line differently
for comedians and for class members whose casual efforts
at humor may offend? And what about location—are
things permitted in a comedy club on campus that
wouldn’t be permissible for you in an academic setting? In
short, give serious thought to the criteria you use in
evaluating the appropriate and inappropriate uses of
humor, a two-edged rhetorical sword.

Shutting Up
BEN SCHWARTZ
This weekend, I used up one of my ten free monthly views of
The New York Times to find film critic A. O. Scott declaring
1337

a national “humor crisis.” No, he wasn’t referring to any of
his colleague Maureen Dowd’s perennial struggles with
political humor; rather, he described a culture-wide danger
zone in which comedians actually get criticized—and worse,
not nicely. “The world is full of jokes and also of people who
can’t take them,” Scott wrote. “We love jokes that find the far
edge of the permissible, but we also love to turn against the
joker who violates our own closely held taboos.”
So much to unpack here—are you really humorless because
you don’t like a joke? Are comedians violating edgy taboos?
Or more often than not, reinforcing tired old ideas, and
flogging views the audience has left behind?
Then, Monday, in a widely circulated clip from the Colin
Cowherd show, a cranky senior from Long Island, Jerry
Seinfeld, called in to chat with Cowherd about how “PC”
complaints on college campuses are why comics like he and
Chris Rock quit doing campus shows. In the kind of hushed
tones that most sports radio personalities reserve for
wringing their hands about “the good of baseball,” or losing
a beloved NFL player to a wife-beating charge just before a
play-off game, Cowherd asks, “Does it . . . does it hurt
comedy?”
Colin Cowherd (1964– )
sports radio and TV personality whose comments about particular racial and ethnic
groups have been the subject of controversy and have cost him at least one job.
Jerry Seinfeld (1954– )
actor, writer, director,

1338

producer, and stand-up
comedian best known for
playing a character based
on himself in the highly
syndicated, eponymously
named Seinfeld.
Chris Rock (1965– )
actor, writer, director,
producer, and stand-up
comedian best known for
his work in film,
appearances on Saturday
Night Live, and the TV
series, Everybody Hates
Chris, which he created.

Poor comedy, that
needy waif of pop
culture, is getting
bullied. “Laughter
is supposed to be a
unifying force,”
A.O. Scott wrote, “a

Jerry Seinfeld

leveler of
distinctions and a healer of divisions. But it often seems to
be just as divisive as anything else in our angry and
polarized climate. Can’t we just all have a good time
together?”
waif
a helpless person, often a child.

If you see comedy
1339

as a progressive
kindergarten, or a
family outing to the
zoo, uh, sure. But
that leveling
process? It’s not
about healing,
really. It often
reflects some
vicious and ugly
divisions in our
country that many
comedians and
audience members
don’t see as
anywhere close to

Chris Rock

level—or even
agree among themselves, for that matter, that leveling is the
needful social remedy in question. Comedy isn’t supposed to
be anything, except what the comedian tries to make it—
harmless, mean, political, dirty, dumb. You wouldn’t say
that music or fiction are “supposed” to be anything; so why
do we saddle all comedy with a curative democratic mission?
Too often we view comedy as a craft, a service brought to us
by cheerful comfort-workers, more than the work of serious
artists. Thus, when they don’t comfort us, we want to
complain to the manager.

1340

Have Twitter and noisy college kids put comedy (whatever
that abstract term is supposed to mean) on the ropes? The
thing I find most tiresome about this “too PC” argument is
that so many people talking about it today think it’s new, like
something suddenly went wrong all at once with the nation’s
millions of millennial PC liberal kids as they logged
themselves onto the Internet. Bill Maher named his first talk
show Politically Incorrect back in 1993. You can find
Southern civic groups in the 1850s banning abolitionist
comedians in the lead-up to the Civil War. Those comedians
were minstrels. Today they would be attacked for that style
of comedy, no matter how vitally progressive their views in
the 1850s.
Bill Maher (1956– )
comedian, television host, and commentator known for his political satire and
sarcastic tone.
minstrels
white performers in blackface and black performers under the direction of whites
who, during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, were part of comic shows
representing people of African descent in negative ways.

This isn’t a problem, nor is it a crisis. The redefining of
“funny” for each generation is a constant of our humor. And
it’s not censorship. Local vaudeville theater managers once
had the authority to censor and blacklist comics at every
level from the 1870s through the 1930s, on the basis of
nothing more than purely whimsical local tastes. Movie
studios, TV networks, magazine editors, newspaper critics
(when they had weight), and even other comedians (see
1341

David Letterman versus Bill Hicks)—have all done far more
to censor comedy and damage careers than anyone on
Twitter or college campuses can today. Comedy has never
had more venues, more outlets, more diversity than this
moment, right now.
vaudeville
variety entertainment performances popular in the U.S. and Canada during the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
blacklist
create a list of individuals or groups to be censored or not employed, generally
because of their identities or their politics.
David Letterman (1947– )
comedian, television host, and film and TV producer; he remains the longest-serving
late night talk-show host in U.S. history.
Bill Hicks (1961–1994)
comedian, musician, and social critic who died of pancreatic cancer at 32. He was
known for his dark humor on controversial topics. Although Hicks had appeared on
Late Night with David Letterman eleven times, in 1993 Letterman decided not to air a
segment taped earlier that evening before a live audience because of the
controversial jokes Hicks had told. Years later, in 2009, Letterman aired the segment
and stated he had been wrong not to do so in the first place.

Americans have always told comedians to shut up, and
American comedians, to their credit, have rarely done it.
They’ve been shut up at times, yes: fired from shows,
shouted down, banned from clubs, etc. But that’s not what’s
happening today. No one banned Seinfeld and Rock from
doing campus shows; instead, they opted out, because that’s
not their audience anymore. That’s just show business. Last
year, students uninvited Maher from a commencement
speech appearance,
1342

and he was then reinvited by the
chancellor, hours
later. He continues
to offend people
weekly, and often
daily, on Twitter.
No one was more
surprised to be
booed during
Vietnam than Bob
Hope. It shouldn’t
surprise anyone if
one day, and
maybe one day
soon, the same

Amy Schumer

thing happens to
Amy Schumer or John Oliver.
Bob Hope (1903–2003)
comedian, vaudevillian, actor, dancer, singer, and author. Hope is among the most
famous comedians and actors of the twentieth century. Between 1941 and 1994, he
made 57 tours with United Service Organizations (USO), which provides live
entertainment to active-duty military abroad. During one of his tours in Vietnam, he
was booed when he made a statement that President Nixon had a clear plan for
winning the war. In 1997, Congress named him an honorary veteran of the U.S.
military, the only time such an award has been bestowed.
Amy Schumer (1981– )
stand-up comedian, film and Broadway actor, and author; known for Inside Amy
Schumer on Comedy Central.
John Oliver (1997– )

1343

British-born comedian, actor, producer, and political commentator known for his
work on The Daily Show with John Stewart, the podcast The Bugle, and Last Week
Tonight with John Oliver. His commentary on political issues has helped influence
legislation, giving rise to the “John Oliver Effect,” the ability of Oliver (and other
entertainers) to turn often arcane legislative issues into viral phenomena.

“It’s no good longing for a simpler age,” Scott wrote of the
current humor crisis, “though it is possible to imagine that
once upon a time things were clearer.” In the clearer time
he imagines, Scott describes an America where Jewish
comics weren’t part of the mainstream culture and
remained on the “ borscht belt.” That flies in the face of our
most common understanding of how American humor
evolved ever since Jews first arrived on these shores.
borscht belt
now-defunct summer resorts in the Catskill Mountains of New York that were popular
with Jews of Eastern European heritage from New York City from the 1920s until the
1970s. (Borscht is a beet-based soup popular among Eastern Europeans.) Many
famous American comedians of Jewish heritage got their start performing on the
borscht belt circuit.

No, times weren’t any more clear back then, ever. If the past
seems more clear to anyone now, that’s perhaps because
large segments of the audience were silenced, or never
asked what they thought—be they people of color, women,
or LGBT people.
Long ago, Times writers who held Scott’s job could shut
down a movie they disliked with a single review. One
famous instance of this was Warren Beatty’s 1967 film
Bonnie and Clyde, declared dead on arrival by Times critic
1344

Bosley Crowther, who was appalled by the rude new culture
it represented. Pauline Kael had to save it with a New
Yorker review. That was nearly fifty years ago. Today, Scott
is equally uncomfortable with the rude new culture of
diversity on the Internet. “A crisis of authority is not for the
faint of heart,” Scott wrote in an essay last year, where he
worried over the death of adult culture in America. No, not if
it threatens you. For some of us, it’s exhilarating.
Bonnie and Clyde
highly popular and influential biographical film about Depression-era bank robbers
Bonnie Parker and Clyde Barrow starring Faye Dunaway and Warren Beatty. It broke
a number of taboos with regard to the depiction of violence and sex in particular.
Pauline Kael (1919–2001)
especially influential film critic during the second half of the twentieth century. She
wrote for the New Yorker magazine; frequently, her opinions differed from those of
other powerful critics.

Poster advertising the film Bonnie and Clyde

1345

Comedy is more often than not a populist business, so why
are we surprised when the response it engenders in its
audience is equally populist? What we could use is a better
vocabulary to criticize and answer comedians. Is every
comment about race, gender, or sexuality we don’t agree
with a sure sign the comedian is a racist or bigot whose
career needs to end? While watching a comedian in a club,
do we really need to shout them down in the middle of a set
because we fear that it’s heading somewhere that we won’t
like? In short, a little patience, a little of the tolerance we
insist that our comedians demonstrate, would be welcome
from the audience, too.
populist
literally, of the people; the word’s connotations, however, most often imply the
common people, in contrast to the elite.

RESPOND●

1. What, specifically, is Schwartz’s argument in this selection?
To what extent does he agree with A.O. Scott and Jerry
Seinfeld, both of whom he cites, and to what extent is he
seeking to reframe the issues in a different way?
2. As Schwartz notes, there is “so much to unpack here” (para.
2). Although he is referring specifically to Scott’s comments,
in fact, his observation applies to uses of humor more
broadly. Why is the use of humor always complex, and why
and how do users of humor open themselves up to
criticism? Is it helpful or necessary to distinguish between
humor used by comedians during performances and humor

1346

used in other contexts? Why or why not?
3. Schwartz presents a considerable number of specific
examples of comedians and humorous entertainment in
American history. What sorts of appeals do these examples
represent? Why? For what purposes is Schwartz using
them?
4. THINKING CRITICALLY What is the relationship between
comedy and free speech for you, and what experiences
have led you to this position? Here are four possible
options, though there are surely others in addition to
combinations of these four. One common position is that
any topic should be fair game for a comedian. If patrons
choose to pay to watch a comedian perform or show up at
a free performance on campus, for example, they shouldn’t
be surprised if something they find offensive gets said—in
fact, they should perhaps expect to be offended. A second
position argues that humor is or at least can be a tool for
combatting various kinds of social and societal problems
by naming them publicly and mocking them. Related to this
position is the acknowledgment that such humor often is
truly funny, even when it comes at the expense of members
of groups we do or don’t belong to. A third position
contends that context is crucial—the identity of the person
using the humor, the homogeneity or values of the
particular audience, and the specific location where the
humor is used all matter. A fourth position claims that there
can be no humor about certain topics; in short, these topics
are to be treated as taboos when it comes to humor.
5. In his closing paragraph, Schwartz issues challenges both
through a series of rhetorical questions and in his comment
that “What we could use is a better vocabulary to criticize

1347

and answer comedians.” Write a proposal argument in
which you respond to this challenge or to one of the
questions Schwartz poses about how comedians get
labeled or how audience members sometimes react when
anticipating what a comedian is about to do. Focus your
argument on the specific context of college and university
campuses, which, as the selections in this chapter are quick
to remind us, are different in important ways from other
public venues. (Chapter 11 will guide you in writing a
proposal argument.)

1348

Over the past several years, microaggressions have
been the subject of great debate in several Englishspeaking countries, particularly on college campuses and
in the workplace. The term microaggression is heavily
contested, as you’ll discover in the next selection by Scott
Lilienfeld. However, it generally refers to “under the
radar,” everyday comments, phrases, and labels that seem
innocent, innocuous, or even complimentary to the
speaker but that feel offensive to the recipient. While the
person making the comment may think nothing of what is
said, the recipient is reminded that, in some sense, they
don’t belong or they are doing something wrong (even if
whoever they are or whatever they are or are not doing is
out of their control). Such comments are directly or
indirectly linked to putting people into boxes, often boxes
based on race or ethnicity, gender, sexuality, social class,
ability, body type, or some other aspect of identity. While
we might expect microaggressions always to be small or
minor, it is clear that frequently the comments that get
labeled “microaggressions” should more properly be
termed “macroaggressions,” a fact that a New York Times
video referenced in Question 4 in the following selection
invites you to explore.
There are two visual arguments for this chapter, a poster
about racial microaggressions produced by the Turner
Consulting Group in Toronto, Canada, and a cartoon by

1349

illustrator Alexandra Dal. The Turner Group serves
workplaces and schools in their efforts to respond to
diversity within their organizations. The company’s goal is
not merely helping organizations comply with local or
national laws but, more importantly, helping them
flourish as they create more inclusive environments for all
—employees, clients, students. (A commonly made
observation is that diversity is something people see while
inclusion is something they feel.) Alexandra Dal is a Native
American cartoonist and illustrator who lives and works
in San Antonio, Texas. Both of these visual arguments
focus on the sorts of specific questions ethnic or racial
minorities frequently encounter—and some would argue
have to endure—in North American society.
From a rhetorical point of view, microaggressions are
interesting because they remind us that what speakers or
writers intend is often less important than the effect on
the audience of what is said or written. The creators of
both selections make this effect visual in the frustrated,
sad, or angry expressions of their minority characters.
Microaggressions are likewise interesting because they
immediately reveal assumptions the speaker is making,
not merely about the person to whom the question is
addressed but also about what the world is like or should
be like, as the questions in Dal’s cartoon make undeniably
clear. As Dal notes on her Web site in reference to this

1350

comic, the questioners in the frames on the right likely do
not imagine that they are engaging in behaviors that could
be termed offensive, “inappropriate,” or “racist.” In fact,
when they ask a person of color if she is the first member
of her family to attend college, they may even assume
their question functions as a compliment or display of
support: Dal observes that even before the young person
can reply, the questioner often adds, “Your parents must
be so proud!”
[The questioners] think they’re giving you the
opportunity to . . . trot out your inspirational horror
story of clawing your way out of the hood and
avoiding teen pregnancy and gangs while
simultaneously helping your single mother raise your
5 younger siblings.
While such a story is, indeed, the story of some college
students’ lives—and that is a fine thing—the problem is the
questioners’ insidious assumption that students of color
are likely to be first-generation college students. Dal
further points out that those asking such questions often
see themselves as “progressive and unprejudiced,” but it is
most unlikely that they would make similar remarks to
white people, as illustrated by the frames of the comic on
the left.
Efforts to encourage discussion of microaggressions in
places like classrooms or the workplace generally have
1351

several related goals. Certainly, they seek to help those
involved in these discussions find ways of talking about
the power of language and, more particularly, the ways
that comments—often the most casual remarks, even ones
that can be well intentioned—can sting. They work more
broadly to remind everyone that they likely make faulty
assumptions about those they encounter based on the
boxes into which they have put those individuals.
In so doing, these discussions encourage individuals to
reflect on things they may have said without thinking, on
the categories of social difference they so easily fall back
on, and on the nature and limits of what some would term
“free speech.” Such discussions also work to remind those
who have been on the receiving end of microaggressions—
likely everyone at some point because of some aspect of
their identity—that they are not alone. However, the fact
that everyone may at some point be the recipient of such
remarks does not justify their recurring use. Rather, it can
—and many would argue should—lead everyone to
consider why members of some groups are much more
likely to be repeated recipients of them or why the
versions of them they receive are far more painful than a
momentary sting. As you study the Turner Group’s poster
and Dal’s cartoon, consider why the comments and
questions they contain could seem innocuous to the
speaker but exhausting, if not offensive, to the hearer.
Microaggressions are often compared to wasp stings. A
1352

rare or occasional one might not be too irritating, but
being stung repeatedly or constantly has significant
consequences for a person’s well-being.

Racial Microaggressions Poster
TURNER CONSULTING GROUP

1353

Questions
ALEXANDRA DAL

1354

RESPOND●

1355

1. How would you describe the argument being made by the
poster from the Turner Consulting Group? The cartoon by
Alexandra Dal? What assumptions or presuppositions are
behind each of the questions asked in the poster and the
cartoon? How effective is each as a visual argument? Which
of the two is more effective? Why? (Chapter 14, on visual
rhetoric, will help you respond to this question.)
2. This poster and the cartoon focus on microaggressions
grounded in race. What other types of microaggressions
might be successfully tackled in this medium? Draft a
poster like this one to call out microaggressions of other
types (class, sexual orientation, ability, gender, and more)
on campus, at your workplace, or in your community.
3. As the headnote points out, microaggressions have become
a topic of discussion—and debate—on college campuses
and in the workplace. Watch this YouTube video on “White
Fragility Training” in the workplace:
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZPDpcYEdiOg> or
<https://bit.ly/2gXd5Hx>. (By the way, white fragility is
defined by the Oxford dictionaries as “discomfort and
defensiveness on the part of a white person when
confronted by information about racial inequality or
injustice.”) As you watch the video, consider how it
recognizes microaggressions and at the same time mocks
programs in cultural sensitivity and diversity training. What
do you think the goals of this video are, and how effective
do you find it? What are the advantages and disadvantages
of using humor as the means to try to educate viewers
about microaggressions? Does the video, for example, let
certain groups off the hook? (Chapter 2 offers a discussion
of the challenges of using humor effectively.)

1356

4. THINKING CRITICALLY Efforts to document microaggressions
have given rise to Facebook and Instagram pages as well as
more than one photography project. An especially
interesting photographic response to microaggressions is
the I’m Tired Project <https://theimtiredproject.com/>,
begun in 2015 by Paula Apkan and Harriet Evans, then
twenty one-year-old college graduates. While begun in
Britain, this photojournalism project has expanded and
now includes photos from the United States and other
countries. Each black-and-white photograph shows the
naked back of an individual with a sentence beginning with
the words “I’m tired…” painted on it. Here are some
examples of the things they are tired of:
I’m tired of being told I sound “white”
I’m tired of being the angry Black woman
I’m tired of being told I’m not real
I’m tired being “pretty for an Indian girl”
I’m tired of my intelligence being associated with my
ethnicity
I’m tired of assumptions being made about my eating
habits because of my size
I’m tired of people using the word crazy
I’m tired of people saying racism is over
What might you surmise about the identity of the individual
based on their comment? For example, the person who
stated “I’m tired of being told I sound ‘white’” is an African
American male. If this seems strange to you, read John
McWhorter’s essay “Thick of Tongue” in Chapter 25.
Consider the ease with which we put individuals into boxes.

1357

What sort of comments might have been made to lead
these individuals to be “tired”?
5. Return to the comments listed in Question 4, and choose
the one you find makes the most effective argument for
taking the notion of microaggressions seriously. Then,
analyze that argument in the way that Toulmin might. As
Chapter 7 explains, the British philosopher Stephen
Toulmin offers an especially useful method for analyzing
arguments. In this case, the statements in Question 4
represent the claim of the argument. Working backward
from the claim, try to put into words the reason(s),
warrant(s), backing, and evidence for such a conclusion. In
short, detail the chain of reasoning leading to the claim.
(Note that you do not need to agree with the claim; your
task is to analyze it and, as best as possible, to explain why
the individual making the statement assumes the claim is
valid.) When you have completed your analysis, present it
by writing it up as an argument of fact. (Again, your task
is not to evaluate the argument, but to present it in its best
light, that is to support it as strongly as possible.) As noted,
you will find information on Toulmin’s method of analysis
in Chapter 7 while Chapter 8 discusses arguments of fact.

1358

Scott O. Lilienfeld (1960– ) is a professor of psychology at
Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia. Throughout his career,
he has been a strong supporter of evidence-based methods
and treatment practices in his field. With colleagues, he has
often sought to call into question claims about psychological
phenomena that have not been rigorously tested, which is
something we see in this selection. Aeon, a British online
magazine, published a longer version of this essay, which was
in turn adapted from Lilienfeld’s academic journal article,
“Microaggressions: Strong Claims, Inadequate Evidence.” As
you read, pay careful attention to the ways in which Lilienfeld
repeatedly seeks to make clear the limits of the claims he is
making, focusing on the challenges of rigorously
investigating microaggressions from the perspective of social
psychology.
Why a Moratorium on Microaggressions Is Needed
SCOTT O. LILIENFELD
Prejudice remains a huge social evil but evidence for harm
caused by microaggression is incoherent, unscientific, and
weak.
Across college campuses, a big idea has taken hold: the notion
that microaggressions—subtle but offensive comments or
actions directed at minorities or other powerless people—can
lower performance, lead to ostracism, increase anxiety, and
sometimes cause so much psychological pain that the recipient
might even commit suicide. Yet despite the good intentions and
1359

passionate embrace of this idea, there is scant real-world
evidence that microaggression is a legitimate psychological
concept, that it represents unconscious (or implicit) prejudice,
that intervention for it works, or even that alleged victims are
seriously damaged by these under-the-radar acts. It is entirely
possible that future research will alter some of these verdicts.
Until the evidence is in, though, I recommend abandoning the
term microaggression, which is potentially misleading. In
addition, I call for a moratorium on microaggression training
programs and publicly distributed microaggression lists now
widespread in the college world.
implicit prejudice
prejudice—that is, negative beliefs or feelings about a group—that individuals are not
aware that they have.
moratorium
pause, freeze.

Context is all-important here. Despite impressive societal
strides, racial prejudice remains an inescapable and deeply
troubling reality of modern life. As recently as 2008, 4 to 6
percent of Americans acknowledged in a national poll that they
would be unwilling to vote for any African-American candidate
as president. And this deeply troubling figure might be an
underestimate given the social undesirability attached to
admissions of racism. Indeed, a growing number of scholars
contend that prejudice often manifests in subtler forms than it
did decades ago. From this perspective, prejudice has not
genuinely declined—it has merely become more indirect and

1360

insidious.
social desirability
a form of bias that sometimes occurs in social science research when participants respond
in ways they believe will be viewed positively by others, especially the researchers. Social
desirability bias leads subjects to overreport “positive” behaviors and underreport
“negative” ones.
insidious
deceptive, sneaky.

Enter the concept of microaggressions, those subtle snubs,
slights and insults directed at minorities, as well as women and
other historically stigmatized groups. Compared with overtly
prejudicial comments and acts, they are commonly understood
to reflect less direct, although no less pernicious, forms of
racial bias. Last year, Shaun R. Harper, founder of the Center
for the Study of Race and Equity in Education at the University
of Pennsylvania, told an Intelligence Squared debate about
meeting an African-American student whose engineering
professor had expressed incredulity that he’d received a perfect
score on an exam. Few would dispute that such remarks, even if
not malicious, are almost certainly callous. Prejudice
undoubtedly manifests itself in subtle and indirect ways that
have until recently received short shrift in psychological
research.
pernicious
damaging, harmful.
malicious
spiteful, nasty, cruel.
callous

1361

unfeeling, insensitive, uncaring.
short shrift
little consideration.

Over the past few years, the concept of microaggression has
made its way into public discussions at dozens, if not hundreds,
of colleges and universities, with many institutions offering
workshops to faculty members on identifying and avoiding
microaggressions and disseminating lists of microaggressions
to caution faculty and students against expressing statements
that might cause offense.
All of these applications hinge on one overarching assumption:
that the microaggression research program aimed at
documenting the phenomenon is sound and that the concept
itself has withstood rigorous scientific scrutiny. This is not the
case. Microaggressions have not been defined with nearly
enough clarity to allow rigorous scientific investigation. No one
has shown that they are interpreted negatively by all or even
most minority groups. No one has demonstrated that they
reflect implicit prejudice or aggression. And no one has shown
that microaggressions exert an adverse impact on mental
health.
adverse
hostile.

I am hardly the first to raise questions regarding this body of
research. Over the past few years in particular, the
microaggression concept has been the target of withering
1362

attacks from social critics, especially—although not exclusively
—on the right side of the political spectrum. These writers have
raised legitimate concerns that concepts such as
microaggression can at times discourage controversial speech
and inadvertently perpetuate a victim culture among aggrieved
individuals.
My major concern is the rigor of the psychological science
itself. In no way do I deny that subtle forms of prejudice exist
and are becoming more prevalent in some sectors of society.
Nor do I wish to discourage, let alone reject, research into
implicit prejudice. Nor do I contend that microaggressions don’t
exist. Instead, I contend only that microaggressions must be
studied properly before we can claim to know their impact or
the best ways of reducing the pain that they might cause. Good
intentions are a start but are not sufficient.
The term microaggression was coined by psychiatrist Chester
Pierce at Harvard in 1970 to describe seemingly minor but
damaging put-downs and indignities experienced by African
Americans. Pierce wrote: “Every Black must recognize the
offensive mechanisms used by the collective White society,
usually by means of cumulative proracist microaggressions,
which keep him [sic] psychologically accepting of the
disenfranchised state.”
disenfranchised
literally, deprived of being able to vote; more often, as here, used in the broader sense of
marginalized.

1363

But it was not until 2007 that the microaggression concept
began to filter into the academic mainstream. In an influential
article in American Psychologist, the psychologist Derald Wing
Sue defined microaggressions as “brief and commonplace daily
verbal, behavioral, or environmental indignities, whether
intentional or unintentional, that communicate hostile,
derogatory, or negative racial slights and insults toward people
of color.” Microaggressions can be verbal comments, for
instance subtle racial slights; behaviors, such as ignoring
minority individuals; or environmental decisions, including
naming all buildings on a college campus after white
individuals, or even former slave owners. Sue and his team
have called microaggressors “perpetrators,” but I prefer the
somewhat ungainly term “deliverers” to avoid any connotation
of intentionality or malevolence.
To Sue and his colleagues, microaggressions are pernicious
precisely because they are usually ambiguous. Victims are
typically trapped in a catch-22. Because they are uncertain of
whether prejudice has actually been expressed, recipients
frequently find themselves in a no-win situation. If they say
nothing, they risk becoming resentful. Furthermore, they might
inadvertently encourage further microaggressions from the
same person. In contrast, if they say something, the deliverer
might deny having engaged in prejudice and accuse minoritygroup members of being hypersensitive or paranoid.
catch-22
a dilemma or double bind; a situation in which any possible solutions cancel each other

1364

out.

Scott O. Lilienfeld builds his argument around operational
definitions of microaggressions and its three subcategories,
microassaults, microinsults, and microinvalidations. See Chapter 9
for more on definitional arguments.
LINK TO Chapter 9, Kinds of Definitions

Sue and his team differentiated among three subtypes of
microaggressions, based on observation. Microassaults, which
are the most blatant of the three, are explicit racial derogations
“characterized primarily by a verbal or nonverbal attack meant
to hurt the intended victim through name-calling, avoidant
behavior, or purposeful discriminatory actions.” They might
include using racial slurs, drawing a swastika on someone’s
door, or referring to an African American as “colored.” In
contrast to other microaggressions, microassaults are often
intentional.
Microinsults are barbs and put-downs that impart negative or
even humiliating messages to victims; they “convey rudeness
and insensitivity and demean a person’s racial heritage or
identity.” For example, an employer who says: “I believe that
the most qualified person should get the job, regardless of race”
is delivering a microinsult.
Finally, microinvalidations “exclude, negate, or nullify the

1365

psychological thoughts, feelings, or experiential reality of a
person of color.” According to Sue, a microinvalidation could be
a white person informing an African American that “I don’t see
color”; it might also be an African-American couple receiving
poor restaurant service and being told by white friends that they
were oversensitive in interpreting this poor service as racerelated.
Intriguing as they are, Sue’s conclusions are really just
theoretical conjectures based on information gleaned largely
from focus groups and are in no way backed up by rigorous
data or experimental techniques. Despite this limitation, the
past decade has witnessed the extension of the microaggression
concept to other groups who historically have been the targets
of prejudice and discrimination, including women; gay, lesbian,
and transgender individuals; Asian Americans; Latinos; Muslim
Americans; and the obese. Virtually all of these extensions
presume that the microaggression concept has already been
validated and is well-established in African Americans—despite
the fact that, by any standard of psychological science, this
concept does not pass scientific scrutiny.
focus group
a small group of people, often diverse in nature, interviewed to get their beliefs, opinions,
or attitudes about a specific topic, issue, or possible product as a way of understanding
and predicting how the larger population might respond. This qualitative technique is
widely used in market research, political analysis, and certain kinds of social
psychological research.

In the case of the microaggression concept, it is dubious
1366

whether its definition is sufficiently clear to permit adequate
scientific progress. For example, it is not evident which kinds of
actions constitute a verbal, behavioral or environmental
indignity, nor what severity of indignity is necessary for an
action to constitute a microaggression.
All this vagueness and ambiguity can lead to outright
contradictions in what is or is not a slight. For example, both
ignoring and attending to minority students in classrooms have
been deemed to be microaggressions by some authors: one
researcher called out “teachers ignoring the raised hands of
Asian-American students in classrooms” as a microaggression.
Another regarded complimenting the student with a remark
such as “That was a most articulate, intelligent, and insightful
analysis” as a microaggression. In still other cases, they have
regarded both praising and criticizing minority individuals as
microaggressions.
Compounding this problem, microaggressions necessarily lie in
the eye of the beholder. It is doubtful whether an action that is
largely or exclusively subjective can legitimately be deemed
“aggressive.” The “eye of the beholder” assumption generates
other logical quandaries. In particular, it is unclear whether any
verbal or nonverbal action that a certain proportion of minority
individuals perceives as offensive would constitute a
microaggression. Would a discussion of race differences in
personality, intelligence or mental illness in an undergraduate
psychology course count? What about news coverage of higher

1367

crime rates among certain minority populations than among
majority populations? It is likely that some or all of these
admittedly uncomfortable topics would elicit pronounced
negative emotional reactions among at least some minority
group members.
The boundaries of the microaggression concept appear so
indistinct as to invite misuse or abuse. One major scholar in the
field even regarded the statement “I don’t usually do this, but I
can waive your fees if you can’t afford to pay for counselling” as
a microaggression. At least one research team has even
classified saying “God bless you” following another person’s
sneeze as a microaggression, presumably because it could
offend nonreligious individuals. According to some expansive
definitions of microaggressions, this article itself could
presumably constitute a microaggression, as it challenges the
subjective experience of certain minority-group individuals.
Given the fluid boundaries of the concept, in hindsight even
statements that might appear to be explicitly anti-prejudiced
have been interpreted as microaggressions. Sue’s team, for
instance, analyzed what the Arizona senator and thenpresidential candidate John McCain said in response to an
elderly white woman during a 2008 campaign stop. The woman
said: “I can’t trust Obama. . . . He’s an Arab,” and McCain
immediately grabbed the microphone to correct her. “No
ma’am,” McCain retorted, “he’s a decent family man [and]
citizen that I just happen to have disagreements with. . . . He’s
not [an Arab]!”
1368

While acknowledging that McCain’s defense of Obama was
“well-intentioned,” the researchers dubbed it a “major
microaggression.” According to Sue, McCain’s assertion that
Obama is “a decent family man” implicitly communicated the
message that most Arab or Muslim males are not decent family
men, as well as the message that were Obama in fact a Muslim
(which he is not), it would have implied that he was somehow
dangerous or at least unworthy of admiration.
Although these post-hoc interpretations of McCain’s comments
might be defensible, they are concerning. In particular, they
raise the possibility that a vast number of statements can be
retrospectively labelled microaggressions. For example, had
McCain responded: “No ma’am, he’s not an Arab—but what
would be wrong if he were?”—which is the response that Sue
said McCain should have given—some advocates could have
contended that McCain was subtly intending to insinuate that
Obama might indeed be a Muslim. Furthermore, Sue’s
interpretation overlooks the possibility that McCain was merely
responding to the affective gist of the woman’s comment—
namely, that Obama is a bad and untrustworthy person—rather
than to its literal content. In doing so, he effectively
communicated his central point—namely, that although he
disagreed with Obama on many things, he did not believe that
Obama was trying to conceal or lie about his ancestry or that
Obama was a bad person.
The microaggression field, like much of psychology, lacks

1369

diversity of thought, and it shows. For instance, “Attaining a
racially color-blind society is unattainable and only reinforces
racism and societal inequality,” wrote Sue in his book Race Talk
and the Conspiracy of Silence (2015). Although this position
might be defensible, it is hardly the only legitimate perspective
on racial color-blindness. For example, many non-prejudiced
participants might view the goal of a racially color-blind society
as achievable in principle, if not fully in practice. Ironically,
conceptualizing such statements as microaggressions runs
counter to the crux of Reverend Martin Luther King Jr.’s
eloquent affirmation: “I have a dream that my four little
children will one day live in a nation where they will not be
judged by the color of their skin, but by the content of their
character.” A compelling argument could be advanced that
many putative microaggressions, especially
microinvalidations, lend themselves to a myriad of potential
interpretations, some of them largely malignant, others largely
benign. . . .
putative
presumed but not (fully) demonstrated to be the case.
myriad (of)
numerous or even innumerable.

Some microaggression researchers—and the people reporting
so much pain from these comments and acts—might be
themselves committing a similar error. For example, Sue
regarded the question “Where were you born?” directed at
Asian Americans as a microaggression because it reflects the
1370

assumption that recipients are “different, less than, and could
not possibly be, ‘real’ Americans.” Yet most cognitivebehavioral therapists would maintain that leaping to this
inference without attempting to check it out constitutes mindreading. Instead of prejudice, it might in many cases reflect
genuine and sincere curiosity regarding an individual’s culture
of origin.
cognitive-behavioral therapy
a form of psycho-social therapy whose goal is helping individuals develop coping
strategies for overcoming unhealthy patterns of emotional self-regulation or unhealthy
thoughts, beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors.

Even the word “microaggression” can lead us astray. It implies
that statements are aggressive in nature. Yet, confusingly,
microaggression advocates posit that such behaviors are
typically unintentional. As a result, the root word “aggression”
in “microaggression” is conceptually confusing and misleading.
Essentially, all contemporary definitions of aggression in the
social-psychological and personality literatures propose or at
least strongly imply that the actions comprising this construct
are intentional. From this perspective, the concept of an
unintentional microaggression is an oxymoron.
oxymoron
a phrase or concept made up of contradictory elements or ideas, often with the
connotation, as here, of self-contradiction. Some examples of oxymorons could include
deafening silence, alone together, and the living dead, all of which are used figuratively but
would present logical contradictions if taken literally.

Does it matter? Research suggests that it might, because the

1371

perception of intent is a critical correlate of, and perhaps
contributor to, aggression. Specifically, social-cognitive
research on hostile attribution of intent suggests that if
individuals perceive aggressive intent, they are more likely to
respond aggressively in turn. Hence, labelling ambiguous
statements or actions as “aggressive” might inadvertently foster
aggression in recipients. And labelling certain statements or
acts as “microaggressions” could fuel anger and even overt
aggression in recipients: this possibility should be examined in
the lab.
social-cognitive research
psychological research on how individuals process and apply information about social
situations and other people. The research begins with the claim that how we think about
other people has important consequences for how we construct our understanding of the
social world, including interacting with others.
hostile attribution of intent
the tendency to assume the behavior of others is, in fact, hostile even though it may be
ambiguous or even positive.

Even the prefix “micro” sometimes gets things wrong—implying
that these transgressions are barely visible or at least
challenging to detect. Yet for a number of purported
microaggressions, especially microassaults, this assumption is
dubious. In particular, many or most microassaults appear to
be emblematic of traditional, “old-fashioned” racism. Sue and
his team include in their list of microassaults the act of using
racial epithets—but, really, is that kind of verbal attack “micro”
in the least? Such statements and behaviors are grossly
offensive, and subsuming them under the broad
1372

microaggression umbrella could inadvertently trivialize
patently racist acts. Moreover, if investigators find that total
scores on microaggression are associated with minority
psychopathology, might this not merely reflect alreadyestablished statistical associations between overt racism and
mental health?
The terrain is fraught. Numerous items identified as
microaggressive in the literature appear fairly common in
everyday life, and not necessarily driven by hostile intent. For
example, being passed over by a taxi driver for a white person
has been listed as a microaggression. In a study of
microaggressions experienced by African-American faculty
members in counselling and psychology programs, the
researchers identified a student calling a professor by his or her
first name as a microaggression.
fraught
burdened and, here, politically charged in numerous ways.

Yet it is likely that virtually all individuals who have lived in a
major city, regardless of their race, have at least once been
passed over by a taxi driver for a white person, and that
virtually all faculty members, regardless of their race, have at
least once had a student address them by their first name.
Without at least some information concerning the frequency of
the events, it’s difficult to exclude the possibility that many
microaggressions merely reflect everyday occurrences in the
lives of both majority and minority individuals.
1373

All this requires a hard and careful look. Numerous studies
have revealed robust correlations between microaggressions
and adverse mental-health outcomes, such as psychological
distress, anxiety and depression, among minorities.
Researchers have argued that the cumulative effects of
microaggressions shorten life expectancy and even foster
suicidal ideation, but where is the solid proof?
Let’s be clear: prejudice and discrimination remain part and
parcel of the daily landscape of many minority individuals. In a
recent survey by the American Psychological Association, more
than three-fourths of African Americans reported encountering
at least some instances of discrimination on a day-to-day basis,
and almost two in five African-American males said that they
had been mistreated by the police. Given these sobering
statistics, it is essential that psychological science continues to
elucidate the sources and consequences of acts of prejudice and
discrimination, both subtle and overt.
The study of microaggressions is a potentially fruitful step in
this direction, but it leaves a daunting number of critical
scientific questions, both conceptual and methodological,
unaddressed and unanswered. In this regard, the
microaggression research program (MRP) might be little
different from other nascent psychological constructs that
await refinement in light of additional scientific knowledge.
Given the numerous unresolved questions surrounding
microaggression, MRP scholars must be circumspect in

1374

advocating for the application of this fledgling concept to
colleges until more science has been conducted. In the interim,
humility should be the watchword.
nascent
emerging, often with the connotation of promising.
fledgling
fairly new, untried.

So, what to do? Although the MRP is presently highly
problematic, we should not throw the baby out with the
bathwater. Subtle prejudice undeniably exists, and a certain
proportion of what are now misleadingly termed
“microaggressions” probably reflect such prejudice. If we could
reconceptualize most microaggressions as inadvertent cultural
and racial slights, we’d all be better off. The microaggression
culture prevalent on many campuses makes just about everyone
feel threatened, and could amp up already simmering racial
tensions. Distributing lists of “forbidden” phrases to campus
administrators or faculty members or mandating
microaggression training for employees are unlikely to be
helpful. A time-out on these ill-advised programs is long
overdue.
amp up
amplify, increase, or magnify.
simmering
on the verge of boiling over.

Yes, many majority individuals say unintentionally offensive

1375

things to minority individuals from time to time, often because
they are careless or oblivious or because they are simply
unaware of these individuals’ past racial and cultural
experiences. Microaggressions should be the start of an open
dialogue, not the end. Telling someone: “What you just said is a
microaggression. You offended me and you have to stop” is
unlikely to be conducive to a productive two-way conversation.
In contrast, it could be a fruitful entry point into a difficult but
mutually enlightening discussion to say: “You probably didn’t
mean this, but what you said bothered me. Maybe we’re both
misunderstanding each other. I realize that we’re coming from
different places. Let’s talk.”

RESPOND●
1. In this selection, what specifically is Lilienfeld critiquing? Why?
How does he seek to limit the scope of his critique? In other
words, what does he do as a writer to help readers understand
what he is and is not claiming? Consider specific statements he
makes as well as where and how often he makes them.
2. How does Lilienfeld use the three categories of
microaggressions as grounds for critique of the general
concept? (The simplest way to answer this question will be to
read carefully the relevant paragraphs, making a list of
Lilienfeld’s claims so that you can see the progression of his
argument as well as the distinctions made among the
categories.) As a psychologist, Lilienfeld is understandably
concerned with operational definitions—definitions that are
explicit enough to permit us, first, to determine clearly whether

1376

or not some phenomenon is present and, second, to count it so
that we may analyze it quantitatively. What does Lilienfeld’s
critique teach about the need for appropriately detailed
definitions of terms, especially in research contexts? (See
Chapter 9 on definitional arguments.)
3. Lilienfeld is obviously concerned with precision in language
use. How does each of the following passages illustrate his
concern with precise language?
a. “Every Black must recognize the offensive mechanisms
used by the collective White society, usually by means of
cumulative proracist microaggressions, which keep him
[sic] psychologically accepting of the disenfranchised
state” [when quoting a text from 1970, before writers
commonly used inclusive language].
b. Sue and his team have called microaggressors
“perpetrators,” but I prefer the somewhat ungainly term
“deliverers” to avoid any connotation of intentionality or
malevolence.
c. Even the word “microaggression” can lead us astray. It
implies that statements are aggressive in nature. Yet,
confusingly, microaggression advocates posit that such
behaviors are typically unintentional. As a result, the root
word “aggression” in “microaggression” is conceptually
confusing and misleading. Essentially, all contemporary
definitions of aggression in the social-psychological and
personality literatures propose or at least strongly imply
that the actions comprising this construct are intentional.
From this perspective, the concept of an unintentional
microaggression is an oxymoron.
How do these statements contribute to Lilienfeld’s ethos for

1377

social science readers who link precision in language with
careful analysis? How do they serve to call into question at
least some claims about microaggressions? (Chapter 13
discusses word choice and precision.)
4. THINKING CRITICALLY To what extent can Lilienfeld’s critique be
seen as minimizing or undermining his own acknowledgment
of the fact that racism and other sorts of harmful or malicious
comments in fact exist and are part of the daily life of members
of certain groups? Consider, for example, the comments
reported in this video from 2016 about the sorts of comments
made to Asian Americans:
<https://www.nytimes.com/video/us/100000004706646/thisis2
016-asian-americans-respond.html> OR
<http://nyti.ms/2iTViTr>. (Please be aware that this video from
the New York Times contains explicit language and that
watching it may prove challenging for some individuals.)
Should these comments be considered microaggressions? If so,
of which type? (See Question 2 above.) Do any of them rise to a
category that we might want or need to term
macroaggressions? And how does Lilienfeld’s suggestion in the
final paragraph of the selection shift the burden of
responsibility for the situation from the person who made the
comment to the person who was the target? Does such a
suggestion seem fair in contexts like those represented in the
video? Why or why not?
5. Building on your responses to Questions 2 and 4, write a threepart evaluative essay. First, seek to use the evaluative
distinctions given for microinsults, microassaults, and
microinvalidations in paragraphs 11–13 of the selection.
Categorize three of the comments made in the video discussed

1378

in Question 4. Second, use what you learn in trying to use these
categories as the basis for evaluating Lilienfeld’s critiques of
the concept of microaggressions. Finally, address what is likely
the important question to be considered: how might arguing
about terminology—or even using the term microaggression as
a label for the comments reported in the video—deflect
attention from the real issues that many would argue need to
be dealt with?

1379

This selection first appeared in February 2017 in the
Chronicle of Higher Education, a newspaper and Web site
focusing on news related to colleges and universities; its
primary audience is professors, administrators, and staff
at such institutions. It was one of a series of trend reports,
which examined hot-button issues on college campuses
that would likely continue to shape campus life. Sarah
Brown, who has written for the Chronicle since 2015,
frequently writes on topics such as diversity, sexual
assault, and state policies toward higher education. As you
read this selection, consider our society’s changing
understanding of college and professional athletes, the
power they potentially wield, and the ways these issues
intersect with understandings of freedom of speech and
expression.

Activist Athletes
SARAH BROWN
Ariyana Smith, a women’s basketball player at Knox College,
lay down on the court before a game—and stayed there for
four and a half minutes. Eric Striker, a University of
Oklahoma football player, filmed a Snapchat video on his
phone that went viral. The University of Missouri’s football
team staged a full-on boycott, refusing to practice or play
altogether.
1380

Ariyana Smith

1381

Eric Striker

1382

Members of the University of Missouri football team in 2016

These demonstrations, protesting racial injustice, reflect the
many ways that college athletes have taken public stands in
recent years to send a message or bring about change.
Collegiate athletes—particularly in revenue-generating
sports like football and men’s basketball—have a national
platform that many of their fellow students do not. They can
also leverage the massive amounts of money that pour into
college sports each year.
leverage
using something—here, the visibility, profit, and importance a school may place on
athletics—to its maximum advantage, in this case so as to lobby for social change.

The most recent uptick in athlete activism on campuses

1383

began in 2014, in the aftermath of Michael Brown’s death at
the hands of a police officer in Ferguson, Missouri. That
incident inspired some players to call attention to what they
saw as systemic racial bias in law enforcement. Later that
year, players on a number of basketball teams wore shirts
saying “I can’t breathe” before games, a reference to what
Eric Garner, another black man, had said when he was put
in a chokehold by a New York City police officer. He later
died.
In 2015, 32 players on Missouri’s football team wanted to call
attention to what they saw as poor institutional responses to
racial incidents on the campus. So they refused to play until
Timothy Wolfe, then the president of the university system,
resigned. The boycott began a few days before a scheduled
game against Brigham Young University, and if Missouri had
canceled the game, it would have owed BYU $1 million. Mr.
Wolfe was also facing growing pressure from student
protesters, including one who vowed not to eat until the
president resigned. He stepped down two days after the
football boycott began.
In 2016, with political polarization and racial tensions
running high, athletes’ activism increased. They were
inspired largely by Colin Kaepernick, the quarterback of the
San Francisco 49ers, who in August started refusing to stand
during the national anthem as a means of protesting
injustices against black people. Since then, many college

1384

football and basketball players, as well as marching-band
members, have demonstrated in some way during the
anthem.

Colin Kaepernick taking a knee during the national anthem, 2016.

1385

While many such protests are about race, they touch on
other issues as well. The University of Minnesota’s football
team decided to boycott its bowl game in December because
the university had suspended 10 players for an alleged
sexual assault. Team members said they wanted to call
attention to what they considered a lack of due process for
students accused of misconduct. Players ended the boycott
two days later, after Minnesota’s investigation report into
the incident was made public. It contained many lurid
allegations about the case, in which the alleged victim
claimed that she was pressured to have sex with multiple
men, including several football players.
Given the widespread opposition to President Trump,
experts on sports and social movements say they expect
even more athletes to join the fray.
When college officials see such activism and aren’t sure how
to handle it, their first call is often to Harry Edwards, a
prominent sports sociologist and emeritus professor at the
University of California at Berkeley. Lately his phone has
been ringing off the hook. “Oftentimes I’ll get a call or query
or be invited to a university, and what they want to know is,
How we can avoid this?” he says. “They cannot avoid it.”
Mr. Edwards tells college presidents, athletics directors, and
coaches that “they should be aware of where their locker
rooms are.” Many athletic administrators seem surprised,
1386

he said, that their players are talking and tweeting about
broader societal issues.
Given their potential influence, it may seem surprising that
more college athletes don’t engage in protests. But even as
their activism has gained more traction, these students
continue to face pressures that might have given some of
their peers pause before speaking out.
One factor is simply the way athletics teams operate. “The
sports structure in and of itself is not designed to cultivate
activism,” says Joseph N. Cooper, an assistant professor at
the University of Connecticut who studies sports, race, and
culture. “It’s really designed to cultivate conformity.” He
likens it to the military: “You have leaders who provide
orders, you don’t question them, and you’re not thinking
critically about what you’re doing.” College players also have
a lot on the line—namely, dreams of a professional career. If
their activism rubs people the wrong way, that could put
their futures at risk.
Athletics officials and coaches stand to lose, too, if angry
alumni or fans stop donating or buying tickets for games, or
if politicians try to punish their campuses. After six female
basketball players at the University of Arkansas knelt during
the anthem in November, in protest of police violence
against black people, a state lawmaker placed a temporary
hold on the institution’s budget request. Then there’s the

1387

possibility of reputational damage, which could affect
recruiting. So campus officials have tended to be wary of
such activism.
Since athletes are at the mercy of their coaches in terms of
playing time and scholarships, coaches and team managers
exercise a great deal of influence over their players’ choices.
If a college team includes several individuals who have
come together to organize a protest, “but the coach is saying,
No, you’re not kneeling, you’re not walking out, you’re not
doing whatever it is—that’s powerful,” says Jennifer
McGarry, a professor of educational leadership at
Connecticut and a former athletic administrator.
Last year Josh Rosen, the quarterback at the University of
California at Los Angeles, publicly criticized a new $280
million deal with the apparel company Under Armour. Mr.
Rosen pointed out that while student athletes had effectively
made the large contract possible, they would not benefit
financially from it because they aren’t paid. “We’re still
amateurs, though. . . . Gotta love non-profits. #NCAA” he
wrote on Instagram. Mr. Rosen is expected to be a top pick
in next year’s NFL draft.
After UCLA’s coach, Jim L. Mora, admonished the player for
making a contentious statement that distracted from the
university’s announcement, Mr. Rosen deleted the post.
At least one
1388

athletics director
believes there’s
growing support
among his
colleagues for
student activism.
“The athletic
director of today is
a lot more
knowledgeable
about the right to
free expression and
the fact that this
isn’t the old-school
old days anymore,”
says Ray Anderson,
who serves in that
role at Arizona
State University.
Josh Rosen

Mr. Anderson
stresses, though, that there’s an important distinction to be
drawn between a respectful, peaceful protest and a meanspirited “intentional interference.”
College officials also have to ponder the question of whether
their athletes should be treated primarily as students with
First Amendment rights or as athletes who represent the

1389

institution, he says. For him there’s no question: They are
students first and athletes second. So the job of colleges is to
educate them about possible ramifications of speaking out,
he says.
In sports, he says, “the memories go long.”
Mr. Rosen, the UCLA quarterback, has had to learn some of
those lessons firsthand. In April, he posted an Instagram
photo of himself teeing off at a Trump golf course while
wearing a bandana that profanely insulted Mr. Trump—
which sparked a social-media firestorm and earned another
public rebuke from his coach. “With Trump, I’m learning to
evolve my message and understand how to convey the
substance of it,” he later told Sports Illustrated.
Despite the risks, Mr. Edwards believes the college athletics
world will see more activism in the coming months. He
specifically predicts more activity on the issue of athlete
pay.
“It’s almost inevitable, given the impact on activism that the
Trump regime will have,” he says. “Before a Final Four or a
bowl championship series with four teams playing, some
group of athletes or teams in the locker room is going to say,
‘We’ll take the court or field when someone talks to us about
the damn money.’”

TAKEAWAY

1390

Athletes take the field—and a knee
Activism among college athletes swelled in 2016. Many were
inspired by Colin Kaepernick, the NFL quarterback who knelt
during the national anthem to protest racial injustice.
College athletes can pack a powerful protest by leveraging
their high profiles—and, in some cases, the revenue they
generate. But the number of athlete activists remains small
because protesting carries risks.
Widespread opposition to President Trump is likely to inspire
more college athletes to take stands on race and other issues
in the coming months.

RESPOND●

1. What is your response to political activism by athletes?
Have you seen it occurring on your own campus? Did this
selection give you new ways of thinking about such
activism as it relates to the issue of free speech?
2. This selection, which is from early 2017, makes strong
predictions about what would happen in the future. Were
these predictions borne out? Why or why not, do you think?
3. Given the leverage that student athletes potentially have,
some would argue that they have an obligation to engage
in activism of the sort described in this selection. Would
you agree or disagree with such an argument? Why or why
not? How does such an argument intersect with arguments
about freedom of speech on campus or with membership in
various groups?
4. THINKING CRITICALLY Chapter 13 encourages you, as a critical
reader and a writer, to pay special attention to word choice

1391

and the often subtle messages word choice conveys. In
paragraph 23 of this selection, Professor Harry Edwards
refers to “the Trump regime.” Investigate the connotations
and denotations of that word regime, including possible
synonyms Edwards might have used. What does his word
choice tell readers about Edwards? Does that information
influence how you assess Edwards’s trustworthiness, or his
ethos? Should it? Why or why not?
5. Paragraph 19 poses a question: Should student athletes be
treated primarily as students with First Amendment rights
or as athletes who represent the institution for which they
play? Another paragraph also offers the perspective of Ray
Anderson, athletic director at Arizona State University, on
that issue. What is your position and what has led you to
that conclusion? Which of the two ways of characterizing
student athletes do you believe should be privileged? What
do you see as the consequences of assuming either
perspective, or of trying to acknowledge the tension
between the two and to honor that tension? Write a causal
argument in which you state your position on this issue
and explain the reasons that you hold it, that is, the
evidence, experiences, or understanding of the situation
that have caused you to see the issue as you do. (Chapter
11 will offer direction in how to construct a successful
causal argument.)

1392

In this selection, Catherine Nolan-Ferrell, an associate
professor of Latin American history at the University of Texas
at San Antonio, shares her experiences with the challenge of
balancing free speech and civility in the classroom. It first
appeared in Academe, the journal of the American
Association of University Professors, an organization of
professors and other academics in the U.S., in late 2017. As
you read, reflect on your own experiences with this balancing
act and consider how and why these issues may be
experienced differently by students and by their instructors.
Balancing Classroom Civility and Free Speech
CATHERINE NOLAN-FERRELL
Last fall, I began my modern Latin American history course
with my usual introduction: “I am a historian of modern Latin
America, with a particular emphasis on nationality and
citizenship among marginalized peoples. My current research
is on the Guatemalan refugee crisis of the early 1980s and its
aftermath along the Guatemalan-Mexican border.” I explained
that the course focuses on themes of ethnicity, class, and how
nations include or exclude marginalized peoples as citizens.
I always introduce myself like this at the beginning of any class
I teach because students have the right to know who I am, what
my interests are, and how my particular perspectives have
influenced the choice of topics to be discussed. By
acknowledging how my interests shape my teaching, I want to
emphasize the importance of intellectual honesty. I cannot
1393

claim complete neutrality about the subject matter, but I do
promise students that I will discuss multiple perspectives and
explain how and why I reached my point of view. Although they
may not remember the details of the Mexican Revolution or the
causes and impacts of the Dirty War in Argentina, they will
learn how to read critically and evaluate a wide range of
primary sources. By assessing these sources, students develop
the fundamental skills needed to build historical arguments. We
may not always arrive at the same conclusion, but we have
some basic agreement about what constitutes historical data.
The challenge lies in teaching students how to contribute to the
dialogue about how “facts” are made, or, more precisely, how
people develop consensus about what constitutes factual
information in the face of individual (and societal) choices to
dismiss accepted facts that may conflict with particular
worldviews.
Mexican Revolution
a series of armed struggles occurring in Mexico during the second decade of the twentieth
century that continue to shape contemporary Mexican politics in complex ways.
Dirty War
the program of state terrorism in Argentina from the mid-1970s until 1983, during which
some 30,000 people disappeared as the military, militia, and right-wing death squads
“disappeared” those who did not share their political views or were suspected of not
sharing them. It was part of a larger U.S. CIA-sponsored project during the Cold War,
Operation Condor.

1394

A demonstration of the Mothers of Plaza de Mayo, an association of Argentinian
women whose children were “disappeared” during the Dirty War

Primary sources are the “raw data” of historical research.
Broadly defined as documents or objects created at the time the
historical events occurred, these sources provide direct or
firsthand knowledge of past events. This knowledge is not yet
“fact,” though, because primary sources often reflect distinct
perspectives on the past. History professors teach students to
assess the validity of historical data by asking who produced the
primary source, why he or she produced it, and what biases
may have influenced the creator of the source. Researchers also
cross-reference documents. They ask whether other primary
sources corroborate, or at least mention, the subject in
question. By discussing and debating primary sources, we
1395

construct general understandings of historical facts as concrete
events that occurred at a particular time and place and involved
specific people. Historians may debate some of the details, but
they agree on the overall parameters of the historical event.
This knowledge, along with understanding of foundational
concepts of historical context, causality, complexity,
contingency, and change over time, enables students to figure
out why something happened in the way that it did.
cross-reference
here, compare documents dealing with same period or topic.
corroborate
provide support for or confirm the existence of.
foundational
forming the basis or foundation of.
contingency
here, how a range of events and circumstances work together to shape history; its
opposite would be inevitability—that certain events necessarily occurred.

The heart of any history class is not the memorization of names
and dates but the process of historical analysis. Students quickly
learn that patterns of human behavior often recur, not in the
simplistic sense of “history repeating itself” but because history
“rhymes.” Historians see echoes of past events in current
conflicts, though we remain mindful of how unique times,
places, and people affect experiences.

A DIFFICULT BALANCE

1396

The political situation that characterized the 2016 presidential
campaign posed multiple challenges to classroom civility and
academic freedom in my class. These challenges were
magnified by the demographics of the University of Texas at
San Antonio, which is designated as a Hispanic-serving
institution and has a student body that is nearly 50 percent
Latino. The composition of my class mirrored that of the
institution as a whole: 54 percent of the students were Latino
(including Mexican American, Mexican-origin, and
Guatemalan-origin students), 32 percent were Anglo-American,
and the rest were a mix of international students and those who
preferred not to define themselves by race, ethnicity, or
nationality. Nearly half of those attending UTSA are firstgeneration college students. Many students work more than
thirty hours a week and also have full-time school and family
responsibilities.
Anglo-American
in Texas, the term Anglo-American applies to individuals who do not identify as or are not
taken to be African American, Asian American, or Hispanic. Thus, someone whose
ancestors immigrated to Texas from Germany or Czechoslovakia would be considered
Anglo. Broadly, the term refers to non-Hispanic whites.

1397

This 1942 sign distributed by the Lonestar Restaurants in Texas represents the sort
of indignities Mexican Americans and African Americans had to endure in Texas
and elsewhere in the country before the Civil Rights era.

Given the composition of UTSA’s student body, many students
carry with them community memories that include a long
legacy of racism and violence. Prior to the mid-1960s, Jim
Crow–like segregation and federal redlining in San Antonio
restricted many Mexican Americans to substandard housing
and inadequate schools, ultimately excluding them from wellpaying employment opportunities. Community members and
leaders throughout south Texas, including politicians, activists,
and artists, remind people not only of the Chicano movement’s
struggles for civil rights but also of previous deportation
campaigns of Mexicans and Mexican Americans in the United
1398

States during the 1930s and 1940s. Although historians dispute
the numbers of those who left and the level of coercion that was
used, most agree that between four hundred thousand and five
hundred thousand people of Mexican origin left the United
States. Some were forcibly removed, others were pressured
(with threats or incentives), and others voluntarily repatriated.
Roughly 50 to 60 percent of those who went to Mexico were
actually US citizens.
Jim Crow
state and local laws and practices enforcing racial or ethnic segregation of African
Americans in the Southern United States from the post-Reconstruction period in the
nineteenth century until the Supreme Court rulings responding to the Civil Rights
movement in the 1950s and 1960s.
Chicano movement
a 1960s civil rights movement led by Cesar Chavez and Dolores Huerta focusing on the
Mexican American community in the southwestern United States.

The Mexican American community’s experiences of racism in
south Texas, and in San Antonio specifically, made US
presidential candidate Donald Trump’s blanket characterization
of Mexican immigrants as rapists and murderers particularly
offensive to both students and faculty at UTSA. Trump’s call to
“build a wall” and “throw them out” also instilled in students
fears of racial profiling. Several Mexican American students
shared stories of being verbally harassed, being told that “you’ll
get sent home soon” or “we’ll be cleaning up this country, so
you’d better get ready,” and “we don’t want you ‘illegals’ who
live off welfare.” A Mexican American student in her late
twenties came to my office before class one day, obviously
1399

distressed. She had overheard students talking about how
Trump was going to “take back America” from the “illegals.” In
tears, she asked me how she should try to cope with these sorts
of racist comments.
On the one hand, these are cases of free speech. A person can
express opinions about political ideals or religious beliefs
without censorship. According to the US Supreme Court’s ruling
in Schenck v. United States, such speech is protected unless it
“incites actions that would harm others.” Indeed, colleges and
universities actively encourage diverse viewpoints. On the other
hand, UTSA has an explicit policy on classroom civility that
asserts “students share in the obligation to maintain a
classroom environment that is conducive to learning.
Accordingly, students are prohibited from engaging in any
behavior that obstructs, disrupts, or interferes with any class.”
Schenck v. United States
1919 Supreme Court case that was the first in a series of rulings that have shaped
contemporary understandings of free speech in this country.

How do faculty members draw the line between free speech
and disruptive behavior? The 2016 election has made that
question more difficult to answer. In almost any other year,
students could wear clothing with political slogans, religious
statements, or mottos that advocate for a certain cause without
provoking any alarm. However, the toxic political climate of the
election, particularly the use of polarized rhetoric that explicitly
denigrated certain ethnicities, religions, or political belief

1400

systems, made “normal” political campaign slogans ambiguous.
Shortly before the election, one student showed up to class
wearing a red “Make America Great Again” baseball cap. Was
the person wearing the hat expressing disdain for the
opposition political party or candidate? Or was the hat-wearer
expressing more hostile beliefs, such as support for calls to
“deport illegals”? In the absence of context—not knowing what
the student meant to say—I had no good way to assess the
student’s intentions in wearing the hat. In contrast, I did know
that another student viewed the hat as a threat to Mexican
Americans. At the time, I decided that the hat disrupted the
class, at least for some students, and I asked the person to
remove it. The student immediately did so and apologized for
wearing “distracting” clothing.

1401

Students wearing MAGA caps in Dallas on election day, 2016

In the next class period, my students discussed the overall
hostile atmosphere created by election rhetoric and the balance
between protecting free speech and creating a safe learning
environment. Since many students in that class wanted to
become K–12 teachers or to work in business, we discussed how
to handle such a situation in a professional setting. After much
debate, students agreed that in a work environment, wearing
overtly political clothing could be seen as either intimidating or
inappropriate. As the class moved toward consensus, several
students explicitly stated that they would not wear clothing
associated with “their” candidate as long as the “other side”
agreed to do the same.

1402

Unfortunately, the détente lasted only until the day after the
election. On that day, a different student wore his red “Make
America Great Again” hat to class, but I failed to notice it
because the hat was turned backward. After class, several
students asked me why I did not make him take off the hat,
clearly annoyed that the neutrality agreement had been
violated. Then, on Thursday morning, I arrived at work to find
that someone had slid a photocopy of a flyer from the “Texas
State Vigilantes” under my office door. The flyer read, “Now
that our man TRUMP is elected and republicans own both the
senate and the house—time to organize tar & feather
VIGILANTE SQUADS and go arrest & torture those deviant
university leaders spouting off all this Diversity Garbage.”
détente
easing of strained relations or hostility between two political entities, often countries.

Without context, how was I to interpret the flyer’s message?
Was it from a student who was concerned about ensuring
faculty free speech? Or was it from someone who wanted to
intimidate a professor? Was it a “plant” from left-wing activists
who sought to make conservatives look bad? Was it merely a
bad joke? Given that Texas law allows concealed weapons on
campus, should I be concerned for my personal safety?
How could I turn this disturbing incident into a “teachable
moment”?

1403

THINKING HISTORICALLY
By chance, the class was scheduled to discuss human rights and
the Guatemalan Civil War that day. During the early 1980s,
Guatemalan military leaders, with support of the US
government, unleashed massive waves of violence against any
perceived opponents, murdering and “disappearing” thousands
of civilians. The violence culminated in genocide against
Mayan indigenous peoples. Faculty and students at the
University of San Carlos, the most prestigious university in
Guatemala, faced persistent threats. Paramilitary groups often
sent flyers or spray-painted messages on doors to inform
activists that they were targeted for disappearance or execution.
genocide
the deliberate killing of a large group of people, generally people of a particular ethic,
religious, or national group.
paramilitary
unofficial group often operating as if it were the military.

1404

A mass grave from the Guatemalan Cvil War in the 1980s being exhumed in
Guatemala City

Because this sort of violence has never characterized academia
in the United States, students here often take for granted their
safety and their right to speak their minds. They sometimes fail
to recognize the privileges and responsibilities that accompany
our civil liberties. I showed students the flyer and asked them
what they thought about it. How would they interpret it? Given
the context of the class material, and the fact that some of them
were honestly fearful about the new president, most interpreted
the flyer as a threat.
One student, however, defended the use of intimidation tactics
as sometimes necessary for the greater good. He argued that it
1405

was acceptable to “put people on notice” that “we” (I presume
he meant Texans) would not tolerate “misbehavior down here.”
When I asked him what he meant by misbehavior, he said,
“Well, you know, the kind of rioting and stuff that happens in
California and New York, where people feel like it’s okay to just
break things, just because they’ve lost.” Other students spoke
out against the vandalism that accompanied postelection
protests but said that people had a legitimate right to
demonstrate. They pointed out that few protests turned violent
and that demonstrations in Austin, Houston, and San Antonio
were all peaceful. His response: “Yeah, well, you know they
want to bring all that chaos here, and we’ll shoot them before
they do it.” Someone asked, “Who’s the ‘they?’” He responded,
“You know, the immigrants and the liberals and the blacks who
just want the government to baby them and take stuff from the
people who work.”
At this point, a very bright but quiet young woman interrupted
him. She challenged his willingness to classify entire groups of
people as “problems.” Her family immigrated “with papers” and
never requested government assistance. She was the first in her
family to attend college, and although she had received some
subsidized student loans as financial aid, she did not see such
loans as “a handout from taxpaying citizens.” In response to the
“good immigrant” argument, someone else brought up Donald
Trump Jr.’s “Skittles” analogy. (During his father’s campaign, he
said, “If I had a bowl of Skittles and I told you three would kill
you, would you take a handful? That’s our Syrian refugee
1406

problem.”) The woman’s family may be “good immigrants,” but
this student was not convinced that accepting immigrants was
worth the risk of possibly welcoming terrorists.
At this point, I interrupted and asked students where they drew
the line between free speech and civility. Clearly, given the very
heated debate, students recognized that they were no longer
respecting their classmates. Instead, students on all sides of the
debate had fallen into the trap of treating their classmates as
“the other.”
In teaching genocide, we explicitly discuss the process of
“othering,” of how extreme identity constructions of “us versus
them” dehumanize particular groups that are perceived as
inferior. The “others” carry markers of exclusion, such as
ethnicity or race, religion, class, or gender. Othering, from its
mildest forms of exclusion to its extremes of genocidal violence,
not only enables people to dismiss alternate viewpoints; it also
enables them to deny the fundamental humanity of those who
differ from them.
When the students realized that they had slipped into using
dehumanizing language, they backed away from confrontation
and remained quiet for the rest of class. This was not precisely
the result I wanted; I wanted them to realize that they could
disagree with one another but still recognize value in those who
held different viewpoints. However, as the young woman from
the immigrant family told me after class, “I just cannot keep

1407

talking to people who refuse to listen.”
In “The Problem of Othering: Towards Inclusiveness and
Belonging,” John Powell and Stephen Menendian define
“othering” as “a set of dynamics, processes, and structures that
engender marginality and persistent inequality across any of
the full range of human differences based on group identities.”
The divisive rhetoric from the political arena so polarized
students that the classroom environment felt “unsafe” to both
the pro-Trump students (who believed they were being unfairly
labeled and marginalized as racists) and the anti-Trump
students (who believed they were being subjected to racist
stereotyping).
For the following month, the class continued to grapple with
tensions that surfaced during the election. My modern Latin
American history course overlapped closely with political
debates surrounding the North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA), the drug wars, and immigration from
Mexico and Central America. My constant challenge to students
was to think historically: find primary sources, carefully
analyze them, and then construct historical arguments that
could be supported by evidence. Why did narcotraffickers gain
respect and support in some parts of Latin America? To answer
this question, students grappled with the causes of corruption,
political and economic alienation, efforts of impoverished
peoples to earn a viable income, and cultural values such as
“machismo,” which students saw as a positive idea that values

1408

men’s roles in providing for their families and as a negative idea
that leads men to use violence to protect their honor and
authority. We discussed causality and contingency by
examining the impact of NAFTA on workers in both the United
States and Mexico. Students assessed the decline of US
manufacturing by evaluating the impact of cheaper Mexican
labor, as well as dramatic technological changes that automated
and improved the efficiency of factories.
narcotraffickers
individuals and groups that buy and sell illegal narcotics.

As students increasingly challenged each other to provide
evidence, two key patterns emerged. First, debate became more
respectful, because it was harder to simplify human actions as
“good” or “bad.” The people we studied were humanized, and
students began to see one another as complex individuals.
Second, students began questioning the fundamental validity of
primary sources. When I showed statistical data from the
Department of Homeland Security about the high level of
Mexican deportations between 2008 and 2014, one student
objected, questioning whether the Obama administration would
accurately report deportation numbers. A few students
dismissed statements from women and children who fled gang
violence in Honduras or El Salvador as either exaggerations or
complete fabrications. In order to contextualize these oral
testimonies, students looked at murder rates and reports on
gang violence gathered from US Department of State bulletins,
the Congressional Record, and various human rights
1409

organizations. These usually well-respected sources are created
by people who are experts in their field. Student responses to
these primary sources varied from mild concern about
inaccuracy or misinterpretation to complete dismissal of their
validity.
How do we navigate a world where many in society have lost
trust in shared data? How do we teach students to respect the
evidence, even if it challenges their worldviews? And how do we
do so in such a politically charged climate, when an inability (or
perhaps refusal) to trust data creates an inability to engage in
dialogue about fundamental social, economic, and political
issues? When one of my students states that “the guy in the
Trump hat” scares her, I may not necessarily agree that her
reaction is reasonable, but I cannot deny the fear. How do I
teach the student wearing the hat that his classmate’s fear is
real? How do I acknowledge the very real fears that many
Trump supporters share about immigration, terrorism, or
imminent economic collapse—even when, in my analysis, the
evidence does not validate those fears? Biologically, fear
inhibits rational thinking and provokes the “fight-or-flight”
response. Our society seems trapped by this primal reaction,
and we cannot distinguish between perceived and actual
threats. The constant barrage of information—true, false, and
other—has created a collective deafness. One way to counter
this is to listen only to things that are familiar and comfortable.
fight-or-flight response
a physiological response to a threatening situation, real or imagined, in which an animal,

1410

including a human, responds with aggression (fight) or by fleeing (flight).
primal
relating to an early stage of evolution.

However, history offers another option. By enticing us to “hear
the past,” to acknowledge tensions between the need to find
patterns of human behavior and acknowledge unique
situations, we can extend our ability to hold complex
information. Critical analysis of primary sources creates a “safe
space” where students can encounter the other without reacting
with fear. It allows them to see the fundamental humanity in
those who hold different beliefs.

Catherine Nolan-Ferrell argues in favor of greater respect and
understanding across different political viewpoints, much like the
rhetorical listening Krista Ratcliffe advocates, as discussed in
Chapter 1.
LINK TO Chapter 1, Why Listen to Arguments Rhetorically and
Respectfully?

CONFRONTING “ALTERNATIVE FACTS”
The “Statement on Standards of Professional Conduct” of the
American Historical Association (AHA) describes “critical
dialogue,” “trust and respect,” and “integrity of the historical
record” as core values of the profession. Historians’ raw data
come from primary sources—documents and artifacts such as
diaries, letters, court transcripts, and photographs that were
created during the particular period being studied. The
1411

historian interprets the data to explain why particular events
occurred in the way they did or why people acted in the way
they did.
American Historical Association
the oldest and largest professional association for historians.

It has been said that “history is an exercise in empathy.”
Historians attempt to see the world as those who lived in the
past experienced it. Ours is fundamentally a collective
enterprise—we build on each other’s work and debate multiple
perspectives in order to create an understanding of the past. In
order to participate effectively in the critical dialogues that help
historians contextualize and interpret sources, it is imperative
that we trust each other to “respect the integrity of the historical
record.” We may debate the interpretation of historical data,
but we must respect the evidence. I teach my students to follow
the archival trail, even if doing so challenges their preconceived
ideas about the past. (For example, students may have a
romanticized view of a revolution—oppressed peoples rebel to
free themselves from their tormentors—but the historical data
often create a much more complicated picture. The idealistic
revolutionary may end up selling out his compatriots in
exchange for personal profit or to protect his or her own life.)
Without this fundamental respect for the historical record—for
historical data—our interpretations cannot be trusted. As the
AHA states, “By practicing their craft with integrity, historians
acquire a reputation for trustworthiness that is arguably their
single most precious professional asset.” In other words, facts
1412

matter. Arguments must be supported by evidence.
empathy
the ability to perceive a situation from another’s perspective.
compatriot
a person from the same country.

What do these core values mean in a world of “fake news” and
“alternative facts”? At the start of the spring 2017 semester, a
student told me that he “didn’t believe in facts” because
everything was fundamentally biased. In his view, if all
historical data are merely representations of what people
thought and perceived at the time, nothing is “real”—what we
call “facts” are an endless chain of biased information. This is
the danger of so-called alternative facts. They exist outside of
dialogue. There is no need to come to an agreement about data
because data exist in isolation—not as a part of a broader
interpretive narrative. The student’s reasoning made me think
about those who deny genocides. By taking the view that
everything is merely “perception,” one can deny or minimize
the horrors of mass violence. But bodies are real. Mass graves
are real. Evidence cannot be dismissed.
As academics, we are dedicated to understanding both the
historical world and the present by interpreting evidence. We
may disagree about how to interpret evidence, but we believe
that evidence exists. When people claim that they are working
from “alternative facts,” they are not just disputing an
interpretation; they are rejecting the very foundation of

1413

knowledge.

RESPOND●
1. What is your response to Nolan-Ferrell’s argument in this essay
—both at the gut level and intellectually? Have you had
classroom experiences like the ones she describes? How did
you respond? How did your instructor respond (if the professor
was aware of them)? What is your reaction to Nolan-Ferrell’s
argument against the notion of “false facts”? Why?
2. Nolan-Ferrell’s essay is, in many ways, built around a series of
narratives—stories she recounts from her experiences as a
professor of history. Which of these narratives, if any, did you
find especially effective for constructing or supporting the
arguments she is making? What specific aspects of the
narrative(s) were effective? (If you did not find any of the
narratives effective in advancing the author’s argument,
explain why you did not.) As Chapter 4 notes, testimonies often
function as logical appeals—“this is my experience; therefore, it
counts as fact”—but they can also serve as ethical or pathetic
appeals. In what ways does Nolan-Ferrell use narrative to serve
all these purposes? (See Chapters 1–4 for discussions of logical,
ethical, and pathetic appeals.)
3. Throughout this selection, Nolan-Ferrell builds up a definition
of “primary sources” and their particular meaning and value for
historians and historical methods of analysis. Collect the
various definitions and characterizations of the term “primary
sources,” and characterize them according to the types of
definition presented in Chapter 9.
4. THINKING CRITICALLY As explained in the headnote, Academe,

1414

where this essay appeared, is the magazine of the American
Association of University Professors. Hence, it is safe to assume
that Nolan-Ferrell’s intended audience is other professors.
What evidence can you provide for Nolan-Ferrell’s invoked
audience, that is, the audience whose values are reflected and
inscribed in the text? How would you characterize that
audience? (Your response will likely be “She is writing for
people who assume/agree that . . .” or “She is writing to people
who are concerned with. . . .”) Had Nolan-Ferrell been writing
for an audience of only historians, how might her essay have
been different? For example, is there information in the
selection she might have assumed her audience shared? Had
she been addressing students, rather than faculty, how might
her essay have been different? (Chapter 1 discusses the notion
of intended and invoked audience as well as the key role that
audience plays in the construction of any argument.)
5. Nolan-Ferrell’s essay raises many questions that she does not
explicitly answer, one of the most interesting being where the
line is or should be drawn between free speech and civility,
both highly valued on American college campuses. Write a
definitional essay in which you seek to define or characterize
this line in light of the selections in this chapter, class
discussions, and your own personal experience. (Chapter 9 will
help you think about constructing a definitional argument.)

1415

Glossary
academic argument
writing that is addressed to an audience well informed about the topic, that aims to
convey a clear and compelling point in a somewhat formal style, and that follows agreedupon conventions of usage, punctuation, and formats.
accidental condition
in a definition, an element that helps to explain what’s being defined but isn’t essential to
it. An accidental condition in defining a bird might be “ability to fly” because most, but not
all, birds can fly. (See also essential condition and sufficient condition.)
ad hominem argument
a fallacy of argument in which a writer’s claim is answered by irrelevant attacks on his/her
character.
allusion
an indirect reference. Saying “watch out or you’ll create the next Edsel” contains an
allusion to the Ford Edsel, a disastrously unpopular and unsuccessful product of the late
1950s.
analogy
an extended comparison between something unfamiliar and something more familiar for
the purpose of illuminating or dramatizing the unfamiliar. An analogy might, say, compare
nuclear fission (less familiar) to a pool player’s opening break (more familiar).
anaphora
a figure of speech involving repetition, particularly of the same word at the beginning of
several clauses.
antithesis
the use of parallel structures to call attention to contrasts or opposites, as in Some like it
hot; some like it cold.
antonomasia
use of a title, epithet, or description in place of a name, as in Your Honor for Judge.

1416

argument
(1) a spoken, written, or visual text that expresses a point of view; (2) the use of evidence
and reason to discover some version of the truth, as distinct from persuasion, the attempt
to change someone else’s point of view.
artistic appeal
support for an argument that a writer creates based on principles of reason and shared
knowledge rather than on facts and evidence. (See also inartistic appeal.)
assumption
a belief regarded as true, upon which other claims are based.
assumption, cultural
a belief regarded as true or commonsensical within a particular culture, such as the belief
in individual freedom in American culture.
audience
the person or persons to whom an argument is directed.
authority
the quality conveyed by a writer who is knowledgeable about his/her subject and
confident in that knowledge.
background
the information a writer provides to create the context for an argument.
backing
in Toulmin argument, the evidence provided to support a warrant.
bandwagon appeal
a fallacy of argument in which a course of action is recommended on the grounds that
everyone else is following it.
begging the question
a fallacy of argument in which a claim is based on the very grounds that are in doubt or
dispute: Rita can’t be the bicycle thief; she’s never stolen anything.
causal argument

1417

an argument that seeks to explain the effect(s) of a cause, the cause(s) of an effect, or a
causal chain in which A causes B, B causes C, C causes D, and so on.
ceremonial argument
an argument that deals with current values and addresses questions of praise and blame.
Also called epideictic, ceremonial arguments include eulogies and graduation speeches.
character, appeal based on
also known as an ethical appeal; a strategy in which a writer presents an authoritative,
credible self-image in order to gain the trust of an audience.
circumstantial evidence
in legal cases, evidence from which conclusions cannot be drawn directly but have to be
inferred.
claim
a statement that asserts a belief or truth. In arguments, most claims require supporting
evidence. The claim is a key component in Toulmin argument.
classical oration
a highly structured form of an argument developed in ancient Greece and Rome to defend
or refute a thesis. The oration evolved to include six parts—exordium, narratio, partitio,
confirmatio, refutatio, and peroratio.
confirmatio
the fourth part of a classical oration, in which a speaker or writer offers evidence for the
claim.
connotation
the suggestions or associations that surround most words and extend beyond their literal
meaning, creating associational effects. Slender and skinny have similar meanings, for
example, but carry different connotations, the former more positive than the latter.
context
the entire situation in which a piece of writing takes place, including the writer’s
purpose(s) for writing; the intended audience; the time and place of writing; the
institutional, social, personal, and other influences on the piece of writing; the material
conditions of writing (whether it’s, for instance, online or on paper, in handwriting or in

1418

print); and the writer’s attitude toward the subject and the audience.
conviction
the belief that a claim or course of action is true or reasonable. In a proposal argument, a
writer must move an audience beyond conviction to action.
credibility
an impression of integrity, honesty, and trustworthiness conveyed by a writer in an
argument.
criterion (plural criteria)
in evaluative arguments, a standard by which something is measured to determine its
quality or value.
deductive reasoning
a process of thought in which general principles are applied to particular cases.
definition, argument of
an argument in which the claim specifies that something does or doesn’t meet the
conditions or features set forth in a definition: Pluto is not a major planet.
deliberative argument
an argument that deals with action to be taken in the future, focusing on matters of
policy. Deliberative arguments include parliamentary debates and campaign platforms.
delivery
the presentation of an argument.
dogmatism
a fallacy of argument in which a claim is supported on the grounds that it’s the only
conclusion acceptable within a given community.
either/or choice
a fallacy of argument in which a complicated issue is misrepresented as offering only two
possible alternatives, one of which is often made to seem vastly preferable to the other.
emotional appeal
a strategy in which a writer tries to generate specific emotions (such as fear, envy, anger,

1419

or pity) in an audience to dispose it to accept a claim.
enthymeme
in Toulmin argument, a statement that links a claim to a supporting reason: The bank will
fail (claim) because it has lost the support of its largest investors (reason). In classical
rhetoric, an enthymeme is a syllogism with one term understood but not stated: Socrates
is mortal because he is a human being. (The understood term is All human beings are
mortal.) (See also syllogism.)
epideictic argument
See ceremonial argument.
equivocation
a fallacy of argument in which a lie is given the appearance of truth, or in which the truth
is misrepresented in deceptive language.
essential condition
in a definition, an element that must be part of the definition but, by itself, isn’t enough to
define the term. An essential condition in defining a bird might be “winged”: all birds have
wings, yet wings alone don’t define a bird since some insects and mammals also have
wings. (See also accidental condition and sufficient condition.)
ethical appeal
See character, appeal based on, and ethos.
ethnographic observation
a form of field research involving close and extended observation of a group, event, or
phenomenon; careful and detailed note-taking during the observation; analysis of the
notes; and interpretation of that analysis.
ethos
the self-image a writer creates to define a relationship with readers. In arguments, most
writers try to establish an ethos that suggests authority, fairness, and credibility.
evaluation, argument of
an argument in which the claim specifies that something does or doesn’t meet established
criteria: The Nikon D4s is the most sophisticated digital SLR camera currently available.

1420

evidence
material offered to support an argument. (See also artistic appeal and inartistic appeal.)
example, definition by
a definition that operates by identifying individual examples of what’s being defined:
sports car—Corvette, Viper, Miata, Cayman.
exordium
the first part of a classical oration, in which a speaker or writer tries to win the attention
and goodwill of an audience while introducing a subject.
experimental evidence
evidence gathered through experimentation; often evidence that can be quantified (for
example, a survey of students before and after an election might yield statistical evidence
about changes in their attitudes toward the candidates). Experimental evidence is
frequently crucial to scientific arguments.
fact, argument of
an argument in which the claim can be proved or disproved with specific evidence or
testimony: The winter of 2016 was the warmest on record for the United States.
fallacy of argument
a flaw in the structure of an argument that renders its conclusion invalid or suspect. (See
ad hominem argument, bandwagon appeal, begging the question, dogmatism, either/or
choice, equivocation, false authority, faulty analogy, faulty causality, hasty generalization,
non sequitur, paralipsis, red herring, scare tactic, sentimental appeal, slippery slope,
stacking the deck, and straw man.)
false authority
a fallacy of argument in which a claim is based on the expertise of someone who lacks
appropriate credentials.
faulty analogy
a fallacy of argument in which a comparison between two objects or concepts is
inaccurate or inconsequential.
faulty causality
a fallacy of argument making the unwarranted assumption that because one event

1421

follows another, the first event causes the second. Also called post hoc, ergo propter hoc,
faulty causality forms the basis of many superstitions.
firsthand evidence
data—including surveys, observations, personal interviews, and so on—collected and
personally examined by the writer. (See also secondhand evidence.)
forensic argument
an argument that deals with actions that have occurred in the past. Sometimes called
judicial arguments, forensic arguments include legal cases involving judgments of guilt or
innocence.
formal definition
a definition that identifies something first by the general class to which it belongs (see
genus) and then by the characteristics that distinguish it from other members of that class
(see species): Baseball is a game (genus) played on a diamond by opposing teams of nine
players who score runs by circling bases after striking a ball with a bat (species).
genus
in a definition, the general class to which an object or a concept belongs: baseball is a
sport; green is a color.
grounds
in Toulmin argument, the evidence provided to support a claim and reason—that is, an
enthymeme.
hard evidence
support for an argument using facts, statistics, testimony, or other evidence the writer
finds.
hasty generalization
a fallacy of argument in which an inference is drawn from insufficient data.
hyperbole
use of overstatement for special effect.
hypothesis
a well-informed guess at what the conclusion of one’s research will reveal. Hypotheses

1422

must be tested against evidence, opposing arguments, and so on.
immediate reason
the cause that leads directly to an effect, such as an automobile accident that results in an
injury to the driver. (See also necessary reason and sufficient reason.)
inartistic appeal
support for an argument using facts, statistics, eyewitness testimony, or other evidence
the writer finds rather than creates. (See also artistic appeal.)
inductive reasoning
a process of thought in which particular cases lead to general principles.
infotention
a term coined by Howard Rheingold to describe the digital literacy skills of managing the
technology we use and synthesizing the information we find online.
intended readers
the actual, real-life people whom a writer consciously wants to address in a piece of
writing.
invention
the process of finding and creating arguments to support a claim.
inverted word order
moving grammatical elements of a sentence out of their usual order (subject-verbobject/complement) for special effect, as in Tired I was; sleepy I was not.
invitational argument
a term used by Sonja Foss and Cindy Griffin to describe arguments that are aimed not at
vanquishing an opponent but at inviting others to collaborate in exploring mutually
satisfying ways to solve problems.
invoked readers
the readers implied in a text, which may include some whom the writer didn’t consciously
intend to reach. An argument that refers to those who have experienced a major trauma,
for example, invokes all readers who have undergone this experience.

1423

irony
use of language that suggests a meaning in contrast to the literal meaning of the words.
kairos
the opportune moment; in arguments, the timeliness of an argument and the most
opportune ways to make it.
line of argument
a strategy or an approach used in an argument. Argumentative strategies include appeals
to the heart (emotional appeals), to character (ethical appeals), and to facts and reason
(logical appeals).
logical appeal
a strategy in which a writer uses facts, evidence, and reason to convince audience
members to accept a claim.
logos
See logical appeal.
metaphor
a figure of speech that makes a comparison, as in The ship was a beacon of hope.
metonymy
a rhetorical trope in which a writer uses a particular object to stand for a general concept,
as in referring to businesspeople as suits or to the English monarchy as the crown.
narratio
the second part of a classical oration, in which a speaker or writer presents the facts of a
case.
necessary reason
a cause that must be present for an effect to occur; for example, infection with a particular
virus is a necessary reason for the development of mumps. (See also immediate reason
and sufficient reason.)
non sequitur
a fallacy of argument in which claims, reasons, or warrants fail to connect logically; one
point doesn’t follow from another: If you’re really my friend, you’ll lend me five hundred

1424

dollars.
operational definition
a definition that identifies an object by what it does or by the conditions that create it: A
line is the shortest distance between two points.
oxymoron
a rhetorical trope that states a paradox or contradiction, as in jumbo shrimp.
paralipsis a logical
fallacy in which speakers or writers raise a point by saying they will not mention it, thus
doing the very thing they say they’re not going to do.
parallelism
use of similar grammatical structures or forms for clarity, emphasis, and/or artfulness: in
the classroom, on the playground, and at the mall.
paraphrase
a restatement of the meaning of a piece of writing using different words from the original.
partitio
the third part of a classical oration, in which a speaker or writer divides up the subject and
explains what the claim will be.
patchwriting
a misuse of sources in which a writer’s phrase, clause, or sentence stays too close to the
original language or syntax of the source.
pathos, appeal to
See emotional appeal.
peroratio
the sixth and final part of a classical oration, in which a speaker or writer summarizes the
case and moves the audience to action.
persuasion
the act of seeking to change someone else’s point of view.

1425

plagiarism
the act of using the words, phrases, and expressions of others without proper citation or
acknowledgment.
precedents
actions or judgments in the past that have established a pattern or model for subsequent
decisions. Precedents are particularly important in legal cases.
premise
a statement or position regarded as true and upon which other claims are based.
propaganda
an argument advancing a point of view without regard to reason, fairness, or truth.
proposal argument
an argument in which a claim is made in favor of or opposing a specific course of action:
Sport-utility vehicles should have to meet the same fuel economy standards as passenger
cars.
purpose
the goal of an argument. Purposes include entertaining, informing, convincing, exploring,
and deciding, among others.
qualifiers
words or phrases that limit the scope of a claim: usually; in a few cases; under these
circumstances.
qualitative argument
an argument of evaluation that relies on non-numerical criteria supported by reason,
tradition, precedent, or logic.
quantitative argument
an argument of evaluation that relies on criteria that can be measured, counted, or
demonstrated objectively.
quantitative data
the sort of data that can be observed and counted.

1426

reason
in argumentation, a statement that expands a claim by offering evidence to support it.
The reason may be a statement of fact or another claim. In Toulmin argument, a reason is
attached to a claim by a warrant, a statement that establishes the logical connection
between claim and supporting reason. (See also Toulmin argument.)
rebuttal
an answer that challenges or refutes a specific claim or charge. Rebuttals may also be
offered by writers who anticipate objections to the claims or evidence they offer.
rebuttal, conditions of
in Toulmin argument, potential objections to an argument. Writers need to anticipate
such conditions in shaping their arguments.
red herring
a fallacy of argument in which a writer abruptly changes the topic in order to distract
readers from potentially objectionable claims.
refutatio
the fifth part of a classical oration, in which a speaker or writer acknowledges and refutes
opposing claims or evidence.
reversed structures
a figure of speech that involves the inversion of clauses: What is good in your writing is not
original; what is original is not good.
rhetoric
the art of persuasion. Western rhetoric originated in ancient Greece as a discipline to
prepare citizens for arguing cases in court.
rhetorical analysis
an examination of how well the components of an argument work together to persuade or
move an audience.
rhetorical questions
questions posed to raise an issue or create an effect rather than to get a response: You
may well wonder, “What’s in a name?”

1427

rhetorical situation
the relationship among topic, author, audience, and other contexts (social, cultural,
political) that determines or evokes an appropriate spoken or written response.
Rogerian argument
an approach to argumentation based on the principle, articulated by psychotherapist Carl
Rogers, that audiences respond best when they don’t feel threatened. Rogerian argument
stresses trust and urges those who disagree to find common ground.
scare tactic
a fallacy of argument presenting an issue in terms of exaggerated threats or dangers.
scheme
a figure of speech that involves a special arrangement of words, such as inversion.
secondhand evidence
any information taken from outside sources, including library research and online
sources. (See also firsthand evidence.)
sentimental appeal
a fallacy of argument in which an appeal is based on excessive emotion.
signifying
a distinctive trope found extensively in African American English in which a speaker or
writer cleverly and often humorously needles another person.
simile
a comparison that uses like or as: My love is like a red, red rose or I wandered lonely as a
cloud.
slippery slope
a fallacy of argument exaggerating the possibility that a relatively inconsequential action
or choice today will have serious adverse consequences in the future.
species
in a definition, the particular features that distinguish one member of a genus from
another: Baseball is a sport (genus) played on a diamond by teams of nine players (species).

1428

stacking the deck
a fallacy of argument in which the writer shows only one side of an argument.
stance
the writer’s attitude toward the topic and the audience.
stasis theory
in classical rhetoric, a method for coming up with appropriate arguments by determining
the nature of a given situation: a question of fact; of definition; of quality; or of policy.
straw man
a fallacy of argument in which an opponent’s position is misrepresented as being more
extreme than it actually is, so that it’s easier to refute.
sufficient condition
in a definition, an element or set of elements adequate to define a term. A sufficient
condition in defining God, for example, might be “supreme being” or “first cause.” No
other conditions are necessary, though many might be made. (See also accidental
condition and essential condition.)
sufficient reason
a cause that alone is enough to produce a particular effect; for example, a particular level
of smoke in the air will set off a smoke alarm. (See also immediate reason and necessary
reason.)
summary
a presentation of the substance and main points of a piece of writing in very condensed
form.
syllogism
in formal logic, a structure of deductive logic in which correctly formed major and minor
premises lead to a necessary conclusion:
Major premise

All human beings are mortal.

Minor premise

Socrates is a human being.

Conclusion

Socrates is mortal.

1429

synthesis
a kind of critical thinking in which a writer identifies patterns, themes, and connections
among sources and combines them to make a particular point or to support a claim.
testimony
a personal experience or observation used to support an argument.
thesis
a sentence that succinctly states a writer’s main point.
Toulmin argument
a method of informal logic first described by Stephen Toulmin in The Uses of Argument
(1958). Toulmin argument describes the key components of an argument as the claim,
reason, warrant, backing, and grounds.
trope
a figure of speech that involves a change in the usual meaning or signification of words,
such as metaphor, simile, and analogy.
understatement
a figure of speech that makes a weaker statement than a situation seems to call for. It can
lead to powerful or to humorous effects.
values, appeal to
a strategy in which a writer invokes shared principles and traditions of a society as a
reason for accepting a claim.
warrant
in Toulmin argument, the statement (expressed or implied) that establishes the logical
connection between a claim and its supporting reason.
Claim

Don’t eat that mushroom.

Reason

It’s poisonous.

Warrant

What is poisonous should not be eaten.

1430

Acknowledgments
Sara Barbour. “Kindle vs. Books: The Dead Tree Society.” First
published in the Los Angeles Times, June 17, 2011. Reprinted
by permission of the author.
Kate Beispel. “The Snacktivities and Musings of a Millennial
Foodie.” Reprinted by permission.
Sarah Brown. “Activist Athletes.” Chronicle of Higher
Education, February 26, 2017. Used with the permission of
the Chronicle of Higher Education. Copyright © 2017. All
rights reserved.
Melinda C. R. Burgess, Karen E. Dill, S. Paul Stermer, Stephen
R. Burgess, and Brian P. Brown. “Playing with Prejudice:
The Prevalence and Consequences of Racial Stereotypes in
Video Games.” Media Psychology 14.3 (2011): 289–311.
Copyright © 2011. Reprinted by permission of Taylor &
Francis Group Ltd., http://www.tandfonline.com.
James Carroll. “Who Am I to Judge?” New Yorker, December
23–30, 2013. Copyright © 2013. Reprinted by permission of
the author.
Lauren Carroll. “Congress Let Internet Providers ‘Spy On’ Your
Underwear Purchases, Advocacy Group Says.” PolitiFact,
March 30, 2017. Copyright © 2017. Reprinted by permission.
Stephen L. Carter. “Offensive Speech Is Free Speech. If Only
We’d Listen.” Bloomberg View, June 19, 2017. Used with
permission of Bloomberg L.P. Copyright © 2017. All rights
1431

reserved.
Juliana Chang. Presentation about immigrant mother.
Reprinted by permission of Juliana Chang.
D.K. “Shooting Guns: It’s Rather Fun, Actually.” Economist,
February 13, 2015. Copyright © 2015 by The Economist Group
Limited. Reproduced with permission of The Economist
Group Limited in the format Educational/Instructional
Program via Copyright Clearance Center.
James Dubick, Brandon Mathews, and Clare Cady. “Hunger on
Campus: The Challenge of Food Insecurity for College
Students.” studentsagainsthunger.org (National Student
Campaign Against Hunger and Homelessness), October 2016.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution
4.0 International License. To view the terms of this license,
visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0.
Sophie Egan. “The American Food Psyche.” Excerpted from pp.
14–20, 305–9 of Devoured by Sophie Egan. Copyright © 2016
by Sophie Egan. Reprinted by permission of HarperCollins
Publishers.
Jorge Encinas. “How Latino Players Are Helping Major League
Baseball Learn Spanish.” © 2017 National Public Radio, Inc.
News report as originally published on npr.org on March 26,
2017, and used with the permission of NPR. Any
unauthorized duplication is strictly prohibited.
Franklin Foer. Excerpt from World without Mind: The
Existential Threat of Big Tech by Franklin Foer. Copyright ©

1432

2017 by Franklin Foer. Used by permission of Penguin Press,
an imprint of Penguin Publishing Group, a division of
Penguin Random House LLC. All rights reserved. Any thirdparty use of this material, outside of this publication, is
prohibited. Interested parties must apply directly to Penguin
Random House LLC for permission.
Tal Fortgang. “Checking My Privilege: Character as the Basis of
Privilege.” Princeton Tory, April 2, 2014. Copyright © 2014.
Reprinted by permission.
Gallup/Knight Foundation. “Free Expression on Campus: What
College Students Think about First Amendment Issues.” A
Gallup/Knight Foundation Survey. Copyright © 2018 Gallup
by Gallup, Inc. Reproduced with permission of Gallup Press
in the format Educational/Instructional Program via
Copyright Clearance Center.
Roxane Gay. “The Careless Language of Sexual Violence.” The
Rumpus, March 10, 2011. Copyright © 2011 by Roxane Gay.
Reprinted by permission of the author.
Pascal-Emmanuel Gobry. “America’s Birthrate Is Now a
National Emergency.” The Week, August 12, 2016. Copyright
© 2016. Reprinted by permission.
Briahna Joy Gray. “The Question of Cultural Appropriation.”
Current Affairs, September 6, 2017. Copyright © 2017 by
Briahna Gray. Reprinted by permission of the author.
Rob Greenfield. “An Argument against Veganism . . . from a
Vegan.” robgreenfield.tv, July 23, 2015,

1433

http://robgreenfield.tv/vegan/. Reprinted by permission.
Deanna Hartley. “Creative Ways to Get Noticed by Employers
on Social Media.” CareerBuilder.com, March 27, 2017.
Reprinted by permission.
Cameron Hauer. “Appeal, Audience, and Narrative in Kristof’s
Wilderness.” Reprinted by permission.
Amanda Hess. “How Privacy Became a Commodity for the Rich
and Powerful.” New York Times Magazine, May 9, 2017.
Copyright © 2017 The New York Times. All rights reserved.
Used by permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of
the United States. The printing, copying, redistribution, or
retransmission of this Content without express written
permission is prohibited.
Michael Hiltzik. “Don’t Believe Facebook: The Demise of the
Written Word Is Very Far Off.” Los Angeles Times, June 17,
2016. Copyright © 2016 Los Angeles Times. Reprinted by
permission.
Japanese American Citizens League. “Power of Words
Handbook: A Guide to Language about Japanese Americans
in World War II.” April 27, 2013. Reprinted by permission.
Rob Jenkins. “Defining the Relationship.” Chronicle of Higher
Education, August 9, 2016. Used with the permission of the
Chronicle of Higher Education. Copyright © 2016. All rights
reserved.
Alli Joseph. “With Disney’s Moana, Hollywood Almost Gets It
Right: Indigenous People Weigh In.” salon.com, December 2,
1434

2016. This article first appeared in Salon.com, at
http://www.salon.com. An online version remains in the
Salon archives. Reprinted with permission.
Jess Kapadia. “I Still Don’t Understand the Cultural
Appropriation of Food.” Food Republic, June 1, 2017.
Reprinted by permission.
Jenny Kim. “The Toxicity in Learning.” Reprinted by
permission.
C. Richard King. Excerpt from Redskins: Insult & Brand.
Copyright © 2016 by the Board of Regents of the University of
Nebraska. Reprinted by permission of the University of
Nebraska Press.
Nicholas Kristof. “Fleeing to the Mountains.” New York Times,
August 13, 2017. Copyright © 2017 The New York Times. All
rights reserved. Used by permission and protected by the
Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, copying,
redistribution, or retransmission of this Content without
express written permission is prohibited.
Barry LePatner. Excerpt from Too Big to Fall: America’s Failing
Infrastructure and the Way Forward by Barry B. LePatner
(Foster Publishing, 2010). Copyright © 2010. Reprinted by
permission.
Scott O. Lilienfeld. “Why a Moratorium on Microaggressions Is
Needed.” Perspectives on Psychological Science, January 11,
2017. Perspectives on Psychological Science by Association
for Psychological Science. Reproduced with permission of

1435

Sage Publications, Journals in the format
Educational/Instructional Program via Copyright Clearance
Center.
Mark Lilla. “How Colleges Are Strangling Liberalism.”
Chronicle of Higher Education, August 20, 2017. Used with
the permission of the Chronicle of Higher Education.
Copyright © 2017. All rights reserved.
Lindsay McKenzie. “Getting Personal about Cybersecurity.”
Inside Higher Ed, November 22, 2017. Copyright © 2017.
Reprinted by permission.
John McWhorter. “Thick of Tongue.” Guernica, March 15, 2016.
Copyright © 2016. Reprinted by permission.
Sidra Montgomery. “The Emotion Work of ‘Thank You for Your
Service.’” Reprinted by permission.
Sara Morrison. “Covering the Transgender Community: How
Newsrooms Are Moving Beyond the ‘Coming Out’ Story to
Report Crucial Transgender Issues.” Nieman Reports,
January 12, 2016. Copyright © 2016. Reprinted by permission
of the Nieman Foundation for Journalism.
Catherine Nolan-Ferrell. “Balancing Classroom Civility and
Free Speech.” Reprinted with permission from the
November–December 2017 issue of Academe, the magazine
of the American Association of University Professors.
Copyright © 2017 American Association of University
Professors.
John Palfrey. “Safe Spaces, Brave Spaces: Diversity and Free
1436

Expression in Education.” pp. 8–18. © 2017 Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. Reprinted by permission of The MIT
Press.
Nicole Pasulka. “How a Bible-Belt Evangelical Church
Embraced Gay Rights.” TakePart.com, January 30, 2015.
Reproduced with the permission of Participant Media, LLC.
© 2018 Participant Media, LLC. All rights reserved.
Lauren Salm. “70 Percent of Employers Are Snooping
Candidates’ Social Media Profiles.” CareerBuilder.com, June
15, 2017. Reprinted by permission.
Kathryn Schulz. “Dead Certainty: How ‘Making a Murderer’
Goes Wrong.” New Yorker, January 25, 2016. Copyright ©
2016. Reprinted by permission.
Ben Schwartz. “Shutting Up.” The Baffler, June 9, 2015.
Copyright © 2015 by Ben Schwartz. Reprinted by permission
of HSG Agency as agent for the author.
Ruth J. Simmons. Smith College commencement speech. May
18, 2014. Reprinted by permission.
Lenore Skenazy. “My Free-Range Parenting Manifesto.”
Politico, July 22, 2015. Copyright © 2015 Politico: Politics,
Political News. Reproduced with permission of Capitol News
Company LLC in the format Republish in a book via
Copyright Clearance Center.
Ernie Smith. “They Should Stop: In Defense of the Singular
They.” Tedium, August 4, 2016. Copyright © 2016. Reprinted
by permission.
1437

Becca Stanek. “I took vitamins every day for a decade. Then I
found out they’re useless.” The Week, March 28, 2017.
Copyright © 2017. Reprinted by permission.
Laura Tarrant. “Forever Alone (and Perfectly Fine).” Reprinted
by permission.
Jean M. Twenge. “Have Smartphones Destroyed a Generation?”
The Atlantic, August 5, 2017. © 2017 The Atlantic Media Co.,
as first published in the Atlantic Magazine. All rights
reserved. Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.
Diane Weathers. “Speaking Our Truth” (excerpt). Essence 33.6
(October 2002), p. 24. Reprinted by permission.
Caleb Wong. “Addiction to Social Media: How to Overcome It.”
Reprinted by permission.

1438

Index
A
abstracts, 407–9, 415–16
academic arguments, 405–37
abstracts for, 407–9, 415–16
claims, crafting, 412, 478–79
and counterarguments, 479–80
data collection for, 441–45
developing, 411–18
documentation for, 413–15
quoting experts, 478
review of the literature, 476–77
standard written English for, 324–27
style and tone in, 416
understanding, 406–10
academic integrity, 485
Academic Search Complete database, 442, 444
accuracy, of print sources, 458
Accuracy in Media, 168, 169
1439

acknowledgments
of collaborators, 491
of Internet sources, 489–91
“Activist Athletes” (Brown), 765–69
ad hominem arguments, 86–87
advertisement, citing, in MLA style, 513
advocate, stance and purpose of, 412
allusion, 334
alternative arguments (confirmation and refutatio), 137
“alternative facts,” 6–7, 165
“American Food Psyche, The” (Egan), 594–98
“America’s Birthrate Is Now a National Emergency” (Gobry),
284–85
analogies, 335–36
faulty, 93–94, 336
structure of arguments, 76
analytical arguments, 77–78
anaphora, 343
and (Boolean operator), 445
Andersen, Kurt, 339

1440

anecdotes, in Toulmin argument, 145
Angelou, Maya, 332
annotated bibliography, example of, 483
antithesis, 344
antonomasia, 336
anxiety, public speaking and, 364–65
APA style
content notes in, 519
digital sources in, 523–27
first text page in, 530
in-text citations in, 516–18
other sources in, 527–28
print books in, 520–22
print periodicals in, 522–23
References list in, 519–28, 531
short quotations in text, 473
signal verbs in, 475
title page in, 529
“Appeal, Audience, and Narrative in Kristof’s Wilderness”
(Hauer), 121–24

1441

appeals
emotional (pathos), 26
ethical (ethos), 26, 27
logical (logos), 26, 27
architectural proposal, 297–99
“Argument against Veganism . . . from a Vegan, An”
(Greenfield), 609–14
arguments. See also specific types and topics
academic, 405–37
in brief (enthymeme/claim), 152
causal, 255–85
ceremonial, 17–18
classical oration, 136–39
to convince and inform, 9–11
cultural contexts for, 56
cultural differences, 30–31
definitional, 21, 197–223
deliberative, 17
emotional appeals (pathos), 32–44
epideictic, 17–18

1442

ethical appeals (ethos), 46–57
of evaluation, 22
to explore, 13–15
factual, 20–21, 164–96
fallacies of, 79–96
about future, 17
invitational, 14, 139–42
logical appeals (logos), 58–78
multimodal, 381–402
occasions for, 15–17, 20
about past, 15–17
to persuade, 11–12
about present time, 17–19
presentations, 363–80
proposals, 23
rhetorical analysis, 97–132
Rogerian, 14–15, 139–42
sources, used to clarify and support, 476–82
stasis theory, 20–23
structural, 135–63
1443

style in, 321–45
Toulmin, 143–62
visual, 346–62
Aristotle
on appeals to audience, 26–27
on classifying arguments, 15–17
on constructed arguments, 71
on forensic arguments, 17, 20
on rhetoric (persuasion), 6, 15
Arnold, Eve, 353
articles, citing
in APA style, 522–25
in MLA style, 505–6
artistic proofs, 60–62
artwork, citing, in MLA style, 512–13
Assu, Sonny, “Breakfast Series,” 577–79
assumptions
implicit, 73–75
tentative, 265
unstated, 7, 73–75
1444

and warrants, 147–50
attitudes, shifts in, 228
audiences. See also readers
for academic arguments, 407, 413
appeals to, 24–27
as citizen journalists, 384
connecting with, 325–26
credibility and, 289
identifying with, 103–5
for multimodal arguments, 389–90, 392
for presentations, 378–79
of print sources, 459
of proposals, 288–90, 297
virtual, 384–88
authorities
quotations from, 471–73
review of the literature, 476–77
authority
arguments based on character, 48–49
of authors, 471–73
1445

claims of, 51–53
cultural contexts and, 56
establishing, 55
images to enhance, 353–55
in Toulmin argument, 147, 157
in visual arguments, 347
authors
citing, in APA style, 516–27
citing, in MLA style, 490, 496–99, 501–10
paraphrasing of, 467–70
quotations from, 471–73
reliability of, 460
signal verbs and, 475
stance of, 457
“whois” search term, 459
Ayatollah Khomeini, 440

B
background (narratio), 137
backing evidence, 49, 59–60, 143, 151–52

1446

balance, in visual arguments, 116
“Balancing Classroom Civility and Free Speech” (Nolan-Ferrell),
772–82
bandwagon appeals fallacy, 83–84
Barbour, Sara, 269–70
Barry, Dave, 265
Barry, Lynda, 399
Baynham, Jacob, 341
Becker, Alton L., 139–40
begging the question fallacy, 89–90
Beispel, Kate, “Snacktivities and Musings of a Millennial Foodie,
The,” 187–92
beliefs, 59–60, 165
benefits to opponent, 140
Bennett, Lerone, Jr., 343
Bergstrom, Carl, 7
Berl, Rachel Pomerance, 256
Bernstein, Richard, 53
bias
confirmation (or “myside”), 59

1447

evaluating sources for, 456
in news and political sources, 168–69
in questionnaires, 449
Biba, Erin, 340
bibliographic notes, in MLA style, 500–501
Bibliography, in APA style, 519
“big data,” 7
Bing searches, 444–45
blogs, 384, 395–96
Bloomberg, Michael, 65
body language, 379
Bolter, Jay, 382
Bonner, Mehera, 231–32
books
citing in APA style, 520–22
citing in MLA style, 501–4
Boolean operators, 445
“both/and” solutions, 15
boxes, lists, and other emphasis, 358
brackets, in quotations, 473
1448

Bravo, Tony, 337–38
“Breakfast Series” (Assu), 577–79
Brown, Sarah, “Activist Athletes,” 765–69
Brown, Tiffany Lee, 342
Bruni, Frank, 50
Burgess, Melinda C. R., Karen E. Dill, S. Paul Stermer, Stephen
R. Burgess, and Brian P. Brown, “Playing with Prejudice: The
Prevalence and Consequences of Racial Stereotypes in Video
Games,” 567–75
Burke, Tarana, 4
Burke, Timothy, 108–9
Burnett, T Bone, 237, 238
Bush, George W., 43

C
Cadwalladr, Carole, 63
Cady, Clare, James Dubick, and Brandon Mathews, “Hunger on
Campus: The Challenge of Food Insecurity for College
Students,” 634–46
Calegari, Nínive, 76
“Calling Bullshit” college course, 7
campus speech, questions of freedom of, 729–84
1449

Canagarajah, Suresh, 323
Capetillo, Luisa, 399–400
Capps, Kriston, 77–78
captions for video/slides, 378
“Careless Language of Sexual Violence, The” (Gay), 682–87
Carr, Nicholas, 89
Carroll, James, 47–48
Carroll, Lauren, “Congress Let Internet Providers ‘Spy On’ Your
Underwear Purchases, Advocacy Group Says,” 713–17
Carter, Stephen L., “Offensive Speech Is Free Speech. If Only
We’d Listen,” 158–61
cartoon, citing, in MLA style, 513
Cascio, Jamais, 89
Castro, Raul, 34
causal arguments, 255–85
categories of, three, 257
causes, types of, 267
characteristics of, 262–64
claims, 264–65, 268–70, 274, 276
complexity of, 262–63

1450

definitions, based on, 263
design and visuals in, 271–72
developing, 264–72
ethnographic observations, 269–70
evidence for, 264, 277
hypotheses in, 269
as parts of other arguments, 262
personal experience and, 269–70
probable versus absolute conclusions, 263–64
reasons, warrants, and evidence for, 267–68
relationships of causes, 266–68
stating cause and examining effect, 257, 258
stating effect and tracing back to causes, 257, 258–60
Toulmin terms for, 275
understanding, 256–61
writing guidelines for, 273–78
cause-and-effect arguments. ,See causal arguments
Census Data, “English and Languages Other Than English in the
United States,” 677–80
ceremonial arguments, 17–18

1451

ceremonial rhetoric, 225
Chang, Juliana, from “This Is What Language Loss Looks Like,”
371–72
character arguments. See ethical appeals (ethos)
Charlottesville rally, example of emotional arguments, 105, 107
charts
bar, 360
citing, in MLA style, 500, 513
pie, 359
as “quotations” from other sources, 471
software for, 361
Chidiac, George, 368–69
Chisholm, Latisha, 18–19
Chokshi, Niraj, 66
Chou, Hui-Tze Grace, 64
Chung, Jack, 410
circular reasoning, 90
Citation Index, 457
Citation Project, 456
citations. See also documentation

1452

in academic arguments, 418
documentation styles, 495
for paraphrases, 469
passage, MLA style for, 490
in-text, in APA style, 516–18
in-text, in MLA style, 496–500
citizen journalists, 384
civic arguments and opinions, 382
claims
for academic arguments, 412
for causal arguments, 274
circumstantial evidence, 465–66
contextualizing, 174
for definitional arguments, 198–200, 205–6
developing or supporting, 439–40, 465–67
elements of support for, 162
for evaluations, 235–37, 242
examples of, 412, 478–79
for factual arguments, 170–71, 173–74
personal experience as, 145
1453

for proposals, 301–2
qualifications, to clarify, 235
reasons, and warrants, 143, 145–50
refining, 173–74
for rhetorical analysis, 125–26
supported by sources, example of, 478–79
in Toulmin argument, 143, 144, 154–56
clarification, sources for, 476–81
class discussions, 364–65
classical oration, 136–39
“click bait,” 7
climactic order, in presentations, 375–76
climate change, and exploring arguments, 24
Clinton, Bill, 36
Clinton, Hillary, 91
close reading, 7
Cloud, John, 23
code meshing, 323–24
code switching, 324
collaborative writing
1454

acknowledging cowriters, 491
in APA style, 522
Luisa (Stanford University Creative Writing Program),
399–401
in MLA style, 497, 503
“collective intelligence” of the Web, 465
college library resources, 443
Collins, Jason
quoted in Sports Illustrated, 115
from statement to NBA on “coming out,” 327
colloquialisms, 50, 324–25
colons, 331
color, responses to, 116, 351–53
comics, as multimodal arguments, 399–402
commencement address (Simmons), 50
common ground, in Rogerian argument, 14–15
common sense, in constructed arguments, 71–74
communication and rhetorical listening, 140
composition, of visual arguments, 358
conclusions

1455

peroratio, 137
for presentations, 370–72
probable versus absolute, 263–64
conditions of rebuttal, 154–57
confirmatio, 137
confirmation (or “myside”) bias, 59
“Congress Kills Internet Privacy” (Crowe), 705
“Congress Let Internet Providers ‘Spy On’ Your Underwear
Purchases, Advocacy Group Says” (Carroll), 713–17
connecting with audiences, 325–26
connotation, 326
conscientious commitment to truth, 406, 414
content, of presentations, 367
content and purpose, social media sites, 390
content notes, in APA style, 519
context
establishing, 476
in Rogerian argument, 140
contextualizing the claim, 174
contrast, in Web page design, 392

1456

controversy, in crafting claims, 412
convincing versus persuading, 9–11
Conway, Kellyanne, 58
copyrighted material
Internet sources, 488–89
on “transformative” works, 487–88
visual works, 362
core principles, beliefs and, 50
Costa, Bob, 238
counterarguments, highlighting, 479–80
“Covering the Transgender Community: How Newsrooms Are
Moving Beyond the ‘Coming Out’ Story to Report Crucial
Transgender Issues” (Morrison), 580–90
Crane, Brian, “Oh, My Gosh! When Did Facebook Start with
Mind Infiltration?” 702
“crap detection,” 6, 166, 459–62, 465
“Creative Ways to Get Noticed by Employers on Social Media”
(Hartley), 709–11
creators and distributors of social media sites, 389
credentials, of authors and publishers, 457
credibility

1457

of authors in electronic sources, 460–62
building with audiences, 49–51
ethical appeals, 27, 108
images for, 353–55
synthesizing sources and, 481
trustworthiness, 49–51
crediting sources
basic principles of, 486
exempted sources, 486–87
fair use, 487–89
guidelines for, 486–87
criteria
for arguments, 233–34
of evaluations, 226–28
critic, stance and purpose of, 412
critical reading
advertisements, 110
blogs, 397
comics, 401
emotional arguments (pathos), 34–36
1458

rhetorical analysis, 6–7, 98–100
critical thinking
about audiences, 24–25
about ethical arguments, 48–49
about hard evidence, 60–62
about own argument, 29
cross-cultural communication, 140
Crowe, J. D., “Congress Kills Internet Privacy,” 705
Crystal, David, 470, 471
cultural contexts
for arguments, 56
communication across cultures, 30–31
ethos and, 56
evidence, finding, 441
logos and, 74
organization of arguments, 163
pronoun preferences, 326
rhetorical analysis, 113
speaking up in class, 365
style and, 345
1459

currency
in APA style, 495
of electronic sources, 462
of print sources, 458

D
Dal, Alexandra, “Questions,” 753
dashes, 331–32
data
collecting, 446–51
presentation of, 359–61
quantitative, 439
sources of, 417
databases, 228, 442–45
citing, in APA style, 524–25
citing, in MLA style, 506–7, 510
searching in, 445
Dawkins, Richard, 397
decision making, arguments to support, 12–13
Declaration of Independence, from, 137–38

1460

deductive reasoning and syllogisms, 71–73
Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA), from, 198
Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA), 61–62
“Defining the Relationship” (Jenkins), 220–23
definitional arguments, 21, 197–223
claims for, 198–200, 205–6
crafting, 206–8
definitions by example, 203–4
design and visuals for, 209–10
developing, 205–10
example of, 200–201
formal, 200–202
matching claims to, 208–9
negative definitions, 204–5
operational definitions, 202
questions related to conditions, 202
Toulmin analysis of, 207
understanding, 198–200
writing guidelines for, 211–16
deliberative arguments, 17
1461

democracy and online “echo chambers,” 8
Deshpande, Manasi, 478–79
design and visuals
in academic arguments, 416–17
analyzing social media sites, 390–91
in definitional arguments, 209–10
for evaluations, 238–39
examples of, 358
headings, 358–61
multimodal arguments, 390–91
storyboarding of Web pages, 392
videos and video essays, 393–94
Web sites, creating, 392–93
DeVos, Betsy, 93–94
diagrams and drawings, 360
Dickens, Charles
from Hard Times, 176
parallelism, example of, 344
diction, in presentations, 373
dictionaries, 199–200
1462

digital object identifier (DOI), 506, 523
Di Modica, Arturo, 77–78
disagreeing with respect, 140–41
discussions, class and public, 364–65
dissertations, citing
in APA style, 527
in MLA style, 510
D.K., “Shooting Guns: It’s Rather Fun, Actually,” 544–45
documentation. See also APA style; MLA style
in academic arguments, 414–15
exempted sources, 486–87
of online sources, 459–62
in rhetorical argument, 113, 130
“whois” search term, 459
Dodick, David W., 407–8
Doe v. City of Belleville (Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals), 70
dogmatism fallacy, 86
“Don’t Believe Facebook: The Demise of the Written Word Is
Very Far Off” (Hiltzik), 193–96
Douglass, Frederick, 141

1463

Downey, Robert, Jr., 95
drafts
and peer review, 236
for questionnaires, 449, 450
drawings, 360
Drum, Kevin, 142
D’Souza, Dinesh, 88
Dubick, James, Brandon Mathews, and Clare Cady, “Hunger on
Campus: The Challenge of Food Insecurity for College
Students,” 634–46
Dubner, Stephen J., 168
DVD, citing, in APA style, 528

E
Easel.ly, 361
Eastwood, Clint, 329–30
eating habits, as definition of society, 592–647
“echo chambers,” online, 8, 385–86
Edge, Nicholas, 64
editing
academic arguments, 418
1464

in visual arguments, 116
editions, citing,
in APA style, 521
in MLA style, 498, 499, 503
editor, citing
in APA style, 521
digital source, 506–7
in MLA style, 502, 506–7
editorials, citing
in APA style, 523
in MLA style, 506
Edwards, Russell, 466
Egan, Sophie, “The American Food Psyche,” 594–98
Eggers, Dave, 76
either/or choices, fallacy of, 81–82
electronic sources, evaluating, 459–62
ellipsis marks
alone and paired with dashes, 332
increasing use of, 330, 332
with quotations, 473
1465

emails, citing
in APA style, 518
in MLA style, 509
emotional appeals (pathos), 32–44
connecting with readers, 36–39
cultural contexts for, 56
ethical versus rash or casual, 34
fallacies of, 80–84
human-interest stories, 44
humor, 40–43
images, persuasive, 32–33
personal experience, 38–39
political ads and, 39
reading critically to recognize, 34–36
rhetorical analysis of, 105–8
“Emotion Work of ‘Thank You for Your Service,’ The”
(Montgomery), 432–37
Encinas, Jorge, “How Latino Players Are Helping Major League
Baseball Learn Spanish,” 689–94
endorsements in political ads, 101–2

1466

“English and Languages Other Than English in the United
States” (Census Data), 677–80
enthymemes
claims and reasons, 145–46
reasoning and common sense, 73–75
as topic sentences, 145–46
in Toulmin argument, 145–46, 152, 154
and warrants, 147–49
epideictic arguments, 17–18, 225
Epstein, Eve, 342
equivocations, as fallacies, 90–91
ethical appeals (ethos), 46–57
authority through, 51–53
character, establishing, 46–48
core principles, 50
expertise, questioning of, 53
fallacies of, 84–88
honesty about, 54–55
humor in, 49
in own writing, 55

1467

personal experience, 52
rhetorical analysis of, 108–9
trustworthiness and credibility, 48–51
visuals for, 353–55
ethnographic observations, in causal arguments, 269–70
ethos. See ethical appeals
evaluations
arguments of, 22–23
for bias, 456
characteristics of, 229–32
claims in, 233, 235–37
criteria of, 226–28
of design and visuals, 238–39
developing, 233–39
of electronic sources, 459–62
evidence, presenting, 237–38
field research and, 462
print sources, 457–59
qualitative, 231–32
quantitative, 230–31
1468

reasons, warrants, and claims, 233
of sources, 454–63
understanding, 225
writing guidelines, 240–45
evidence, 438–53
for academic arguments, 413–14, 415
analyzing, 21, 413
assembling, 175
backing, 49, 59–60, 143, 151–52
in causal arguments, 264
circumstantial, 465–66
collecting, 446–51
conclusions drawn from, 64–65
conscientious commitment to truth, 414
in evaluations, 229, 231, 233
for factual arguments, 27, 168, 174–77
hard, 60–62, 168
inartistic, 61
presenting, 237–38
quantitative data, 439
1469

and the rhetorical situation, 439–41
searching for, 441–45
to support a definition, 208
to support a hypothesis, 167
in Toulmin argument, 143, 145–48, 151–52
triangulation of sources, 465
examples, definitions by, 203–4
exclamation points, 330
experiments
evaluating sources, 462
as evidence, 446

F
Facebook, 3–5. See also social media
beliefs, framing of, 64
and personal ethos, 353–55
and social media platforms, 384
use of, by students, 381
fact, arguments of, 20–21
fact-checking, 7, 59–60, 168–69

1470

FactCheck.org, 61–62, 169, 459
facts
to build claims, 145
in classical oration, 136
discerning, 7
empirical studies, 64
and evaluations, 229
framing of, 64
scholarly arguments, 63–64
in Toulmin argument, 145
uncovering, in causal arguments, 265
factual arguments, 20–21, 164–96
characteristics of, 167–68
claims in, 173–74
contextualizing the claim, 174
design and visuals, 177–79
developing, 168–69
evidence for, 174–77
hypothesis, researching, 172
issue, identifying, 170–71
1471

refining the claim, 173–74
samples of, 187–92, 193–96
understanding, 164–66
What if? questions, 167
writing guidelines for, 181–85
“fair use” of sources, 487–89
“fake news,” 6–7, 53, 58, 165
Fallaci, Oriana, 440
fallacies
of emotional arguments (pathos), 80–84
of ethical arguments (ethos), 84–88
of logical arguments (logos), 88–93
Fallon, Claire, 322
false authority appeals, 85
false choice fallacy, 82
false equivalency fallacy, 107
faulty analogy fallacy, 93–94, 336
faulty causality fallacy, 88–89
fear campaigns, 81
feminism, and coining of Ms., 326
1472

Fernbach, Philip, 59
field research, 462, 487
figurative language, 334–44
film
citing, in APA style, 528
citing, in MLA style, 511
First Amendment rights, 209
firsthand accounts, in interviews, 447
first text page, in APA style, 530
Fischer, Helen, 230–31
“Fleeing to the Mountains” (Kristof), 118–20
Foer, Franklin, “World without Mind: The Existential Threat of
Big Tech,” 719–22
fonts, choice of, in visual arguments, 116
forensic arguments, 15–17
“Forever Alone (and Perfectly Fine)” (Tarrant), 276–78
formal definitions, 200–201
formality, 322, 324–25
formatting guides for visuals, 362
Fortgang, Tal, 54–55

1473

Foss, Sonja, 14, 140
Fox, Susannah, 406
“Free Speech on Campus: What College Students Think about
First Amendment Issues” (Gallup/Knight Foundation), 741–44
future, arguments about, 17

G
Gallup/Knight Foundation, “Free Speech on Campus: What
College Students Think about First Amendment Issues,” 741–44
Garrett, Jenna, 99
Garvey, Meaghan, 328
Gay, Roxane, “The Careless Language of Sexual Violence,”
682–87
Geaghan-Breiner, Charlotte, 412
“Where the Wild Things Should Be: Healing Nature Deficit
Disorder through the Schoolyard,” 422–31
Gearhart, Sally Miller, 140
gender and pronoun preferences, 326
genre and media
in academic arguments, 416–17
for causal arguments, 275–76
for definitional arguments, 214
1474

for evaluations, 243
for factual arguments, 182–83
for proposals, 302–3
for rhetorical analysis, 127
Gerson, Michael, 72–73, 333
gesture as punctuation, 329–30
“Getting Personal about Cybersecurity” (McKenzie), 698–700
Gier, Joseph, 269
Goadsby, Peter J., 407
Gobry, Pascal-Emmanuel, “America’s Birthrate Is Now a
National Emergency,” 284–85
Gongloff, Mark, 65
Gonzalez, Emma, 114, 374
Google Charts, 361
Google Groups, for author credentials, 457
Google searches, 444–45
government document, citing
in APA style, 522
in MLA style, 504
graphic narrative, citing

1475

in APA style, 521
in MLA style, 503
Graphic Novel Projects, 399
graphics. See also design and visuals
information, organization of, 358–61
typographic elements, 356
graphs. See also charts
examples of, 360–61
factual arguments, 177, 178
identifying sources of data, 417
as “quotations” from other sources, 471
Gray, Briahna Joy, “The Question of Cultural Appropriation,”
620–32
Greenfield, Rob, “An Argument against Veganism . . . from a
Vegan,” 609–14
Gregoire, Carolyn, 104–5
Grey, Emma, 397
Griffin, Cindy, 14, 140
Grossman, Matt, 53
Grusin, Richard, 382

1476

Gutting, Gary, 13–14

H
Hagen, Lisa, 95
Hamilton, Tracy Brown, 86
handouts, for presentations, 377
hard evidence, 60–62
Harkin, Tom, 34
Harrop, Froma, 70–71
Hartley, Deanna, “Creative Ways to Get Noticed by Employers
on Social Media,” 709–11
Hatch, Orrin, 69–70
“hate speech,” attempts to define, 208
Hauer, Cameron, 117
“Appeal, Audience, and Narrative in Kristof’s Wilderness,”
121–24
headings and subheadings
in academic arguments, 415
in visual arguments, 358
Hemingway, Ernest, 460
Hempel, Jessi, 4
1477

Herzog, Werner, 348–49
Hess, Amanda, “How Privacy Became a Commodity for the Rich
and Powerful,” 724–27
“Hi from the Other Side” app, 8
Hiltzik, Michael, 476
“Don’t Believe Facebook: The Demise of the Written Word Is
Very Far Off,” 193–96
Himes, Chester, 340
homepages, on Web sites, 393
Hopkins, David A., 53
“How a Bible-Belt Evangelical Church Embraced Gay Rights”
(Pasulka), 547–52
Howard, Rebecca Moore, 480
How come? questions, 167
“How Do Your Eating Habits Differ from Your Grandparents’?”
(United States Department of Agriculture), 601–7
“How Latino Players Are Helping Major League Baseball Learn
Spanish” (Encinas), 689–94
“How Privacy Became a Commodity for the Rich and Powerful”
(Hess), 724–27
human-interest stories, 44
humor
1478

credibility through, 49
in emotional appeals, 40–43
to explore controversy, 41
“Hunger on Campus: The Challenge of Food Insecurity for
College Students” (Dubick, Mathews, and Cady), 634–46
Hurston, Zora Neale, 14
hyperbole, 336
hypotheses
in causal arguments, 269
developing, 167, 170–71
researching, 172

I
“I Agree with Apple…” (Smith), 704
illusion of explanatory depth, 59
illustrations and photographs, 356–57. See also visuals
images. See also visuals
in emotional appeals, 32–33
as “quotations,” 471
in visual arguments, 353–55
impression or mood, in Web page design, 392
1479

“Impressive Résumé” (Wildt), 703
inartistic proofs, 60–62
inferences, 72, 77–78
“Infographic of Infographics” poster, 359
infographics
for factual arguments, 177, 178, 179
software for, free, 361
informal logic, Toulmin argument as, 73–75
information, visual organization of, 358–61
infotention strategies, 465, 467
Instagram Stories, 384
Institutional Review Boards (IRB), 448
intellectual property, 484–85
intended readers, 25
interactive environments, 384, 395
Internet. See also online sources; Web sites
acknowledgments of, 489–91
copyrighted materials on, 488–89
“crap detection,” 6, 166, 459–62, 465
facts versus misinformation, 166
1480

imagery on, 349–50
inviting comments, 236
privacy issues, 696–728
search options on, 172, 443–45
interviews
citing, in MLA style, 511
evaluating sources, 462
as evidence, 447–48
guidelines for, 447–48
in-text citations
in APA style, 516–18
in MLA style, 496–500
introductions
exordium, 136
in presentations, 370–72
in Rogerian argument, 139
to terms, 477–78
inverted word order, 344
invitational arguments, 14, 139–42
invoked readers, 25
1481

irony, 336–38
“Issue of Privacy, The” (Making a Visual Argument, cartoon
selections), 702–5
“I Still Don’t Understand the Cultural Appropriation of Food”
(Kapadia), 615–17
“I took vitamins every day. Then I found out they’re useless”
(Stanek), 252–54

J
Japanese American Citizens League, “The Power of Words,”
667–76
jargon, audiences and, 326
Jenkins, Rob, “Defining the Relationship,” 220–23
Jobs, Steve, 36–37
Johnson, Lyndon, 343
Johnson, Samuel, 199–200
example of antithesis, 344
humor used to explore controversy, 43
Joseph, Alli, “With Disney’s Moana, Hollywood Almost Gets It
Right: Indigenous People Weigh In,” 537–42
journalism
and facts, 63–64
1482

role in media, 383
JSTOR database, 442

K
kairos, 29–30,
Kapadia, Jess, “I Still Don’t Understand the Cultural
Appropriation of Food,” 615–17
Kellman, Laurie, 51–52
Kelly, Kevin, 347
Keynote software, 369
keyword searches, 445
Kim, Jenny, “The Toxicity in Learning, The,” 247–51
King, C. Richard, “Redskins: Insult and Brand,” 554–65
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 28
from “I Have a Dream” speech, 375–76
Kleege, Georgina, 37–38
Kolbert, Elizabeth, 59
Krauthammer, Charles, 92
Kristof, Nicholas, “Fleeing to the Mountains,” 118–20
Krugman, Paul, 13–14, 331

1483

L
language
code meshing, 323–24
colloquial, in ethical appeals, 50
colloquialisms, 324
figurative, 333–42
influence on the world, 648–95
in presentations, oral, 370–76
pronoun preferences, 326
schemes of figurative language, 343–44
spoken English in writing, 323–24
tropes, 334–42
language and its influence on world, 648–95
Lanham, Richard, 465
Last Week Tonight, and humor, 41–42
lecture or speech, citing in MLA style, 513
Lee, Spike, 111
Lehman, Susan, 328
length of print sources, 459

1484

LePatner, Barry, 26–27
Lessing, Doris, example of inverted word order, 344
letter to the editor, citing
in APA style, 523
in MLA style, 506
letters, citing
in APA style, 523
in MLA style, 512
Levitt, Steven D., 168
LexisNexis database, 442
Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH), 443
like or as, 341–42
Lilienfeld, Scott O., “Why a Moratorium on Microaggressions Is
Needed,” 756–63
Lilla, Mark, 258
lines of argument (confirmatio and partitio), 137
LinkedIn, 353
Linton, Louise, 337–38
listening rhetorically, 7–8
echo chambers, 8

1485

in public discussions, 365
lists, boxes, and other emphasis, 358
literary works, citing, in MLA style, 498
logical appeals (logos), 27, 58–78
academic arguments, 406
arguments from precedent, 77–78
evidence, hard, 60–62
facts, 63–64
fallacies of, 88–95
feelings versus knowledge, 59–60
proofs, artistic and inartistic, 60–62
reason and common sense, 71–75
rhetorical analysis of, 109–12
statistics, 64–67
structures for arguments, 71–73, 75–78
surveys and polls, 67–69
logos (visual representation), 353–55
long quotations in text, 473
Luisa graphic novel (Stanford University Creative Writing
Program), 399–401

1486

M
Madrigal, Alexis C., 328
magazine articles, citing
in APA style, 522
in MLA style, 505, 508
Makau, Josina, 14
“Making a Visual Argument: The Issue of Privacy” (cartoon
selections), 702–5
Malady, Matthew J. X., 332
Mansour, Riyad, 81–82
map, citing, in MLA style, 513
Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School, 67
mashups, credit for, 487–88
Mathews, Brandon, James Dubick, and Clare Cady, “Hunger on
Campus: The Challenge of Food Insecurity for College
Students,” 634–46
Mayer, Jane, 330
McCain, John, 51–52
McCorkle, Ben, 373–74
McCrary, Donald, 328

1487

McGruder, Aaron, 341
McKenzie, Lindsay, “Getting Personal about Cybersecurity,”
698–700
McLuhan, Marshall, 347
McWhorter, John, 111
“Thick of Tongue,” 657–65
media
audiences, virtual, 384
blogs, 384
choosing, for an argument, 113
digital, evolution to, 382
logos (appeals to logic), 383
and new content, 384–85
school shootings, reporting on, 65–66
Media Matters for America, 168
medium
analyzing social media sites, 389
in multimodal arguments, 389
in visual arguments, 354–55
Mehra, Vineet, 357–58

1488

memes in social media, 397
Mendelsohn, Nicola, 476
metaphors, 338–39
metonymy, 339
#metoo hashtag, ethos of, 387
Me Too movement, 3–5
microform, citing, in MLA style, 510
Milano, Alyssa, 3–4
Milk, Harvey, 89
Milton, John, 339
misinformation, on social media, 384
misreading audiences, 104–5
MLA style, 496–515
acknowledging collaborators, 491
digital sources in, 506–10
example of citation in text, 490, 514–15
first text page for, 514
in-text citations, 496–500
other sources in, 510–13
paraphrase with citation, 490
1489

print book references, 501–4
short quotations in text, 473
Works Cited list in, 501–15
Modern Language Association. See MLA style
Montgomery, Sidra, 413
“The Emotion Work of ‘Thank You for Your Service,’” 432–37
Moore, Michael, 88
Morrison, Sara, “Covering the Transgender Community: How
Newsrooms Are Moving Beyond the ‘Coming Out’ Story to
Report Crucial Transgender Issues,” 580–90
motives of source, examining, 455–56
multimedia arguments, 113–14, 177
multimodal arguments
analyzing, 388–91
blogs, 395–96
collaborative writing, 399–401
comics, 399–402
“echo chamber,” of online interactions, 385–86
interactive environments, 384, 395
posters, 397–99

1490

questions, for rhetorical analysis, 388–91
social media, 384, 396–99
time required for, 402
Twitter and audiences for, 385–86
videos and video essays, 393–94
and Web sites, creating, 392–93
wikis, 395
multiple authors, citing, in MLA style, 505, 519
multivolume works, citing
in APA style, 521
in MLA style, 498, 503
“My Free-Range Parenting Manifesto” (Skenazy), 313–17
“myside” (or confirmation) bias, 59

N
narratio, 137
narratives, to support arguments, 69–71
National Institute of Justice, 21
National Institute of Mental Health, 364
National Museum of African American History, proposal for,
298–99
1491

National Rifle Association (NRA), 65
necessary cause, 267
new media platforms, 392
news
blogs as feature of, 395
civic arguments and opinions, 382
fact-checking, Web sites for, 168–69
newsgroups, citing in APA style, 527
newspaper articles, citing
in APA style, 522
in MLA style, 505, 508
Nolan-Ferrell, Catherine, “Balancing Classroom Civility and
Free Speech,” 772–82
nonprint sources, citing, in MLA style, 499
non sequitur fallacy, 91–92
nontraditional forms of argument, 113–14
not (Boolean operator), 445
notes, in-text, citing
in APA style, 519
in MLA style, 500–501

1492

Novella, Steven, 92

O
Obama, Barack, 34
objections, conditions of rebuttal, 143, 154–56
observations, for data collection, 446–47, 462
O’Connor, Anahad, 9–10
“Offensive Speech Is Free Speech. If Only We’d Listen.”
(Carter), 158–61
“Oh, My Gosh! When Did Facebook Start with Mind
Infiltration?” (Crane), 702
omissions, of print sources, 459
online discussions. See also social media
echo chambers, 8
“Hi from the Other Side” app, 8
Me Too movement, 3–5
platforms for, 384
online sources
assessing, 459–62
citing, in APA style, 518
citing, in MLA style, 507–10, 512, 513
1493

searching, 172, 443–45
open-ended questions, 448, 449
operational definitions, 202
opinions, 112, 236. See also evaluations
or (Boolean operator), 445
oration, classical, 136–39
organization of writing
academic arguments, 415–16
causal arguments, 277
cultural context and, 163
evaluations, 243
factual arguments, 182
proposals, 303
rhetorical analysis, 128
visual, of information, 358–61
Orr, Christopher, 22
Oster, Emily, 68, 262–63
outline of Toulmin argument, 143, 156–57
outlines, reverse, 417
“out of the box” thinking, 141
1494

overly sentimental appeals, 82–83
oxymorons, 339–40

P
Paglia, Camille, 5, 11
Palfrey, John, “Safe Spaces, Brave Spaces,” 731–38
pamphlet, citing in MLA style, 504
papers, citing in APA style, 527
paralipsis fallacy, 94–95
parallelism, 115, 344, 375–76
paraphrasing
with citation, in MLA style, 490
crediting, 490
examples of, 469–70, 476, 481
guidelines for, 468–69
in patchwriting, 480–81
as plagiarism, 480–81, 487, 491
and synthesizing, 481
Parker, James, 450
Parker-Pope, Tara, 171

1495

Parry, Richard Lloyd, 39–40
partitio, 137
past, arguments about, 15–17
Pasulka, Nicole, “How a Bible-Belt Evangelical Church
Embraced Gay Rights,” 547–52
patchwriting, example of, 480–81
pauses in speech, example of, 374–75
peer response
academic arguments, 417–18
causal arguments, 276–78
definitional arguments, 215–16
evaluations, 243–45
proposals, 303–5
rhetorical analysis paper, 128–29
Pena, Laura, 477–78, 479
People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA), 271–72
performance, citing, in MLA style, 513
permissions
example of request, 489
in field research, 462

1496

for Internet sources, 488–89
for observations, 447
for visuals, 362
personal experience
to build claims, 145
in causal arguments, 269–70
data collection through, 450
in testimonies and narratives, 69–71
in Toulmin argument, 144–45
personal pronoun preferences, 326
perspectives of authors, evaluating, 460–62
persuading versus convincing, 9–11
persuasion, arguments for, 11–12
Pew Research Center, 406
photographs
citing, in MLA style, 512–13
communicating through, 356–57
creating, 350
for emotional appeals, 350–51
for ethical appeals, 353
1497

identifying, in academic arguments, 417
Pictochart, 361
pie charts, 359–60
Pike, Kenneth L., 139–40
plagiarism, 484–91
Platt, Russell, 490
“Playing with Prejudice: The Prevalence and Consequences of
Racial Stereotypes in Video Games” (Burgess, Dill, Stermer,
Burgess, and Brown), 567–75
Plunkert, David, 10–11
politics
ads and appeals to pathos, 39
Web sites for fact-checking, 168–69
PolitiFact.com, 169
Pollan, Michael, 38
polls, 67–69, 172
Pope Francis, 386
popular culture, stereotypes by, 535–91
“pornography,” attempts to define, 208–9
posters

1498

as multimodal arguments, 397–99
2016 presidential campaigns, 354
in visual arguments, 353–54
poster session, citing, in APA style, 527
post hoc, ergo propter hoc, 88–89
“Power of Words, The” (Japanese American Citizens League),
667
PowerPoint, 369, 377
precedence, 77–78, 439
precipitating cause, 267
Prensky, Marc, 17
presentations, 367–80
audiences, preparing for, 370–76, 378
body language, 379
conclusions for, 370–72
cultural contexts for, 365
delivery, elements of, 378–79
discussions, class and public, 364–65
of evidence for evaluations, 237–38
for factual arguments, 176–77

1499

oral, 347, 355
preparing, 366–80
public speaking, fear of, 384
rehearsing, 369–70
repetition, parallelism, and climactic order, 375–76
signposts in language, 377
silence, used dramatically, 374–75
sources for, 377
structure of, 372–73
syntax and diction, 373
of technical subjects, 237
timing of, 379
tone of voice, 379
type sizes for slides, 377
visuals prepared for, 376–78
Webcasts, 380
presentation software, 352, 369
present time arguments, 17–19
Prezi software, 177, 369
primary sources, 172
1500

print sources
assessing, 457–59
citing, in APA style, 519–23
citing, in MLA style, 501–6
date of publication, 495
privacy issues, online, 696–728
pronouns, personal, 325–26
proofreading
of academic arguments, 418
of questionnaires, 450
proofs, artistic and inartistic, 60–62
propaganda, on social media, 397
proportion, in visual arguments, 116
proposal arguments, 286–317
categorizing, 287–88
for causal arguments, 275
claims, 293–94
defining need or problem, 23–24, 295–97
design and visuals, 297–99
developing, 291–93
1501

for evaluations, 242–43
evidence, 294
feasibility of, 297
headings in, 297
for rhetorical analysis paper, 127
topic, 300
Toulmin terms to describe, 302
writing guidelines for, 300–305
proximate cause, 267
proximity, in Web page design, 392
public discussions, 364–65
public domain works, 362
public service announcement, 271–72
public speaking, tips for, 364–65
punctuation, 330–32
purpose
in academic arguments, 412–13
of arguments, 101
of authors and publishers, 457–58
of reporters, 412
1502

of social media sites, 390
Puschak, Evan, 394

Q
qualifiers
in factual arguments, 174
list of phrases, 153
in Toulmin argument, 143, 153–54
qualitative arguments, 229, 231
quantitative arguments, 229, 230–31
quantitative data, 439
questionnaires, 448–50
“Question of Cultural Appropriation, The” (Gray), 620–32
“Questions” (Dal), 753
quotation marks, 472–73, 486
quotations
in APA style, 516–18
guidelines for, 471–73
in MLA style, 496–500
signal words with, 474–75

1503

R
“Racial Microaggressions Poster,” (Turner Consulting Group),
752
radio programs
citing, in MLA style, 512
multimodal arguments, 382
Rainie, Lee, 406
Rand, Ayn, 75
Ratcliffe, Krista, 140
readers. See also audiences
connecting with, 36–39
general, and specialist information, 407–8
intended versus invoked, 25
technical material and, 478
reading in print versus online, 383
reading for pathos, 34–36
Reagan, Ronald, 28
reasoning. See also factual arguments
constructed arguments, 71–74
deductive, 71, 135
1504

enthymemes, 73–75
inductive, 135
syllogisms, 71–73
Toulmin argument, 143–57
reasons, examples of, 146–50
rebuttals, conditions of, 143, 154–56
reciprocal cause, 267
Reddit, 384
red herring fallacy, 92–93
“Redskins: Insult and Brand” (King), 554–65
references
and in-text citations, 487
preparing, 414
References list, in APA style, 531
reference works, citing
in APA style, 521, 525
in MLA style, 504, 508
refutatio, 137
Reilley, Rob, 98
relevance of sources, 457
1505

remote cause, 267
repetition
in oral presentations, 375–76
as style, 114
reporter, stance and purpose of, 412
republication, citing
in APA style, 521
in MLA style, 504
research
for causal arguments, 273–74
for definitional arguments, 207–8
describing methods of, 415
for evaluations, 459–62
for factual arguments, 172
field, 462
online, 172, 445
for proposals, 300–301
topic for evaluations, 240–41
research report, citing in APA style, 527
resources. See also sources
1506

library, 441–44
online, 443–45
reverse outline, 417
reviewing arguments, 215–16
review of the literature, 476–77
reviews, citing
in APA style, 523
in MLA style, 506
Rheingold, Howard, 6, 166, 459, 465
rhetoric
ceremonial, or epideictic, 17–18
kairos and, 29–30
visual, 346–62
rhetorical analysis, 97–131
arrangement and media, 112–14
assessing quality of argument, 111–12
audiences, identifying, 103–5
composing, 100–101
of emotional arguments, 105–7
of ethical arguments, 108–9
1507

examining, 117–24
key devices, 101
of logical arguments, 109–12
multimodal arguments, 388–91
reading and viewing critically, 100–101
statement and proof, 112
stealthy arguments, understanding, 101
style of arguments, 114–17
understanding, 101–2
visuals and stylistic choices, 116–17
writing guidelines for, 125–30
rhetorical listening, 140
rhetorical opportunity (kairos), 29–30
rhetorical question, 340
rhetorical situation
assessing for presentations, 366–67
cultural context for, 113
evidence for, 439–41
ridicule, as humor, 43
Robinson, Eugene, 332
1508

Robinson, Nathan J., 228
Rodriguez, Natasha, “Who Are You Calling Underprivileged?,”
218–19
Rogerian argument, 14–15, 139–42
Rogers, Carl, 14, 139
Rosen, Christine, 5
Rosenbaum, Ron, 107
Rowling, J. K., 49
Rubio, Marco, 34–36

S
sacred text, citing in MLA style, 499
“Safe Spaces, Brave Spaces” (Palfrey), 731–38
Salm, Lauren, “70 Percent of Employers Are Snooping
Candidates’ Social Media Profiles,” 708–9
San Luis, Natalie, 478
sans serif fonts, 356
sarcasm, 114–15
scare tactics, 80–81
schemes of figurative language, 343–44
scholarly arguments, 63–64
1509

scholarly databases, 442
Schulz, Kathryn, 87–88
Schwartz, Ben, “Shutting Up,” 746–49
script, for presentations, 370–72
searching in databases, 445
searching online, 445
semicolons, 331
sentence fragments, 329
sentence structures, 328–29, 331–32
Serba, John, 336
serif fonts, 355
Sessions, Jeff, 60–62
“70 Percent of Employers Are Snooping Candidates’ Social
Media Profiles” (Salm), 708–9
Shaw, Jeff, 488
Shermer, Michael, 174
Shickele, Anna, 398
“Shooting Guns: It’s Rather Fun, Actually” (D.K.), 544–45
short quotations used in text, 473
ShrinktheWeb, 361

1510

“Shutting Up” (Schwartz), 746–49
signal verbs, 475
signal words and introductions, 474–75
signifying, 340–41
signposts, in presentations, 372–73
silence, used in oral presentations, 374–75
similes, 341–42
Simmons, Ruth J., 18, 50
sizes of elements, in visual arguments, 359
Skenazy, Lenore, “My Free-Range Parenting Manifesto,” 313–17
Slane, Chris, “Window on the Internet,” 703
slang and colloquialisms, 325
slides, for presentations, 376–78
slippery slope fallacy, 82
Sloman, Steven, 59
Smagorinsky, Peter, 326
smartphones, 177, 178, 381
Smith, David, 269
Smith, Ernie, “They Should Stop: In Defense of the Singular
They,” 650–55

1511

Smith, Mike, “I Agree with Apple…,” 704
“Snacktivities and Musings of a Millennial Foodie, The”
(Beispel), 187–92
Snapchat, 347, 381
Snapito, 361
social media. See also Facebook; smartphones; Twitter
analysis of, 389–91
citing, in APA style, 526
citing, in MLA style, 509
connectivity, ubiquitous, 381–82
“echo chamber” effect, 385–86
ellipses, use of, 332
misinformation on, 60
and multimodal arguments, 396–99
platforms, 384, 396
and Toulmin argument, 156
trolls, 384
software
for blogging, 396
citing, in APA style, 525

1512

citing, in MLA style, 510
for comics, creating, 401
for videos and video essays, 394
for visual presentations, 361
for Web site creation, 393
WhatsApp, 384
for wikis, 395
Solomon, Jack, 104
Sotomayor, Sonia
from dissenting opinion, 322
example of medium-length sentences, 328
sound recording, citing
in APA style, 529
in MLA style, 512
sources. See also research; resources
acknowledging, 489–91
bias in, 168–69, 456
to clarify and support arguments, 476–81
credibility of, 459–62
crediting, 486–87
1513

currency of, 458, 462
databases as, 442–45
evaluating, 454–63
for factual arguments, 172
fair use of, 487–89
paraphrasing, 467–69
permission for copyrighted materials, 488–89
for presentations, 377
primary, 172
quotations, 471–73
relevance of, 457
scholarly databases, 442
signal phrases for, 474–75
summarizing, 470–71
synthesis of, 466–82
triangulation of, 465
using, 464–83
speaking, public, 365
specialization, of print sources, 458
special pleading, 234
1514

speech, freedom of, and campus speech, 729–84
split notebook page or screen, 447
square brackets in quotations, 473
stacking the deck fallacy, 87–88
stance and purpose
in academic arguments, 412–13
of authors, 457
of publishers, 457–58
standard written English, 324–27
Stanek, Becca, “I took vitamins every day for a decade. Then I
found out they’re useless.,” 252–54
Stanford University Creative Writing Program, 399–401
statement and proof, 112–14
statistics
and evaluations, 229
gun violence, as example, 65–67
researching, 172
status quo, 13–14
Stein, Nathaniel, 114–15, 331
Stiehm, Jamie, 86–87

1515

Stoltenberg, Jens, 108
storyboards, 392, 399, 401
storytelling, 44
straw man fallacy, 92
structures of arguments
analogies, 76
in classical oration, 136–39
cultural contexts, 163
invitational argument, 139–42
precedent, 77–78
Rogerian argument, 139–42
Toulmin argument, 143–62
style and tone
in academic arguments, 416
in causal arguments, 277–78
code meshing, 323–24
connotation, 326
cultural contexts, 326
figurative language, 333–42
formal versus informal, 322
1516

jargon used in, 326
parallelism, 115
punctuation, 329–32
repetition, 114, 115
in rhetorical analysis, 114–17
sarcasm, 114–15
sentence structure, 327–29
slang and colloquialisms, 325
word choice, 324–27
styles for documentation
APA style, 516–31
MLA style, 496–515
subject heading searches, 445
sufficient cause, 267
Sullivan, Andrew, 338–39
summarizing
analyzing evidence, 413, 415
in presentations, 365, 371
of sources, 470–71
superscript numbers
1517

for APA content notes, 519
for MLA endnotes, 500–501
surveys and polls
critical reading of, 68–69
for factual arguments, 172
field research and, 462
questioning motives and methods, 68–69
questionnaires for, 448–50
Sutori, 361
sweeping claims, 144
syllogism, 71–72, 110
syntax, in presentations, 373–74
synthesizing sources, 466–82

T
tables, 177, 178
Tankersley, Reagan, 236
Tarrant, Laura, “Forever Alone (and Perfectly Fine),” 280–83
Taylor, John, 13–14
technical material, 478

1518

technical report, citing, in APA style, 527
television program, citing
in APA style, 528
in MLA style, 512
terms
defined by dictionaries, 199–200
introduced in argument, 477–78
testimonies, 69–71, 229
thank-yous to sources, 448, 462
thesis statements, 109, 170–71, 412, 415. See also claims;
hypotheses
“They Should Stop: In Defense of the Singular They” (Smith),
650–55
“Thick of Tongue” (McWhorter), 657–65
“This Is What Language Loss Looks Like” (Chang), 371–72
title page, sample, in APA style, 529
titles, in APA style, 520
title within a title, in MLA style, 504
Tommasini, Anthony, 208
tone in arguments

1519

evenhanded, in academic arguments, 409–10
in presentations, 379, 394
in Rogerian argument, 140
Toor, Rachel, 335
topics
for academic arguments, 411–16
for causal arguments, 273
for definitional arguments, 211
for evaluations, 240
for factual arguments, 180
for proposals, 300
rhetorical analysis, 125
rhetorical stance on, 412–13
Toulmin, Stephen, The Uses of Argument, 143
Toulmin argument, 143–62
analysis, 143, 157–61
anecdotes to build claims, 145
assumptions and warrants in, 147–50
backing in, 143, 151–52
claims, 143, 144, 147
1520

conditions of rebuttal in, 154–57
elements of structure, 143
enthymemes, 145–46, 152
evidence and reasons in, 143, 145–47, 151–52
framework for, 162
outline of, 156–57
personal experiences in, 145
for proposals, 302
qualifiers, 143, 153–54
rebuttals, understanding, 143, 154–56
warrants in, 143, 146–50
“Toxicity in Learning, The” (Kim), 247–51
transitions, headings, and subheadings, 113
translations, citing
in APA style, 521
in MLA style, 503
translingualism, 324
triangulation of sources, 7, 459, 465
tropes of figurative language, 334–42
Trump, Donald, 35–36, 58
1521

ad hominem attacks, 79–80
paralipsis, use of, 95
“Tweeter-in-Chief,” 387
Tsai, Henry, 401
Tumblr, 384
Turner, Fred, 408–9
Turner Consulting Group, “Racial Microaggressions Poster,” 752
TV news, civic arguments and opinions, 382
Twain, Mark, 93
tweets, citing
in APA style, 526
in MLA style, 509
Twenge, Jean M., 175, 177, 259, 260–61
“Twinkie defense,” 89
Twitter, 353
controversies and, 60–70
hashtags, most used, 387
social media and, 384
trending news and audiences, 386–88
use of, by students, 381
1522

typefaces, 355–56, 358, 377

U
understatement, 342
United States Department of Agriculture, “How Do Your Eating
Habits Differ from Your Grandparents’?” 601–7
URLs and evaluating sources, 460
Uses of Argument, The (Toulmin), 143

V
values, arguments based on, 18–19, 108
Vee, Annette, 27, 328
Venn diagrams, 209–10
Venngage, 361
verbal misinformation, 7
video game, citing in MLA style, 510
videos and video essays, 393–94
citing, in APA style, 528
viewing critically
video images, 98–100
comics, 401

1523

visual arguments, 346–62
examples of
“Breakfast Series” (Assu), 577–79
“English and Languages Other Than English in the United
States” (Census Data), 677–80
“How Do Your Eating Habits Differ from Your
Grandparents’?” (United States Department of
Agriculture), 601–7
“Making a Visual Argument: The Issue of Privacy”
(cartoon selections), 702–5
“Questions” (Dal), 753
“Racial Microaggressions Poster” (Turner Consulting
Group), 752
nontraditional forms of argument, 113–14
power of, 177, 347–49
Visual Artists Rights Act, 78
visual(s)
in academic arguments, 414, 416–17
analysis of, 116–17
in causal arguments, 271–72
charts and graphs, 271–72

1524

citing, in APA style, 521, 527–28
citing, in MLA style, 500, 503, 512–13
color in, 351–53
communicating through, 356–57
copyrights for, 362
data conveyed by, 177, 178, 271, 358–61, 417
in definitional arguments, 209–10
elements of, 116, 177, 178, 358–59
in emotional appeals (pathos), 32–33, 350–53
in ethical appeals (ethos), 347, 353–55
in evaluations, 238–39
examples of, 109–10, 113–14, 353–54, 357
for factual arguments, 177–79
identifying, 417
illustrations and photographs, 356–57
logo as (visual representation), 353–55
manipulated electronically, 197
misuse of, 7
for multimodal arguments, 397–99
organization of information, 358–61
1525

posters, 353–54, 397–99
for presentations, 361, 376–78
in proposals, 297–99
and social media, 353–54
software for presentations, 352, 361
typefaces, styles of, 355–56, 358
Venn diagram, 209–10
videos and video essays, 393–94
white space and, 359
vlogging, 381
voiceovers, 394

W
Wainwright, Corey, 396
Wales, Jimmy, 443
warrants
backing of, 151–52
claims and, 85
conditions of rebuttal, 154–55
determining, 146–50

1526

examples of, 150, 267–68
qualifiers and, 153–54
revising, 154–56
in Toulmin argument, 90, 143, 146–50, 156–57
Watercutter, Angela, 397
Weathers, Diane, 103
Webcasts, of live presentations, 380
Web pages, design, 392–93
Web site documents, citing
in APA style, 524–27
in MLA style, 506–10
Web sites
citing, in APA style, 524
citing, in MLA style, 507
to fact-check political sources, 168–69
and multimodal arguments, 392–93
statistics on usage, 406
triangulation of sources, 7, 459, 465
West, Jevin, 7
What if? questions, 167
1527

WhatsApp, 384
“Where the Wild Things Should Be: Healing Nature Deficit
Disorder through the Schoolyard” (Geaghan-Breiner), 422–31
white space, in visuals, 359
“Who Are You Calling Underprivileged?” (Rodriguez), 218–19
“whois” search term, 459
“Why a Moratorium on Microaggressions Is Needed”
(Lilienfeld), 756–63
Wikipedia
logo, analysis of, 391
for online searches, 443–44
wikis, 395
citing in APA style, 526
citing in MLA style, 509
Wilcox, Susan, 476–77
Wildt, Chris, “Impressive Résumé,” 703
Willett, Walter, 256
Williams, Robin, and design of Web pages, 392
Williams, Terry Tempest, 52
Willis, Frank, 269

1528

“Window on the Internet” (Slane), 703
Winfrey, Oprah, 8
“win/win” solutions, 15
“With Disney’s Moana, Hollywood Almost Gets It Right:
Indigenous People Weigh In” (Joseph), 537–42
Wolkowitz, Michael, 82
Womack, Philip, 331, 332
Wong, Caleb, “Addiction to Social Media: How to Overcome It,”
307–12
Wong, Tom, 62
word choice, 324–27
word order, inverted, 344
working papers, citing, in APA style, 527
work of art, citing, in MLA style, 512–13
Works Cited list
in MLA style, 501–15
preparing, 414
“World without Mind: The Existential Threat of Big Tech”
(Foer), 719–22
writing guides
causal arguments, 273–78
1529

definitional arguments, 211–16
evaluations, 240–45
factual arguments, 180–84
proposals, 300–305
rhetorical analysis, 125–30

Y
Yale Center for Climate Change Communication, 33
Yelp, 384
Young, Richard E., 139–40
YouTube, 384

1530

Readings by Type of Argument
While it is likely the case that all texts ultimately feature aspects
of multiple kinds of arguments, we have sought here to
categorize the selections in Part 5 according to major type(s) of
argument. At the same time, we’re quick to acknowledge that
many factors, including one’s own position on the issues
discussed or even a single word choice by an author, may make
one reader’s proposal another’s evaluation.

Arguments of Fact
Melinda C. R. Burgess, et al., Playing with Prejudice: The
Prevalence and Consequences of Racial Stereotypes in Video
Games
United States Department of Agriculture, How Do Your Eating
Habits Differ from Your Grandparents’?
James Dubick, Brandon Mathews, and Clare Cady, Hunger on
Campus: The Challenge of Food Insecurity for College
Students
Census Data, English and Languages Other Than English in the
United States
Jorge Encinas, How Latino Players Are Helping Major League
Baseball Learn Spanish
Lauren Carroll, Congress Let Internet Providers “Spy On” Your
Underwear Purchases, Advocacy Group Says
Gallup/Knight Foundation, Free Speech on Campus: What
1531

Students Think about First Amendment Issues
Sarah Brown, Activist Athletes

Argument of Definition
Sophie Egan, The American Food Psyche

Evaluations
Alli Joseph, With Disney’s Moana, Hollywood Almost Gets It
Right: Indigenous People Weigh In
D.K., Shooting Guns: It’s Rather Fun, Actually
C. Richard King, Redskins: Insult and Brand
Sonny Assu, Breakfast Series
Jess Kapadia, I Still Don’t Understand the Cultural
Appropriation of Food
Briahna Joy Gray, The Question of Cultural Appropriation
Roxane Gay, The Careless Language of Sexual Violence
Visual Argument: The Issue of Privacy (cartoons)
Turner Consulting Group, Racial Microaggressions Poster
Alexandra Dal, Questions

Causal Arguments
Nicole Pasulka, How a Bible-Belt Evangelical Church Embraced

1532

Gay Rights
Lindsay McKenzie, Getting Personal about Cybersecurity
Amanda Hess, How Privacy Became a Commodity for the Rich
and Powerful

Proposals
Rob Greenfield, An Argument against Veganism . . . from a
Vegan
Ernie Smith, They Should Stop: In Defense of the Singular They
Lauren Salm, 70 Percent of Employers Are Snooping
Candidates’ Social Media Profiles
Deanna Hartley, Creative Ways to Get Noticed by Employers on
Social Media
Franklin Foer, from World without Mind: The Existential Threat
of Big Tech
John Palfrey, Safe Spaces, Brave Spaces
Scott O. Lilienfeld, Why a Moratorium on Microaggressions Is
Needed

Readings That Incorporate Multiple Types of Argument
Sara Morrison, Covering the Transgender Community: How
Newsrooms Are Moving Beyond the “Coming Out” Story to
Report Crucial Transgender Issues (causal, evaluation,
proposal)
1533

John McWhorter, Thick of Tongue (argument of definition,
causal)
Japanese American Citizens League, from The Power of Words
(argument of definition, proposal)
Ben Schwartz, Shutting Up (evaluation, proposal)
Catherine Nolan-Ferrell, Balancing Classroom Civility and Free
Speech (evaluation, proposal)

Arguments That Include Notes and/or References as
Evidence of Reliance on Secondary Sources
C. Richard King, Redskins: Insult and Brand
Melinda C. R. Burgess, et al., Playing with Prejudice: The
Prevalence and Consequences of Racial Stereotypes in Video
Games
James Dubick, Brandon Mathews, and Clare Cady, Hunger on
Campus: The Challenge of Food Insecurity for College
Students
Japanese American Citizens League, from The Power of Words
Lauren Carroll, Congress Let Internet Providers “Spy On” Your
Underwear Purchases, Advocacy Group Says
Franklin Foer, from World without Mind: The Existential Threat
of Big Tech
John Palfrey, Safe Spaces, Brave Spaces

1534

Rogerian Argument
In addressing other vegans in particular, Greenfield seeks to
find and build on common ground while simultaneously
encouraging all his readers to examine seriously what it means
to eat ethically.
Rob Greenfield, An Argument against Veganism . . . from a
Vegan

Invitational Argument
These arguments are invitational in that even though their
writers are strongly committed to a particular stance or
position, both consider varying points of view fairly and openly
and show the deep complexity of the issues involved.
C. Richard King, Redskins: Insult and Brand
John McWhorter, Thick of Tongue

1535

1536

1537

目录
About this Book

2

Cover Page
Inside Front Cover
A Note about the Cover
Frontmatter
Title Page
Copyright Page
Preface
Brief Contents
Contents

2
3
4
6
9
10
12
31
33

Part 1 Reading and Understanding Arguments
Chapter 1 Understanding Arguments and Reading Them
Critically
Everything Is an Argument
Why Read Arguments Critically and Rhetorically?
Why Listen to Arguments Rhetorically and Respectfully?
Why We Make Arguments
Arguments to Convince and Inform
Arguments to Persuade
Arguments to Make Decisions
Arguments to Understand and Explore
Occasions for Argument
Arguments about the Past
Arguments about the Future
Arguments about the Present
Kinds of Argument
Did Something Happen? Arguments of Fact
What Is the Nature of the Thing? Arguments of
Definition
What Is the Quality or Cause of the Thing? Arguments of
Evaluation
What Actions Should Be Taken? Proposal Arguments
1538

56
57
61
63
66
68
69
71
74
75
79
79
81
82
87
88
88
89
91

Appealing to Audiences
Emotional Appeals: Pathos
Ethical Appeals: Ethos
Logical Appeals: Logos
Bringing It Home: Kairos and the Rhetorical Situation
Chapter 2 Arguments Based on Emotion: Pathos
Reading Critically for Pathos
Using Emotions to Build Bridges
Using Emotions to Sustain an Argument
Using Humor
Using Arguments Based on Emotion
Chapter 3 Arguments Based on Character: Ethos
Thinking Critically about Arguments Based on Character
Establishing Trustworthiness and Credibility
Claiming Authority
Coming Clean about Motives
Chapter 4 Arguments Based on Facts and Reason: Logos
Thinking Critically about Hard Evidence
Facts
Statistics
Surveys and Polls
Testimonies and Narratives
Using Reason and Common Sense
Providing Logical Structures for Argument
Degree
Analogies
Precedent
Chapter 5 Fallacies of Argument
Fallacies of Emotional Argument
Scare Tactics
Either/Or Choices
Slippery Slope
Overly Sentimental Appeals
Bandwagon Appeals
1539

94
96
97
98
99
104
107
111
116
119
124
127
131
132
136
141
147
150
155
157
162
165
168
175
175
177
177
180
182
182
183
184
185
186

Fallacies of Ethical Argument
Appeals to False Authority
Dogmatism
Ad Hominem Arguments
Stacking the Deck
Fallacies of Logical Argument
Hasty Generalization
Faulty Causality
Begging the Question
Equivocation
Non Sequitur
Straw Man
Red Herring
Faulty Analogy
Paralipsis
Chapter 6 Rhetorical Analysis
Composing a Rhetorical Analysis: Reading and Viewing
Critically
Understanding the Purpose of Arguments You Are
Analyzing
Understanding Who Makes an Argument
Identifying and Appealing to Audiences
Examining Arguments Based on Emotion: Pathos
Examining Arguments Based on Character: Ethos
Examining Arguments Based on Facts and Reason: Logos
Examining the Arrangement and Media of Arguments
Looking at Style
Examining a Rhetorical Analysis
Guide to writing a rhetorical analysis

Part 2 Writing Arguments

189
189
190
191
193
195
195
196
198
199
200
201
202
203
204
209
213
215
216
218
223
227
230
236
239
245
255

264

Chapter 7 Structuring Arguments
The Classical Oration
Rogerian and Invitational Arguments
Toulmin Argument
1540

265
267
272
279

Making Claims
Offering Evidence and Good Reasons
Determining Warrants
Offering Evidence: Backing
Using Qualifiers
Understanding Conditions of Rebuttal
Outline of a Toulmin Argument
A Toulmin Analysis
What Toulmin Teaches
Chapter 8 Arguments of Fact
Understanding Arguments of Fact
Characterizing Factual Arguments
Developing a Factual Argument
Identifying an Issue
Researching Your Hypothesis
Refining Your Claim
Deciding Which Evidence to Use
Presenting Your Evidence
Considering Design and Visuals
Guide to writing an argument of fact
Two Sample Factual Arguments
Chapter 9 Arguments of Definition
Understanding Arguments of Definition
Kinds of Definition
Formal Definitions
Operational Definitions
Definitions by Example
Negative Definitions
Developing a Definitional Argument
Formulating Claims
Crafting Definitions
Matching Claims to Definitions
Considering Design and Visuals
Guide to writing an argument of definition
1541

280
281
285
292
295
297
301
302
309
312
313
318
321
323
327
328
332
334
336
341
349
364
365
370
370
372
375
376
378
379
381
383
384
386

Two Sample Definitional Arguments
Chapter 10 Evaluations
Understanding Evaluations
Criteria of Evaluation
Characterizing Evaluation
Quantitative Evaluations
Qualitative Evaluations
Developing an Evaluative Argument
Formulating Criteria
Making Claims
Presenting Evidence
Considering Design and Visuals
Guide to writing an evaluation
Two Sample Evaluations
Chapter 11 Causal Arguments
Understanding Causal Arguments
Arguments That State a Cause and Then Examine Its
Effects
Arguments That State an Effect and Then Trace the
Effect Back to Its Causes
Arguments That Move through a Series of Links: A
Causes B, Which Leads to C and Perhaps to D
Characterizing Causal Arguments
They Are Often Part of Other Arguments
They Are Almost Always Complex
They Are Often Definition Based
They Usually Yield Probable Rather Than Absolute
Conclusions
Developing Causal Arguments
Exploring Possible Claims
Defining the Causal Relationships
Supporting Your Point
Considering Design and Visuals
Guide to writing a causal argument
Two Sample Causal Arguments
1542

395
407
408
410
416
417
418
422
423
425
429
431
432
441
453
455
458
459
462
466
466
467
468
469
471
471
474
477
482
483
492

Chapter 12 Proposals
Understanding and Categorizing Proposals
Characterizing Proposals
Developing Proposals
Defining a Need or Problem
Showing That the Proposal Addresses the Need or
Problem
Showing That the Proposal Is Feasible
Considering Design and Visuals
Guide to writing a proposal
Two Sample Proposals

Part 3 Style and Presentation in Arguments
Chapter 13 Style in Arguments
Style and Word Choice
Sentence Structure and Argument
Punctuation and Argument
Special Effects: Figurative Language
Tropes
Schemes
Chapter 14 Visual Rhetoric
The Power of Visual Arguments
Using Visuals in Your Own Arguments
Using Images and Visual Design to Create Pathos
Using Images to Establish Ethos
Using Visual Images to Support Logos
Chapter 15 Presenting Arguments
Class and Public Discussions
Preparing a Presentation
Assess the Rhetorical Situation
Nail Down the Specific Details
Fashion a Script Designed to Be Heard by an Audience
Choose Media to Fit Your Subject
Deliver a Good Show
A Note about Webcasts: Live Presentations over the Web
1543

502
503
506
512
512
518
521
522
525
534

551
552
558
564
568
574
576
590
595
597
602
602
608
614
622
624
628
629
634
635
648
651
653

Chapter 16 Multimodal Arguments
Old Media Transformed by New Media
New Content in New Media
New Audiences in New Media
Analyzing Multimodal Arguments
Making Multimodal Arguments
Web Sites
Videos and Video Essays
Wikis
Blogs
Social Media
Posters
Comics
A Final Note on Time

Part 4 Research and Arguments
Chapter 17 Academic Arguments
Understanding What Academic Argument Is
Conventions in Academic Argument Are Not Static
Developing an Academic Argument
Two Sample Academic Arguments
Chapter 18 Finding Evidence
Considering the Rhetorical Situation
Searching Effectively
Collecting Data on Your Own
Chapter 19 Evaluating Sources
Assessing Print Sources
Assessing Electronic Sources
Practicing Crap Detection
Assessing Field Research
Chapter 20 Using Sources
Practicing Infotention
Building a Critical Mass
Synthesizing Information
Paraphrasing Sources You Will Use Extensively
1544

656
658
662
665
671
676
676
679
681
683
684
686
688
692

693
694
696
705
706
724
752
753
758
766
778
782
786
787
792
795
796
798
800
802

Summarizing Sources
Using Quotations Selectively and Strategically
Framing Materials You Borrow with Signal Words and
Introductions
Using Sources to Clarify and Support Your Own
Argument
Avoiding “Patchwriting”
Chapter 21 Plagiarism and Academic Integrity
Giving Credit
Getting Permission for and Using Copyrighted Internet
Sources
Acknowledging Your Sources Accurately and
Appropriately
Acknowledging Collaboration
Chapter 22 Documenting Sources
MLA Style
In-Text Citations
Explanatory and Bibliographic Notes
List of Works Cited
Sample First Page for an Essay in MLA Style
Sample List of Works Cited for an Essay in MLA Style
APA Style
In-Text Citations
Content Notes
List of References
Sample Title Page for an Essay in APA Style
Sample First Text Page for an Essay in APA Style
Sample References List for an Essay in APA Style

Part 5 arguments

806
808
812
815
823
831
834
839
842
846
849
851
851
859
860
881
883
885
885
890
891
906
908
910

913

Chapter 23 How Does Popular Culture Stereotype You?
With Disney’s Moana, Hollywood Almost Gets It Right:
Indigenous People Weigh In
Shooting Guns: It’s Rather Fun, Actually
How a Bible-Belt Evangelical Church Embraced Gay
Rights
1545

914
918
934
941

Redskins: Insult and Brand
Playing with Prejudice: The Prevalence and Consequences
of Racial Stereotypes in Video Games
Breakfast Series
Covering the Transgender Community: How Newsrooms
Are Moving Beyond the “Coming Out“ Story to Report
Crucial Transgender Issues
Chapter 24 How Does What We Eat Define Who We Are?
The American Food Psyche
How Do Your Eating Habits Differ from Your
Grandparents’?
An Argument against Veganism . . . from a Vegan
I Still Don’t Understand the Cultural Appropriation of Food
The Question of Cultural Appropriation
Hunger on Campus: The Challenge of Food Insecurity for
College Students
Chapter 25 How Does Language Influence Our World?
They Should Stop: In Defense of the Singular They
Thick of Tongue
from The Power of Words
English and Languages Other Than English in the United
States
The Careless Language of Sexual Violence
How Latino Players Are Helping Major League Baseball
Learn Spanish
Chapter 26 Has the Internet Destroyed Privacy?
Getting Personal about Cybersecurity
Making a Visual Argument: The Issue of Privacy
70 Percent of Employers Are Snooping Candidates’ Social
Media Profiles
Creative Ways to Get Noticed by Employers on Social
Media
Congress Let Internet Providers “Spy On” Your Underwear
Purchases, Advocacy Group Says
from World without Mind: The Existential Threat of Big
Tech
1546

955
982
1005
1015
1040
1043
1057
1067
1079
1089
1117
1151
1154
1169
1191
1210
1217
1231
1243
1247
1254
1263
1267
1273
1287

How Privacy Became a Commodity for the Rich and
Powerful
Chapter 27 How Free Should Campus Speech Be?
Safe Spaces, Brave Spaces
Free Speech on Campus: What Students Think about First
Amendment Issues
Shutting Up
Racial Microaggressions Poster
Why a Moratorium on Microaggressions Is Needed
Activist Athletes
Balancing Classroom Civility and Free Speech

Glossary
Acknowledgments
Index
Readings by Type of Argument
Inside Back Cover
Back Cover

1547

1297
1308
1311
1329
1337
1349
1359
1380
1393

1416
1431
1439
1531
1536
1537

