00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 3

6/18/12 3:09 PM

Second edition

the Language of composition
Reading • Writing • Rhetoric
Renée H. Shea
Bowie State University, Maryland

Lawrence Scanlon
Brewster High School, New York

Robin dissin Aufses
Lycée Français de New York

Bedford/St. Martin’s
Boston • new York

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 1

6/18/12 3:09 PM

For Bedford/St. Martin’s
Senior Developmental Editor: Nathan Odell
Senior Production Editor: Bill Imbornoni
Senior Production Supervisor: Nancy J. Myers
Senior Marketing Manager: Daniel McDonough
Editorial Assistant: Emily Wunderlich
Copy Editor: Alice Vigliani
Indexer: Kirsten Kite
Photo Researcher: Julie Tesser
Permissions Manager: Kalina H. Ingham
Art Director: Lucy Krikorian
Text Design: Linda M. Robertson
Cover Design: Donna Lee Dennison
Cover Photo: Panoramic Images/Getty Images (US), Inc.
Composition: Jouve
Printing and Binding: R. R. Donnelley & Sons
President, Bedford/St. Martin’s: Denise B. Wydra
Presidents, Macmillan Higher Education: Joan E. Feinberg and Tom Scotty
Editor in Chief: Karen S. Henry
Director of Development: Erica T. Appel
Director of Marketing: Karen R. Soeltz
Production Director: Susan W. Brown
Associate Production Director: Elise S. Kaiser
Managing Editor: Shuli Traub

Library of Congress Control Number: 2012937280
Copyright © 2013, 2008 by Bedford/St. Martin’s
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording,
or otherwise, except as may be expressly permitted by the applicable copyright statutes or in
writing by the Publisher.
Manufactured in the United States of America.
1 2 3 4 5 6

15 14 13 12

For information, write: Bedford/St. Martin’s, 75 Arlington Street, Boston, MA 02116
(617-399-4000)
ISBN 978-0-312-67650-6

Acknowledgments
Acknowledgments and copyrights are included at the back of the book on pages 1153–1160,
which constitute an extension of the copyright page.
It is a violation of the law to reproduce these selections by any means whatsoever without the
written permission of the copyright holder.

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 2

6/18/12 3:09 PM

To Michael Shea, William and Mary Scanlon,
and Arthur Aufses

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 3

6/18/12 3:09 PM

About the Authors

Renée H. Shea was professor of English and Modern Languages at
Bowie State University and former Director of Composition. She is
coauthor of Literature & Composition: Reading • Writing • Thinking
and two titles in the NCTE High School Literature series on Amy
Tan and Zora Neale Hurston. She has been a reader and question
leader for both AP Language and Literature readings.
Lawrence Scanlon taught at Brewster High School for more than
thirty years. Over the past fifteen years he has been a reader and
question leader for the AP Language exam. As a College Board consultant in the United States and abroad, he has conducted AP
workshops in both Language and Literature, as well as serving on
the AP Language Development Committee. Larry is coauthor of
Literature & Composition: Reading • Writing • Thinking and has
published articles for the College Board and elsewhere on composition and curriculum.
Robin dissin Aufses is director of English Studies at Lycée Français de New York. She is coauthor of Literature & Composition:
Reading • Writing • Thinking. Robin also has published articles for
the College Board on the novelist Chang Rae Lee and the novel All
the King’s Men.

iv

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 4

6/18/12 3:09 PM

Preface

W

e designed The Language of Composition: Reading • Writing • Rhetoric
to be the first college-level textbook intended for upper-level high school
English courses, in particular the Advanced Placement* English Language and
Composition course. Its goal is to help high school students read, analyze, and write
with the same level of skill and sophistication of thought as they would in a firstyear composition course in college. The Language of Composition offers a diverse
collection of more than 150 college-level selections — including nonfiction, fiction, poetry, and visual texts — that are both interesting and suitable for a high
school audience; practical advice on rhetoric, argument, reading, and writing;
and special attention to synthesis and visual analysis skills in keeping with the
content of the AP English Language and Composition course and exam.
The Language of Composition is the product of years of experience and collaboration. The three of us met through workshops where we were learning how to
incorporate the theory and practice of rhetoric into high school curricula. The conversation that began in summer workshops extended to years of discussions about
what worked with eleventh- and twelfth-graders and how to prepare students to
succeed in or place out of first-year composition. The more we taught our students
and worked with teachers, the more we came to appreciate the interrelationship
among the three main components of this book: rhetoric, reading, and writing.
Sometimes we get lucky and life gives us second chances — as it has with The
Language of Composition. Because of the excitement of teachers and students who
have been using the book and the insights they have so generously shared, we learned
what was working well, what needed more work, and what work was yet to be done.

What’s New in the Opening Chapters?
A Chapter on Argument At conferences, at workshops, and in reviews, we heard
many teachers asking for more information on argument — how to help students
*AP and Advanced Placement Program are registered trademarks of the College Entrance Examination Board, which was not involved in the publication of and does not endorse this product.

v

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 5

6/18/12 3:09 PM

vi

Preface

analyze arguments as well as write their own. Chapter 3, “Analyzing Arguments:
From Reading to Writing,” introduces the essential elements of argument — such
as claims, evidence, fallacies, and arrangement — in an approachable and practical way. In this chapter, we take students through the process of constructing an
argument on a topic of their own choice — from exploring ideas to crafting an
arguable claim to developing evidence and structuring the overall essay.
Activity-Driven Opening Chapters The opening chapters now give students
many more opportunities to practice individual skills with brief, approachable
texts. We believe that students learn by doing; we also acknowledge that teachers
need more opportunities to scaffold and differentiate instruction in a challenging
course such as AP English Language. In addition, each of the opening chapters
concludes with a culminating activity on a series of brief texts and visual texts
that allows students to demonstrate what they’ve learned in their work with single
texts. This is yet another layer of scaffolding designed to help students of all levels
reach proficiency.
Chapter Glossaries The glossary of stylistic terms in Chapter 2 of the first edition was so popular with teachers and students as a handy reference, vocabulary
list, and chapter summary that we decided to include similar glossaries in other
opening chapters. Now Chapter 1 includes a brief Glossary of Rhetorical Terms,
and Chapter 3 includes a brief Glossary of Argument Terms and Fallacies.

What’s New in the Thematic Chapters?
Let’s start with what’s not new: the Central and Classic Essays that anchor the
book. While we wanted this new edition to be much more than a cosmetic update,
we recognized the importance of maintaining continuity in the core texts. So,
while a few essays have moved and some new ones are enjoying the spotlight,
every Central and Classic Essay from the first edition has been retained in this
edition.
New Authors, Fresh Perspectives This edition includes more than 80 new
pieces of nonfiction, and we think that is very exciting. Voices new to this edition
include classic writers such as Benjamin Franklin, Walt Whitman, and Andrew
Carnegie, along with a host of influential contemporary thinkers, commentators,
and humorists: Wendell Berry, Firoozeh Dumas, Jonathan Safran Foer, Thomas
Friedman, Malcolm Gladwell, Chuck Klosterman, Michael Lewis, Dinaw
Mengestu, Michael Pollan, Marjane Satrapi, Eric Schlosser, David Sedaris, Brent
Staples, David Foster Wallace, Sarah Vowell, and Fareed Zakaria.
Two New Chapters In this edition, we have shifted the focus of two chapters.
The chapter on Work has become a chapter on The Economy. Particularly timely,
this chapter focuses on personal and social issues surrounding the economy, as

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 6

6/18/12 3:09 PM

Preface

vii

opposed to technical or political matters. The chapter on Nature has evolved into
a chapter on The Environment. This shift in focus recognizes that the AP Language course is moving away from lyrical essays and nature writing and toward
issue-driven arguments.
New Conversation Topics To keep the book up-to-date and to give you fresh
material for class, we have changed many of the topics of conversation in this
edition. Paying College Athletes, for instance, and Sustainable Eating are topics at
the forefront of our national conversation; they are issues that students can
become quickly well-versed in without specialized or technical knowledge. In
the Language chapter, the Conversation on American Politics and the English
Language is a natural extension of Orwell’s essay, and a topic that goes to the
heart of the AP Language course’s civic purpose. In the Popular Culture chapter, the Conversation on Exporting American Pop Culture shows that pop culture
is about more than frothy celebrity gossip; it is a serious cultural and political
force.
New Making Connections Questions In this edition, we’ve added Making
Connections questions to the Conversations to help students compare and contrast the various arguments in the Conversations, a key intermediary step in
moving from analysis toward synthesis.
More Visual Texts So much of the information our students access is visual,
and with that comes an increasing need for visual literacy. This edition includes
even more visual texts than the last — at least three per chapter, and many more
in the opening chapters. From advertisements, to political cartoons, to fine art, to
magazine covers, the visual texts in this edition pack a powerful rhetorical punch.
New Color Insert It is hard to truly analyze a visual text if you cannot talk
about color. This is why, in the new edition, we have included a 24-page color
insert that reproduces every piece of color art in the book.

What Features Haven’t Changed?
Opening Chapters on Key AP Language Skills In the four opening chapters of
The Language of Composition, we introduce students to the principles and language of rhetoric and argument that they will use throughout the book.
• Chapter 1, “An Introduction to Rhetoric: Using the ‘Available Means,’” provides instruction in key rhetorical concepts, including the rhetorical situation, appeals, visual rhetoric, and more.
• Chapter 2, “Close Reading: The Art and Craft of Analysis,” guides students
through the close analysis of diction and syntax with an emphasis on their
rhetorical effects.

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 7

6/18/12 3:09 PM

viii

Preface

• Chapter 3, “Analyzing Arguments: From Reading to Writing,” helps students master the essential elements of argument and put them to use in
their own writing.
• Chapter 4, “Synthesizing Sources: Entering the Conversation,” introduces
students to the use of sources to develop and enhance their own viewpoints.
Thematic Chapters with Essential Questions The thematic organization,
focused by essential questions, encourages students to explore the complexities of
a single issue and synthesize the different viewpoints represented. We chose the
nine chapter themes — Education, Community, The Economy, Gender, Sports,
Language, Popular Culture, The Environment, and Politics — because they are
ones that students will find interesting and relevant and that teachers can easily
supplement with literary works or with materials from current events.
Diverse and Engaging Readings We selected readings for The Language of
Composition that exemplify excellent writing. Whether a text is narrative, expository, or argumentative, we believe that students benefit from reading and analyzing exceptional rhetoric from contemporary and classic authors. We also selected
readings that are important and relevant to students because we believe that
interesting, provocative topics promote active, critical reading.
Each thematic chapter is anchored by a Central Essay and a Classic Essay:
• The Central Essays are rich rhetorical and stylistic models, ideally suited to
the AP English Language course, such as Martin Luther King Jr.’s “Letter
from Birmingham Jail,” Stephen Jay Gould’s “Women’s Brains,” and Jamaica
Kincaid’s “On Seeing England for the First Time.”
• The Classic Essays are canonical works written between the eighteenth century and the early twentieth century, giving students experience analyzing
writing styles from different periods. Among the classic essays are Ralph
Waldo Emerson’s “Education,” Virginia Woolf ’s “Professions for Women,”
Mark Twain’s “Corn-Pone Opinions,” and Jonathan Swift’s “A Modest
Proposal.”
Knowing how important visuals have become as rhetorical texts in college
study and in our society as a whole, we feature visual texts in every chapter.
Among these are political cartoons, photographs, advertisements, tables or
graphs, and paintings. We approach these visual texts, as we do the written ones,
rhetorically, encouraging students to read them closely and ask questions about
the ways artists and designers achieve their purposes.
In-Depth Questions and Writing Prompts In The Language of Composition,
we have worked to enable students to read with a writer’s eye — that is, to see how
they can use the techniques of professional and published writers in their own
writing. Thus, we intend the questions that accompany the selections to link reading with writing. Always promoting active reading, the questions guide students

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 8

6/18/12 3:09 PM

Preface

ix

from understanding what a text is about to how the content is presented as it is
and why — the rhetorical strategies. Most readings in the book are followed by
Exploring the Text questions, which are a mixture of questions that prompt for
discussion and those that ask for a close analysis of rhetoric and style.
For the Central and Classic Essays, the questions are more extensive and
grouped into more discrete categories:
• Questions for discussion probe content and connections and support
students’ careful reading to help them to comprehend ideas, understand
cultural and historical context, and make connections to compelling contemporary issues or influences.
• Questions on Rhetoric and Style address the how and why of a text by
examining the choices the writer makes and the effect those choices have.
On the micro level, these questions address such features as diction and
syntax; on the macro level, they consider a text’s patterns of organization.
While Questions for Discussion are generally open-ended, Questions on
Rhetoric and Style are close reading inquiries requiring precise answers
similar to analytical essay or multiple-choice responses.
• Suggestions for Writing guide students toward written responses that
extend the conversation from the reading and suggest ways that students
might practice some of the strategies that the writer uses.
Conversations Because students’ ability to synthesize multiple sources is a primary concern of college composition courses — as well as a skill that must be
demonstrated on the AP Language exam — the Conversation section in each
chapter provides source material and guiding questions to help students use the
words and ideas of others to support their own arguments. After synthesizing the
written and visual texts provided, students are ready to develop their own voices
and positions.
Student Writing The Student Writing sections use high-quality papers by high
school students and college freshmen to model the types of writing essential to
success in the AP English Language course and in college. They range from timed
writings to longer out-of-class assignments, from rhetorical analyses to essays
that incorporate sources in support of an argument. These essays demonstrate
the students’ skill and creativity, yet they are all in-process, and the accompanying
questions encourage revision and expansion, not mere editing or proofreading.
We have found that such student work is more accessible than the work of professionals and often provokes suggestions and comments that students would be
reluctant to make about a published author’s work or even a peer’s work if he or
she is sitting at the next desk.
Grammar as Rhetoric and Style These sections use examples from the chapter’s readings to reinforce students’ understanding of grammar and show how to

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 9

6/18/12 3:09 PM

x

Preface

use grammar and syntax to achieve a rhetorical purpose or stylistic effect. In each
chapter, we focus on one issue — such as coordination, parallel structures, or use
of pronouns — and explore how what might seem a mechanical point can, in fact,
be approached rhetorically. Thus, students can see, for instance, how and to what
effect Martin Luther King Jr. uses parallel structure or how Gay Talese uses precise, active verbs.

E-Books
The Language of Composition is available in several different electronic formats to
meet your students’ needs:
The Language of Composition Bedford e-Book (ISBN 978-1-4576-1833-8)
Access The Language of Composition from any computer via a Web browser. With
a robust search engine, navigation tools, easy ways to take and share notes, and
interactive exercises, Bedford e-Books support focused reading and studying.
And with fast ways to rearrange chapters, add new custom pages, and embed
video and audio, Bedford e-Books let teachers build just the right book for their
course.
The Language of Composition Bedford e-Book to Go (ISBN 978-1-4576-3259-4)
These downloadable, PDF-style e-books match our print books page for page,
and they’re ready for your tablet, computer, phone, or e-reader device. Students
can take these e-books with them wherever they go.
The Language of Composition Partner e-Books Students can also find PDF versions of The Language of Composition when they shop online at our publishing
partners’ sites: CourseSmart, Barnes & Noble NOOK Study, Follett CafeScribe,
Chegg, and Kno.

Ancillaries
Teacher’s Manual for The Language of Composition (ISBN 978-1-4576-1834-5)
This robust teacher’s manual offers suggested responses to all the questions in the
book and practical approaches to teaching the full-length essays. A new Introduction to Teaching AP English Language section covers major teaching issues —
from designing a curriculum to teaching writing effectively. An expanded test
preparation section includes multiple-choice questions, essay prompts, and synthesis clusters to prepare students for the AP Language exam.
The Language of Composition book companion site (bedfordstmartins.com
/languageofcomp) This free resource includes the Language of Composition
Media Library with links to audio, video, and texts related to the readings in The

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 10

6/18/12 3:09 PM

Preface

xi

Language of Composition; online reading comprehension quizzes; and access to
Re:Writing, a free collection of Bedford/St. Martin’s most popular online materials for writing, grammar, and research, including Exercise Central, the world’s
largest collection of online interactive grammar exercises.
i•claim visualizing argument i•claim offers a new way to see argument. With
tutorials, interactive assignments, and more than 70 multimedia arguments (including Lou Gehrig’s farewell speech), i•claim brings argument to life.
i•cite visualizing sources i•cite presents a new way to see sources. With its animated introduction to using sources, concrete tutorials, and practice exercises,
i•cite helps students understand the hows and whys of working with sources.
To bundle i•claim and i•cite with The Language of Composition for only $5, use:
ISBN 978-1-4576-4135-0.

Acknowledgments
We want to extend our heartfelt appreciation to the team at Bedford/St. Martin’s.
We’ve enjoyed the support, guidance, and encouragement of many talented professionals, starting with the leadership of former president Joan Feinberg, current
president Denise Wydra, editor in chief Karen Henry, and director of development Erica Appel, who have been committed to this project from the start. We
say a special thanks to Nancy Perry, editorial director of custom publishing,
for encouraging us to explore the idea that became The Language of Composition. It is no exaggeration to call her role in this project visionary; The Language
of Composition would truly not exist without her initial ideas and continuing belief in it. To our gifted editor Nathan Odell, we would like to present an
academy award for his exceptional judgment, appreciation for language, energy,
enthusiasm — and patience. Assigned to this project as our editor, he became our
dear friend. We thank Dan McDonough, editor and marketing manager, for his
creativity and faith. He brought us together at Bedford/St. Martin’s and from the
very start understood what we had in mind for this project. We hope the finished product lives up to his ideal. Many thanks to marketing manager Lisa
Kozempel for her support, expertise, wise counsel, and enthusiasm. Also, our
thanks to Emily Wunderlich, editorial assistant, a cheerful researcher and invaluable resource.
We also want to thank our many dedicated and innovative colleagues in the
Advanced Placement Program at the College Board, Educational Testing Service,
and classrooms across the country for sharing their knowledge of their subject
matter and their passion for preparing students for success in college. We want to
single out Janet Heller, formerly director of the AP Program in the Middle States
Office of the College Board, for giving us incredible opportunities to teach and
learn. A remarkable teacher in her own right, Janet encouraged us by example

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 11

6/18/12 3:09 PM

xii

Preface

and common classroom sense to seek better ways to motivate and move all students to do their best work, work that would make them as well as us proud.
We would like to thank our reviewers, whose expertise guided us at every
turn: Jennifer Barbknecht, Allison Beers, Julie Bollich, Rebecca Cartee-Haring,
Allison Casper, Chad Cooley, James Dam, Dottie DePaolo, Beth Dibler, Denise
Hayden, Angie Hedges, Jasara Lee Hing Hines, Robert Hornbuckle, Paula Jay,
Hope Keese, Mary Kirkpatrick, Sylvia Kranish, Shaylene Krupinski, Tonita Lang,
Dianne Malueg, Jenny Massey, Daniel McKenna, Linda Mirro, Lisa Moore, Sherry
Neaves, Jennifer O’Hare, Beth Priem, Emily Richardson, Susan Sanchez, Shital
Shah, Paul Stevenson, Rebecca Swanigan, Gwendolyn Todd, Jennifer Troy, Jason
Webb, Peggy Winter, Eric Woodard, and Victoria Zavadsky.
We also want to thank our colleagues who model the high school–college
partnerships that are fundamental to The Language of Composition: Kathleen L.
Bell, John Brassil, Sandra Coker, Shirley Counsil, Robert DiYanni, Marilyn Elkins,
George Gadda, Mary-Grace Gannon, Stephen Heller, David Jolliffe, Bernie Phelan,
Mary-Jo Potts, Hephzibah Roskelly, Sylvia Sarrett, Ed Schmieder, and Norma
Wilkerson. Their suggestions, advice, and insights have made The Language of
Composition a better book.
We thank our families for their unflagging support and encouragement
through every stage of this project. A longer list of co-authors should include our
children Meredith Barnes, Christopher Shea, Kate Aufses, Michael Aufses, Alison
Scanlon, Lindsay Prezzano, Maura Liguori, and Kaitlin Scanlon.
Finally, we are grateful to our students — the ones in our classrooms and the
colleagues in our workshops — for teaching us well.
Renée H. Shea
Lawrence Scanlon
Robin Dissin Aufses

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 12

6/18/12 3:09 PM

Contents

Color Insert (following p. 604)
Preface v

1 An Introduction to Rhetoric:
Using the “Available Means” 1
activity Understanding Civil Discourse 2
The Rhetorical Situation 2
Lou Gehrig, Farewell Speech 2
Occasion, Context, and Purpose 3
The Rhetorical Triangle 3
activity Analyzing a Rhetorical Situation 4
SOAPS 5
Albert Einstein, Dear Phyllis, January 24, 1936 5
activity George W. Bush, 9/11 Speech 6
Appeals to Ethos, Logos, and Pathos 7
Ethos 7
Automatic Ethos 8
King George VI, The King’s Speech (September 3, 1939) 8
Building Ethos 9
Judith Ortiz Cofer, from The Myth of the Latin Woman: I Just
Met a Girl Named Maria 10
activity Establishing Ethos 10
Logos 11
Conceding and Refuting 11

xiii

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 13

6/20/12 10:10 AM

xiv

contents

Alice Waters, from Slow Food Nation 11
activity George Will, from King Coal: Reigning in China 12
Pathos 13
Richard Nixon, from The Checkers Speech 13
Images and Pathos 14
ACLU, The Man on the Left (advertisement) 15
Humor and Pathos 15
Ruth Marcus, from Crackberry Congress 16
activity Dwight D. Eisenhower, Order of the Day 17
Combining Ethos, Logos, and Pathos 18
Toni Morrison, Dear Senator Obama 18
activity Appealing to Ethos, Logos, and Pathos 20
Rhetorical Analysis of Visual Texts 21
Tom Toles, Rosa Parks (cartoon) 21
activity World Wildlife Fund, Protecting the Future of
Nature (advertisement) 22
Determining Effective and Ineffective Rhetoric 23
Jane Austen, from Pride and Prejudice 24
PETA, Feeding Kids Meat Is Child Abuse (advertisement) 25
Anne Applebaum, If the Japanese Can’t Build a Safe Reactor,
Who Can? 26
activity Tamar Demby, Alarmist or Alarming Rhetoric?
(student essay) 27
activity Federal Highway Administration, Stop for
Pedestrians (advertisement) 29
culminating activity 30
The Times, Man Takes First Steps on the Moon 30
William Safire, In Event of Moon Disaster 33
Ayn Rand, The July 16, 1969, Launch: A Symbol of Man’s Greatness 33
Herblock, Transported (cartoon) 35
Glossary of Rhetorical Terms 36

2 cLoSe ReAding: the Art and craft of Analysis 39
Analyzing Style 40
A Model Analysis 40

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 14

6/18/12 3:09 PM

xv

contents

Queen Elizabeth, Speech to the Troops at Tilbury 40
activity Looking at Rhetoric and Style 41
activity Winston Churchill, Blood, Toil, Tears, and
Sweat 43
Talking with the Text 44
Asking Questions 44
Ralph Ellison, from On Bird, Bird-Watching and Jazz 45
activity Ralph Ellison, from On Bird, Bird-Watching and
Jazz 47
Annotating 48
Joan Didion, The Santa Ana Winds 49
Using a Graphic Organizer 51
From Close Reading to Analysis 54
activity Virginia Woolf, The Death of the Moth 56
Writing a Close Analysis Essay 58
Groucho Marx, Dear Warner Brothers 59
Developing a Thesis Statement 61
A Sample Close Analysis Essay 62
activity Christopher Morley, On Laziness 63
Close Reading a Visual Text 65
Dodge, It’s a Big Fat Juicy Cheeseburger in a Land of Tofu
(advertisement) 66
activity Girl Scouts, What Did You Do Today?
(advertisement) 68
culminating activity 69
John F. Kennedy, Inaugural Address, January 20, 1961 69
Eleanor Clift, Inside Kennedy’s Inauguration, 50 Years On 74
United States Army Signal Corps, Inauguration of John F. Kennedy
(photo) 77
Glossary of Style Elements 78

3 AnALYzing ARguMentS: From Reading to Writing 81
What Is Argument? 81
Tom Toles, Crazed Rhetoric (cartoon) 82
Amy Domini, Why Investing in Fast Food May Be a Good Thing

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 15

83

6/18/12 3:09 PM

xvi

contents

activity Finding Common Ground 85
Essay in Progress: Selecting a Topic 85
Staking a Claim 85
activity Identifying Arguable Statements 86
Types of Claims 87
Claims of Fact 87
Claims of Value 88
Roger Ebert, Star Wars 88
activity Analyzing a Review 90
Claims of Policy 91
Anna Quindlen, from The C Word in the Hallways 91
activity New York Times Editorial Board, Felons and the
Right to Vote 92
Essay in Progress: Staking a Claim 94
From Claim to Thesis 94
Closed Thesis Statements 95
Open Thesis Statements 95
Counterargument Thesis Statements 96
activity Developing Thesis Statements 96
Essay in Progress: Developing a Thesis 97
Presenting Evidence 97
Relevant, Accurate, and Sufficient Evidence 98
Logical Fallacies 98
Fallacies of Relevance 99
Fallacies of Accuracy 100
Fallacies of Insufficiency 100
First-Hand Evidence 101
Personal Experience 101
Jennifer Oladipo, Why Can’t Environmentalism Be
Colorblind? 101
Anecdotes 103
Fabiola Santiago, In College, These American Citizens Are Not
Created Equal 103
Current Events 104
Second-Hand Evidence 105

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 16

6/18/12 3:09 PM

contents

xvii

Historical Information 105
Expert Opinion 107
Quantitative Evidence 108
activity Identifying Logical Fallacies 109
activity Dana Thomas, Terror’s Purse Strings 109
Essay in Progress: Using Evidence 111
Shaping Argument 111
The Classical Oration 111
Sandra Day O’Connor and Roy Romer, Not by Math Alone 112
Induction and Deduction 115
Induction 115
Malcolm Gladwell, from Outliers 116
Deduction 118
Essay in Progress: Shaping an Argument 119
Combining Induction and Deduction 120
Thomas Jefferson, The Declaration of Independence 120
activity Elizabeth Cady Stanton, The Declaration of
Sentiments 123
Using the Toulmin Model 125
Analyzing Assumptions 127
activity Identifying Assumptions 128
From Reading to Writing 129
activity Using Argument Templates 130
Analyzing Visual Texts as Arguments 131
Polyp, Rat Race (cartoon) 133
Alfred Stieglitz, The Steerage (photo) 136
activity U.S. Postal Service, The Heroes of 2001
(stamp) 137
Essay in Progress: Using Visual Evidence 137
culminating activity 137
Tom Toles, Heavy Medal (cartoon) 138
Michael Binyon, Comment: Absurd Decision on Obama Makes a
Mockery of the Nobel Peace Prize 138
Essay in Progress: First Draft 140
Glossary of Argument Terms and Fallacies 140

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 17

6/18/12 3:09 PM

xviii

contents

4 SYntHeSizing SouRceS: entering the conversation 145
activity Reflecting on Sources 146
Using Sources to Inform an Argument 146
Laura Hillenbrand, from Seabiscuit 146
activity Gerald L. Early, from A Level Playing Field 147
Using Sources to Appeal to an Audience 148
Steven Pinker, from Words Don’t Mean What They Mean 149
Steven Pinker, from The Stuff of Thought 149
Steven Pinker, from The Evolutionary Social Psychology of Off-Record
Indirect Speech Acts 150
activity Examining a Columnist 152
conveRSAtion

Mandatory Community Service

153

1. Neil Howe and William Strauss, from Millennials
Rising 153
2. The Dalton School, Community Service Mission
Statement 154
3. Detroit News, Volunteering Opens Teen’s Eyes to Nursing 156
4. Dennis Chaptman, Study: “Resume Padding” Prevalent in
College-Bound Students Who Volunteer 157
5. Arthur Stukas, Mark Snyder, and E. Gil Clary, from The
Effects of “Mandatory Volunteerism”on Intentions to Volunteer 158
6. Mark Hugo Lopez, from Youth Attitudes toward Civic Education
and Community Service Requirements 158
Writing a Synthesis Essay 160
Identifying the Issues: Recognizing Complexity 160
Formulating Your Position 161
activity Supporting a Thesis 162
Framing Quotations 162
Integrating Quotations 163
activity Using Sources Effectively 163
Citing Sources 164
A Sample Synthesis Essay 164
cuLMinAting conveRSAtion

The Dumbest Generation? 166

1. Mark Bauerlein, The Dumbest Generation 167
2. Sharon Begley, The Dumbest Generation? Don’t Be Dumb 168

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 18

6/18/12 3:09 PM

contents

xix

3. Mizuko Ito et al., Living and Learning with New Media:
Summary of Findings from the Digital Youth Project 169
4. Nicholas Carr, Is Google Making Us Stupid? 170
5. R. Smith Simpson, Are We Getting Our Share of the Best? 171
6. Steven Johnson, Your Brain on Video Games 172
7. Clive Thompson, The New Literacy 173
8. Roz Chast, Shelved (cartoon) 174

5 educAtion 175
To what extent do our schools serve the goals of a true education?
Central Essay

Francine Prose, I Know Why the Caged Bird Cannot Read

176

I find myself, each September, increasingly appalled by the dismal lists of texts that
my sons are doomed to waste a school year reading. What I get as compensation is a
measure of insight into why our society has come to admire Montel Williams and
Ricki Lake so much more than Dante and Homer.

Classic Essay

Ralph Waldo Emerson, from Education

189

I believe that our own experience instructs us that the secret of Education lies in
respecting the pupil. It is not for you to choose what he shall know, what he shall do.
It is chosen and foreordained, and he only holds the key to his own secret.

Other Voices

James Baldwin, A Talk to Teachers

197

The paradox of education is precisely this—that as one begins to become conscious
one begins to examine the society in which he is being educated. The purpose of
education, finally, is to create in a person the ability to look at the world for himself,
to make his own decisions. . . . But no society is really anxious to have that kind of
person around.

Kyoko Mori, School

204

In America, we are proof that the romantic notion of the natural writer is a myth. In
Japan, where no formal training is offered in writing, the myth may be a sad reality
that prevents many people from becoming writers.

Sherman Alexie, Superman and Me

215

I learned to read with a Superman comic book. Simple enough, I suppose. I cannot
recall which particular Superman comic book I read, nor can I remember which
villain he fought in that issue. I cannot remember the plot, nor the means by which I
obtained the comic book. What I can remember is this: I was 3 years old, a Spokane
Indian boy living with his family on the Spokane Indian Reservation in eastern
Washington state.

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 19

6/18/12 3:09 PM

xx

contents

David Sedaris, Me Talk Pretty One Day

218

How often is one asked what he loves in this world? More to the point, how often is
one asked and then publicly ridiculed for his answer?

Margaret Talbot, Best in Class

223

In some ways, it seems that the valedictorian is a status designed for a simpler time,
when few people aspired to college. It isn’t entirely suited to a brutally competitive
age in which the dividing line between those who go to college and those who don’t
may be the most significant fissure in American society. . . .

David Foster Wallace, This Is Water: Some Thoughts, Delivered on a
Significant Occasion, about Living a Compassionate Life 232
“Learning how to think” really means learning how to exercise some control over how
and what you think. It means being conscious and aware enough to choose what you
pay attention to and to choose how you construct meaning from experience.

Fiction

Sandra Cisneros, Eleven

239

Visual Text

Norman Rockwell, The Spirit of Education (painting) 242
Visual Text

Roz Chast, What I Learned: A Sentimental Education from Nursery
School through Twelfth Grade (cartoon) 243
conveRSAtion

The American High School

248

1. Horace Mann, from Report of the Massachusetts Board of
Education 248
2. Todd Gitlin, The Liberal Arts in an Age of Info-Glut 251
3. Leon Botstein, Let Teenagers Try Adulthood 254
4. Edward Koren, Two Scoreboards (cartoon) 256
5. Diane Ravitch, Stop the Madness 257
6. Eric A. Hanushek et al., from U.S. Math Performance in Global
Perspective (tables) 260
7. David Barboza, from Shanghai Schools’ Approach Pushes Students
to Top of Tests 263
Student WRiting
Evidence 267

Argument: Using Personal Experiences as

gRAMMAR AS RHetoRic And StYLe Appositives
SuggeStionS FoR WRiting

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 20

Education

269

276

6/18/12 3:09 PM

contents

xxi

6 coMMunitY 279
What is the relationship of the individual to the community?
Central Essay

Martin Luther King Jr., Letter from Birmingham Jail

280

Abused and scorned though we may be, our destiny is tied up with America’s destiny.
Before the pilgrims landed at Plymouth, we were here. Before the pen of Jefferson
etched the majestic words of the Declaration of Independence across the pages of
history, we were here.

Classic Essay

Henry David Thoreau, Where I Lived, and What I Lived For

296

I went to the woods because I wished to live deliberately, to front only the essential
facts of life, and see if I could not learn what it had to teach, and not, when I came to
die, discover that I had not lived.

Other Voices

Richard Rodriguez, Aria: A Memoir of a Bilingual Childhood

303

Memory teaches me what I know of these matters; the boy reminds the adult. I was a
bilingual child, a certain kind — socially disadvantaged — the son of working-class
parents, both Mexican immigrants.

Ellen Goodman, The Family That Stretches (Together)

314

So, our families often extend along lines that are determined by decrees, rather than
genes. If the nucleus is broken, there are still links forged in different directions.

Lori Arviso Alvord, Walking the Path between Worlds

316

The outside, non-Indian world is tribeless, full of wandering singular souls, seeking
connection through societies, clubs, and other groups. White people know what it is to
be a family, but to be a tribe is something of an altogether different sort.

Robert D. Putnam, Health and Happiness

323

Countless studies document the link between society and psyche: people who have
close friends and confidants, friendly neighbors, and supportive co-workers are less
likely to experience sadness, loneliness, low self-esteem, and problems with eating and
sleeping . . . for in study after study people themselves report that good relationships
with family members, friends, or romantic partners — far more than money or
fame — are prerequisites for their happiness.

Dinaw Mengestu, Home at Last

337

I’ve known only a few people, however, that have grown up with the oddly
permanent feeling of having lost and abandoned a home that you never, in fact,
really knew, a feeling that has nothing to do with apartments, houses, or miles, but
rather the sense that no matter how far you travel, or how long you stay still, there is
no place that you can always return to, no place where you fully belong.

Scott Brown, Facebook Friendonomics 342
We scrawl “Friends Forever” in yearbooks, but we quietly realize, with relief, that
some bonds are meant to be shed, like snakeskin or a Showtime subscription. It’s

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 21

6/18/12 3:09 PM

xxii

contents

nature’s way of allowing you to change, adapt, evolve, or devolve as you wish —
and freeing you from the exhaustion of multifront friend maintenance.

Malcolm Gladwell, Small Change: Why the Revolution Will Not Be
Tweeted 344
There is strength in weak ties. . . . Our acquaintances — not our friends — are our
greatest source of new ideas and information. The Internet lets us exploit the power
of these kinds of distant connections with marvelous efficiency. . . . But weak ties
seldom lead to high-risk activism.

Poetry

Aurora Levins Morales, Child of the Americas

354

Paired Visual Texts

Norman Rockwell, Freedom from Want (painting)
Roz Chast, The Last Thanksgiving (cartoon) 358

356

Visual Text

Nissan Motor Company, The Black Experience Is Everywhere
(advertisement) 359
conveRSAtion The Individual’s Responsibility to the
Community 361

1. Andrew Carnegie, from The Gospel of Wealth 361
2. Bertrand Russell, The Happy Life

363

3. Garrett Hardin, from Lifeboat Ethics

365

4. Peter Singer, from The Singer Solution to World
Poverty 369
5. Zapiro (Jonathan Shapiro), World Economic Forum
(cartoon) 374
6. Christian Science Monitor Editorial Board, Warren Buffett,
Bill Gates, and the Billionaire Challenge 375
7. Der Spiegel Online, Negative Reaction to Charity
Campaign 377
Student WRiting
Revision 380

Synthesis: Incorporating Sources into a

gRAMMAR AS RHetoRic And StYLe
SuggeStionS FoR WRiting

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 22

Parallel Structures

Community

384

391

6/18/12 3:09 PM

contents

xxiii

7 tHe econoMY 393
What is the role of the economy in our everyday lives?
Central Essay

Barbara Ehrenreich, from Serving in Florida

394

Chatting with customers is for the good-looking young college-educated servers in the
downtown carpaccio and ceviche joints, the kids who can make $70–$100 a night.
What had I been thinking? My job is to move orders from tables to kitchen and then
trays from kitchen to tables. Customers are in fact the major obstacle to the smooth
transformation of information into food and food into money — they are, in short,
the enemy.

Classic Essay

Jonathan Swift, A Modest Proposal

404

I have been assured by a very knowing American of my acquaintance in London, that
a young healthy child well nursed is at a year old a most delicious, nourishing, and
wholesome food, whether stewed, roasted, baked, or broiled; and I make no doubt
that it will equally serve in a fricassee or a ragout.

Other Voices

John Ruskin, from The Roots of Honor

413

And as the captain of a ship is bound to be the last man to leave his ship in case of
wreck . . . so the manufacturer, in any commercial crisis or distress, is bound to take
the suffering of it with his men, and even to take more of it for himself than he allows
his men to feel; as a father would in a famine, shipwreck, or battle, sacrifice himself
for his son.

Booker T. Washington, The Atlanta Exposition Address

417

To those of my race who depend on bettering their condition in a foreign land or who
underestimate the importance of cultivating friendly relations with the Southern
white man, who is their next-door neighbour, I would say: “Cast down your bucket
where you are” — cast it down in making friends in every manly way of the people of
all races by whom we are surrounded.

Lars Eighner, On Dumpster Diving

421

I live from the refuse of others. I am a scavenger. I think it a sound and honorable
niche, although if I could I would naturally prefer to live the comfortable consumer
life, perhaps — and only perhaps — as a slightly less wasteful consumer owing to
what I have learned as a scavenger.

Eric Schlosser, from In the Strawberry Fields

431

We have been told for years to bow down before “the market.” We have placed our
faith in the laws of supply and demand. What has been forgotten, or ignored, is that
the market rewards only efficiency. Every other human value gets in its way.

Stephen J. Dubner and Steven D. Levitt, What the Bagel Man Saw 443
His economist friends thought he had lost his mind. They made oblique remarks
(and some not so oblique) about “a terrible waste of talent.” . . . Driving around the

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 23

6/18/12 3:09 PM

xxiv

contents

office parks that encircle Washington, he solicited customers with a simple pitch: early
in the morning, he would deliver some bagels and a cash basket to a company’s snack
room; he would return before lunch to pick up the money and the leftovers. It was an
honor-system commerce scheme, and it worked.

Matthew B. Crawford, The Case for Working with Your Hands

449

Some people are hustled off to college, then to the cubicle, against their own
inclinations and natural bents, when they would rather be learning to build things or
fix things. . . . It is a rare person, male or female, who is naturally inclined to sit still
for 17 years in school, and then indefinitely at work.

Fareed Zakaria, How to Restore the American Dream

460

The modern American Dream, for me, was this general prosperity and well-being for
the average person. European civilization had produced the great cathedrals of the
world. America had the two-car garage.

Poetry

Marge Piercy, To Be of Use

469

Visual Text

Jeff Parker, The Great GAPsby Society (cartoon)

471

Visual Text

Tom Tomorrow, This Modern World: A “Handy” Guide to the Housing
Market (cartoon) 472
conveRSAtion

Materialism in American Culture

474

1. Henry David Thoreau, from Economy 474
2. John Kenneth Galbraith, from The Dependence Effect 478
3. Phyllis Rose, Shopping and Other Spiritual Adventures in America
Today 482
4. Wendell Berry, Waste 484
5. Juliet Schor, The New Consumerism 487
6. Joan Smith, Shop-happy 490
7. Virginia Postrel, In Praise of Chain Stores 495
8. Scott DeCarlo, Forbes Price Index of Luxury Goods Keeps Pace
with Inflation (table) 498
Student WRiting
Passage 501

Rhetorical Analysis: Analyzing a Prose

gRAMMAR AS RHetoRic And StYLe Short Simple Sentences
and Fragments 506
SuggeStionS FoR WRiting

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 24

The Economy

512

6/18/12 3:09 PM

contents

xxv

8 gendeR 517
What is the impact of the gender roles that society creates and enforces?
Central Essay

Stephen Jay Gould, Women’s Brains

518

In 1872, the leaders of European anthropometry were trying to measure “with
scientific certitude” the inferiority of women. . . . But science is an inferential exercise,
not a catalog of facts. Numbers, by themselves, specify nothing. All depends upon
what you do with them.

Classic Essay

Virginia Woolf, Professions for Women

525

I discovered that if I were going to review books I should need to do battle with a
certain phantom. And the phantom was a woman, and when I came to know her
better I called her after the heroine of a famous poem, The Angel in the House. It was
she who used to come between me and my paper when I was writing reviews.

Other Voices

Ben Franklin, The Speech of Miss Polly Baker

532

I have brought Five fine Children into the World, at the Risque of my Life. . . . Can it
be a Crime (in the Nature of Things I mean) to add to the Number of the King’s
Subjects, in a new Country that really wants People? I own it, I should think it a
Praise-worthy, rather than a punishable Action.

John and Abigail Adams, Letters

535

I long to hear that you have declared an independency — and by the way in the new
Code of Laws which I suppose it will be necessary for you to make I desire you would
Remember the Ladies, and be more generous and favourable to them than your
ancestors.

Judy Brady, I Want a Wife

539

Not too long ago a male friend of mine appeared on the scene fresh from a recent
divorce. . . . He is looking for another wife. As I thought about him while I was
ironing one evening, it suddenly occurred to me that I, too, would like to have a
wife.

Brent Staples, Just Walk on By: A Black Man Ponders His Power to Alter
Public Space 541
At dark, shadowy intersections, I could cross in front of a car stopped at a traffic light
and elicit the thunk, thunk, thunk, thunk of the driver — black, white, male, or
female — hammering down the door locks.

Judith Ortiz Cofer, The Myth of the Latin Woman: I Just Met a Girl
Named Maria 546
With both hands over his heart he broke into an Irish tenor’s rendition of “María”
from West Side Story. . . . María had followed me to London, reminding me of a
prime fact of my life; you can leave the Island, master the English language, and
travel as far as you can, but if you are a Latina, especially one like me who so
obviously belongs to Rita Moreno’s gene pool, the Island travels with you.

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 25

6/18/12 3:09 PM

xxvi

contents

Deborah Tannen, There Is No Unmarked Woman

552

I asked myself what style we women could have adopted that would have been
unmarked, like the men’s. The answer was none. There is no unmarked woman.

Matthias R. Mehl et al., Are Women Really More Talkative Than
Men? 557
Sex differences in conversational behavior have long been a topic of public and
scientific interest. The stereotype of female talkativeness is deeply ingrained in
Western folklore and often considered a scientific fact.

Poetry

Marge Piercy, Barbie Doll

561

Paired Visual Texts

Charles Le Brun, Chancellor Séguier at the Entry of Louis XIV into Paris
in 1660 (painting) 562
Kehinde Wiley, The Chancellor Séguier on Horseback (painting) 562
conveRSAtion

566

Defining Masculinity

1. Leonard McCombe, Marlboro Man (photo) 566
2. Paul Theroux, Being a Man 567
3. Gretel Ehrlich, About Men 570
4. Rebecca Walker, Putting Down the Gun 573
5. Mark Bauerlein and Sandra Stotsky, Why Johnny Won’t
Read 575
6. David Brooks, Mind over Muscle 577
Student WRiting

Argument: Supporting an Assertion

gRAMMAR AS RHetoRic And StYLe
SuggeStionS FoR WRiting

Gender

Pronouns

580

583

588

9 SPoRtS 591
How do the values of sports affect the way we see ourselves?
Central Essay

Gay Talese, The Silent Season of a Hero

592

Everywhere he goes the question seems the same, as if he has some special vision into
the future of new heroes, and everywhere he goes, too, older men grab his hand and
feel his arm and predict that he could still go out there and hit one, and the smile on
DiMaggio’s face is genuine.

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 26

6/18/12 3:09 PM

contents

xxvii

Classic Essay

Grantland Rice, The Four Horsemen 610
Outlined against a blue-gray October sky, the Four Horsemen rode again. In
dramatic lore they are known as Famine, Pestilence, Destruction and Death. These
are only aliases. Their real names are Stuhldreher, Miller, Crowley and Layden. They
formed the crest of the South Bend cyclone before which another fighting Army
football team was swept over the precipice at the Polo Grounds.

Other Voices

Theodore Roosevelt, The Proper Place for Sports

617

I don’t want you to sacrifice standing well in your studies to any over-athleticism;
and I need not tell you that character counts for a great deal more than either
intellect or body in winning success in life.

William Faulkner, An Innocent at Rinkside

619

And he thought how perhaps something is happening to sport in America (assuming
that by definition sport is something you do yourself, in solitude or not, because it is
fun), and that something is the roof we are putting over it and them.

Joyce Carol Oates, The Cruelest Sport

622

Though highly ritualized, and as rigidly bound by rules, traditions, and taboos as any
religious ceremony, it survives as the most primitive and terrifying of contests: two
men, near-naked, fight each other in a brightly lit, elevated space roped in like an
animal pen . . . two men climb into the ring from which only one, symbolically, will
climb out.

Kris Vervaecke, A Spectator’s Notebook

631

Through the eyes of my daughter and sons, who play in school and community
league sports, I began to see a game as a sustaining drama dreamed up by the will
and the scarcely imaginable possibilities of the body.

Jane Smiley, Barbaro, The Heart in the Winner’s Circle

641

His vets warned us all along that the odds were against him, but we didn’t really
believe them. They had hope, too. How could a horse who appeared so full of life
break his leg and be so suddenly close to death?

Malcolm Gladwell, Offensive Play: How Different Are Dogfighting
and Football? 643
Gameness, Carl Semencic argues, in The World of Fighting Dogs (1984), is no more
than a dog’s “desire to please an owner at any expense to itself.” . . . This is why
Michael Vick’s dogs weren’t euthanized. The betrayal of loyalty requires an act of
social reparation. Professional football players, too, are selected for gameness.

Rick Reilly, Why I Love My Job

658

Sports is real. It can’t be faked. . . . Money, family, looks mean diddly in sports.
If Tom Brady suddenly can’t throw the 30-yard out, he’s benched, dimple or no
dimple.

Caroline Alexander, The Great Game

660

Beyond the training fields, the fiction that this was all a great game was maintained
in the trenches. One young soldier recalled how as his battalion advanced, it was
cheered, as if in a match, by the First Battalion Black Watch. “You feel like in a race,

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 27

6/18/12 3:09 PM

xxviii

contents

you’re waiting to start,” he recalled, “waiting for the signal, then the sergeant would
shout, ‘Right lads,’ and you’re over the top.”

Poetry

John Updike, Ex-Basketball Player 665
Visual Text

New York World, The Twelfth Player in Every Football Game
(cartoon) 667
Visual Text

Sports Illustrated, Yes! (cover)
conveRSAtion

669

Paying College Athletes

671

1. Boris Drucker, “I’m Glad We Won . . .” (cartoon) 672
2. Frank Deford, Pay Dirt: College Athletes Deserve the Same Rights
as Other Students 673
3. Michael Lewis, Serfs of the Turf 674
4. Bill Walton, My Priceless Opportunity 677
5. Michael Wilbon, As Colleges’ Greed Grows, So Does the
Hypocrisy 678
6. Steve Weiberg, Despite Criticism, NCAA Takes a Firm Stance on
Professionalism 681
7. National Collegiate Athletic Association, Why Students
Aren’t Paid to Play 683
Student WRiting
Strategies 686

Rhetorical Analysis: Comparing

gRAMMAR AS RHetoRic And StYLe Direct, Precise, and Active
Verbs 691
SuggeStionS FoR WRiting

Sports

696

10 LAnguAge 699
How does the language we use reveal who we are?
Central Essay

Amy Tan, Mother Tongue

700

Lately, I’ve been giving more thought to the kind of English my mother speaks. Like
others, I have described it to people as “broken” or “fractured” English. But I wince

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 28

6/18/12 3:09 PM

contents

xxix

when I say that. It has always bothered me that I can think of no other way to
describe it other than “broken,” as if it were damaged and needed to be fixed, as if it
lacked a certain wholeness and soundness.

Classic Essay

George Orwell, Politics and the English Language

707

Political language—and with variations this is true of all political parties, from
Conservatives to Anarchists—is designed to make lies sound truthful and murder
respectable, and to give an appearance of solidity to pure wind.

Other Voices

Walt Whitman, Slang in America

720

Such is Slang, or indirection, an attempt of common humanity to escape from bald
literalism, and express itself illimitably, which in highest walks produces poets and
poems, and doubtless in pre-historic times gave the start to, and perfected, the whole
immense tangle of the old mythologies.

Gloria Anzaldúa, How to Tame a Wild Tongue

725

So, if you want to really hurt me, talk badly about my language. Ethnic identity is
twin skin to linguistic identity — I am my language. Until I can take pride in my
language, I cannot take pride in myself.

Marjorie Agosín, Always Living in Spanish

735

Destiny and the always ambiguous nature of history continued my family’s enforced
migration, and because of it I, too, became one who had to live and speak in
translation.

Firoozeh Dumas, The “F Word”

738

My name, Firoozeh, chosen by my mother, means “Turquoise” in Farsi. In America,
it means “Unpronounceable” or “I’m Not Going to Talk to You Because I Cannot
Possibly Learn Your Name and I Just Don’t Want to Have to Ask You Again and
Again Because You’ll Think I’m Dumb or You Might Get Upset or Something.” My
father, incidentally, had wanted to name me Sara. I do wish he had won that
argument.

Charles Krauthammer, In Plain English: Let’s Make It Official

742

One of the major reasons for America’s great success as the world’s first “universal
nation,” for its astonishing and unmatched capacity for assimilating immigrants, has
been that an automatic part of acculturation was the acquisition of English.

Steven Pinker, Words Don’t Mean What They Mean

745

When people talk, they lay lines on each other, do a lot of role playing, sidestep,
shilly-shally and engage in all manner of vagueness and innuendo. We do this and
expect others to do it, yet at the same time we profess to long for the plain truth, for
people to say what they mean, simple as that. Such hypocrisy is a human universal.

Poetry

Naomi Shihab Nye, For Mohammed Zeid of Gaza, Age 15 and Why I
Could Not Accept Your Invitation 749

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 29

6/18/12 3:09 PM

xxx

contents

Visual Text

U.S. Census Bureau, Language Use in the United States (tables)

751

Visual Text

Jim Cummins, The Effects of Bilingualism (cartoon) 754
conveRSAtion
Language 756

American Politics and the English

1. Institute for Propaganda Analysis, How to Detect
Propaganda 756
2. Michiko Kakutani, The Word Police 761
3. North York Women Teachers’ Association, Nonviolent
Language (table) 766
4. Mike Lester, NCAA Native American Mascots (cartoon)

767

5. Geoffrey Nunberg, The -Ism Schism: How Much Wallop Can a
Simple Word Pack? 768
6. Daniel Okrent, The War of the Words: A Dispatch from the Front
Lines 770
7. Letters to the Editor in Response to The War of the Words 773
8. Frank Luntz, from Words That Work 775
Student WRiting
Experience 779

Narrative: Reflecting on Personal

gRAMMAR AS RHetoRic And StYLe Concise Diction
SuggeStionS FoR WRiting

Language

781

785

11 PoPuLAR cuLtuRe 787
To what extent does pop culture reflect our society’s values?
Central Essay

James McBride, Hip Hop Planet

788

To many of my generation, despite all attempts to exploit it, belittle it, numb it,
classify it, and analyze it, hip hop remains an enigma, a clarion call, a cry of “I am”
from the youth of the world. We’d be wise, I suppose, to start paying attention.

Classic Essay

Mark Twain, Corn-Pone Opinions

799

Its name is Public Opinion. It is held in reverence. It settles everything. Some think it
the Voice of God.

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 30

6/18/12 3:09 PM

contents

xxxi

Other Voices

Scott McCloud, from Show and Tell (graphic essay)

805

Traditional thinking has long held that truly great works of art and literature are
only possible when the two are kept at arm’s length.Words and pictures together
are considered, at best, a diversion for the masses, at worst a product of crass
commercialism.

David Denby, High-School Confidential: Notes on Teen Movies

819

The enemy is not authority; the enemy is other teens and the social system that they
impose on one another.

Robin Givhan, An Image a Little Too Carefully Coordinated

825

It has been a long time since so much syrupy nostalgia has been in evidence at the
White House.

Steven Johnson, Watching TV Makes You Smarter

827

For decades, we’ve worked under the assumption that mass culture follows a path
declining steadily toward lowest-common-denominator standards, presumably
because the “masses’’ want dumb, simple pleasures and big media companies try to
give the masses what they want. But . . . the exact opposite is happening: the culture
is getting more cognitively demanding, not less. . . . The most debased forms of mass
diversion — video games and violent television dramas and juvenile sitcoms — turn
out to be nutritional after all.

Daniel Harris, Celebrity Bodies 838
We blame pop culture for turning us into diet-crazed bulimics, but how can
celebrities be “role models,” however derelict, when almost no one seems to imitate
them, when we get fatter even as they get skinnier, exercise less even as they train like
triathletes?

Chuck Klosterman, My Zombie, Myself: Why Modern Life Feels Rather
Undead 846
Every zombie war is a war of attrition. It’s always a numbers game. And it’s more
repetitive than complex. . . . The principal downside to any zombie attack is that the
zombies will never stop coming; the principal downside to life is that you will be
never be finished with whatever it is you do.

Poetry

Hans Ostrom, Emily Dickinson and Elvis Presley in Heaven

850

Visual Text

Andy Warhol, Myths (painting)

851

Visual Text

Mark Tansey, The Innocent Eye Test (painting)
conveRSAtion

853

Exporting American Pop Culture

855

1. Thomas Friedman, The Revolution Is U.S. 855
2. Heather Havrilesky, Besieged by “Friends” 860

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 31

6/18/12 3:09 PM

xxxii

contents

3. Deirdre Straughan, Cultural Hegemony: Who’s Dominating
Whom? 862
4. Kwame Anthony Appiah, from The Case for
Contamination 864
5. Josef Joffe, The Perils of Soft Power 868
6. Joseph S. Nye Jr., The U.S. Can Reclaim “Smart Power” 871
7. Hassan Ammar, Slovakian Soccer Fan at 2010 World Cup
in South Africa (photo) 873
Student WRiting
Satire 875

Rhetorical Analysis: Analyzing

gRAMMAR AS RHetoRic And StYLe Modifiers

878

SuggeStionS FoR WRiting

884

Popular Culture

12 tHe enviRonMent 887
What is our responsibility to the natural environment?
Central Essay

Rachel Carson, from Silent Spring

888

There was a strange stillness. The birds, for example — where had they gone? Many
people spoke of them, puzzled and disturbed. The feeding stations in the backyards
were deserted. The few birds seen anywhere were moribund; they trembled violently
and could not fly. It was a spring without voices.

Classic Essay

Ralph Waldo Emerson, from Nature

897

The lover of nature is he whose inward and outward senses are still truly adjusted to
each other; who has retained the spirit of infancy even into the era of manhood.

Other Voices

Aldo Leopold, from The Land Ethic

906

It is inconceivable to me that an ethical relation to land can exist without love,
respect, and admiration for land, and a high regard for its value. By value, of course
I mean something far broader than mere economic value; I mean value in the
philosophical sense.

Lewis Thomas, Natural Man

915

We still argue the details, but it is conceded almost everywhere that we are not the
masters of nature that we thought ourselves; we are as dependent as the leaves or
midges or fish on the rest of life. We are part of the system.

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 32

6/18/12 3:09 PM

contents

Bill McKibben, from The End of Nature

xxxiii

918

A purely personal effort is, of course, just a gesture — a good gesture, but a gesture.
The greenhouse effect is the first environmental problem we can’t escape by moving to
the woods. There are no personal solutions.

Terry Tempest Williams, The Clan of One-Breasted Women

927

Most statistics tell us breast cancer is genetic, hereditary, with rising percentages
attached to fatty diets, childlessness, or becoming pregnant after thirty. What they
don’t say is that living in Utah may be the greatest hazard of all.

Joy Williams, Save the Whales, Screw the Shrimp

935

A picture of a poor old sea turtle with barnacles on her back, all ancient and exhausted, depositing her five gallons of doomed eggs in the sand hardly fills you with
joy, because you realize, quite rightly, that just outside the frame falls the shadow of
the condo. What’s cropped from the shot of ocean waves crashing on a pristine shore
is the plastics plant, and just beyond the dunes lies a parking lot.

E. O. Wilson, from The Future of Life

945

But wilderness always gives way to civilization, doesn’t it? That is progress and the
way of the world, and we can’t do much about it.

Poetry

Gerard Manley Hopkins, Inversnaid

952

Visual Text

Robert Crumb, A Short History of America (cartoon)

953

Visual Text

Royal Dutch/Shell, Let’s Go (advertisement)
conveRSAtion

Sustainable Eating

955

958

1. Peter Menzel, from Hungry Planet (photo essay) 958
2. Michael Pollan, A Naturalist in the Supermarket 962
3. James McWilliams, The Locavore Myth 965
4. Jonathan Safran Foer, The American Table and The Global
Table 967
5. Nicolette Hahn Niman, The Carnivore’s Dilemma 973
6. Will Allen, A Good Food Manifesto for America 976
7. A. J. Jacobs, Farm to Table: How Our Restaurant Gets Its Food to
Your Plate 980
8. Michael Specter, from Test-Tube Burgers 982
Student WRiting
Essay 988

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 33

Visual Rhetoric: Analyzing a Photo

6/18/12 3:09 PM

xxxiv

contents

gRAMMAR AS RHetoRic And StYLe Cumulative, Periodic, and
Inverted Sentences 991
SuggeStionS FoR WRiting

1001

The Environment

13 PoLiticS 1005
What is the relationship between the citizen and the state?
Central Essay

Jamaica Kincaid, On Seeing England for the First Time

1006

England was to be our source of myth and the source from which we got our sense
of reality, our sense of what was meaningful, our sense of what was meaningless —
and much about our own lives and much about the very idea of us headed that last
list.

Classic Essay

Henry David Thoreau, On the Duty of Civil Disobedience 1016
Must the citizen ever for a moment, or in the least degree, resign his conscience to the
legislator? Why has every man a conscience, then? . . . The only obligation which I
have the right to assume, is to do at any time what I think right.

Other Voices

Abraham Lincoln, The Gettysburg Address 1035
Four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent a new
nation, conceived in liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created
equal. Now we are engaged in a great civil war, testing whether that nation, or any
nation, so conceived and so dedicated, can long endure.

Virginia Woolf, Thoughts on Peace in an Air Raid

1036

Unless we can think peace into existence we—not this one body in this one bed but
millions of bodies yet to be born — will lie in the same darkness and hear the same
death rattle overhead.

Chris Hedges, The Destruction of Culture 1041
In wartime the state seeks to destroy its own culture. It is only when this destruction has been completed that the state can begin to exterminate the culture of its
opponents.

Laura Blumenfeld, The Apology: Letters from a Terrorist 1048
I had resolved to find a way to make my father human in the gunman’s eyes. And I
wanted him to see that what he had done was horrible. I thought about introducing
myself as the daughter of his victim but discarded the idea, because I did not want
him to regard me as “a Jew” or as an adversary. Given the Palestinians’ eagerness to
get their views out to the world, I reasoned that the best way to gain access to him
would be to identify myself to him and his family simply as an American journalist
who was interested in hearing his story.

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 34

6/18/12 3:09 PM

contents

Sarah Vowell, The Partly Cloudy Patriot

xxxv

1057

In my ninety-five-cent copy of the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution,
the two documents are separated by only a blank half page. I forget that there are
eleven years between them, eleven years of war and the whole Articles of Confederation
debacle. In my head, the two documents are like the A side and B side of the greatest
single ever released that was recorded in one great drunken night, but no, there’s a lot
of bleeding life between them. Dead boys and dead Indians and Valley Forge.

Marjane Satrapi, The Veil (graphic memoir)

1066

I really didn’t know what to think about the veil. Deep down I was very religious but
as a family we were very modern and avant-garde.

Fiction

Tim O’Brien, On the Rainy River

1074

Visual Texts

Pablo Picasso, Guernica (painting) 1087
New Yorker, March 17, 2003 (cover) 1089
Harper’s, April 2003 (cover) 1090
conveRSAtion

Colonialism

1091

1. Christopher Columbus, Letter to King Ferdinand of Spain 1091
2. King Ferdinand, The Requerimiento 1096
3. Red Jacket, Defense of Native American Religion 1097
4. George Orwell, Shooting an Elephant 1100
5. Frantz Fanon, from Concerning Violence 1106
6. Eavan Boland, In Which the Ancient History I Learn Is Not
My Own (poem) 1108
7. Chinua Achebe, from The Empire Fights Back 1111
8. National Park Service, Christiansted: Official Map and Guide
(brochure) 1115
Student WRiting

Synthesis: Responding to a Quotation

gRAMMAR AS RHetoRic And StYLe
Complex Sentence 1124
SuggeStionS FoR WRiting

Politics

1119

Subordination in the
1130

MLA guidelines for a List of Works cited 1135
glossary 1141
Acknowledgments 1153
index 1161

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 35

6/18/12 3:09 PM

this page left intentionally blank

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 36

6/18/12 3:09 PM

1
An Introduction to Rhetoric
Using the “Available Means”

T

o many people, the word rhetoric automatically signals that trickery or
deception is afoot. They assume that an advertiser is trying to manipulate a consumer, a politician wants to obscure a point, or a spin doctor is spinning. “Empty rhetoric!” is a common criticism — and at times an indictment. Yet
the Greek philosopher Aristotle (384–322 b.c.e.) defined rhetoric as “the faculty
of observing in any given case the available means of persuasion.”
At its best, rhetoric is a thoughtful, reflective activity leading to effective
communication, including the rational exchange of opposing viewpoints. In
Aristotle’s day and in ours, those who understand and can use the available means
to appeal to an audience of one or many find themselves in a position of strength.
They have the tools to resolve conflicts without confrontation, to persuade readers or listeners to support their position, or to move others to take action.
Rhetoric is not just for Roman senators in togas. You might use rhetoric to
convince a friend that John Coltrane is worth listening to, explain to readers of
your blog why Night of the Living Dead is the most influential horror movie of all
time, or persuade your parents that they should buy you a car. Rhetoric is also not
just about speeches. Every essay, political cartoon, photograph, and advertisement
is designed to convince you of something. To simplify, we will call all of these
things texts because they are cultural products that can be “read,” meaning not
just consumed and comprehended, but investigated. We need to be able to “read”
between the lines, regardless of whether we’re reading a political ad, a political
cartoon, or a political speech. Consider documentary films: every decision — such
as what lighting to use for an interview, what music to play, what to show and
what to leave out — constitutes a rhetorical choice based on what the filmmaker
thinks will be most persuasive.
It is part of our job as informed citizens and consumers to understand how
rhetoric works so that we can be wary of manipulation or deceit, while appreciating effective and civil communication. And it is essential that each of us communicates as effectively and honestly as possible.

1

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 1

6/18/12 3:10 PM

2

CHAPTER 1 • AN INTRoDuCTIoN To RHEToRIC

• ACTIVITY •
Identify an article, a speech, a video, or advertisement that you think is
manipulative or deceptive and one that is civil and effective. Use these two
examples to explain what you see as the difference.

The Rhetorical Situation
Let’s start out by looking at a speech that nearly everyone has read or heard: the
speech that baseball player Lou Gehrig gave at an Appreciation Day held in his
honor on July 4, 1939. Gehrig had recently learned that he was suffering from
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a neurological disorder that has no cure (today
it is known as Lou Gehrig’s disease). Although Gehrig was a reluctant speaker, the
fans’ chant of “We want Lou!” brought him to the podium to deliver one of the
most powerful and heartfelt speeches of all time.
Farewell Speech
Lou GehriG

Fans, for the past two weeks you have been reading about a bad break I got. Yet
today I consider myself the luckiest man on the face of the earth. I have been in ballparks for seventeen years and have never received anything but kindness and encouragement from you fans. Look at these grand men. Which of you wouldn’t consider
it the highlight of his career just to associate with them for even one day?
Sure, I’m lucky. Who wouldn’t consider it an honor to have known Jacob Ruppert;
also the builder of baseball’s greatest empire, Ed Barrow; to have spent six years
with that wonderful little fellow, Miller Huggins; then to have spent the next nine years
with that outstanding leader, that smart student of psychology — the best manager
in baseball today, Joe McCarthy? Who wouldn’t feel honored to have roomed with
such a grand guy as Bill Dickey?
Sure, I’m lucky. When the New York Giants, a team you would give your right
arm to beat, and vice versa, sends you a gift — that’s something! When everybody
down to the groundskeepers and those boys in white coats remember you with
trophies — that’s something!
When you have a wonderful mother-in-law who takes sides with you in squabbles
against her own daughter — that’s something! When you have a father and mother
who work all their lives so that you can have an education and build your body —
it’s a blessing! When you have a wife who has been a tower of strength and shown
more courage than you dreamed existed — that’s the finest I know!
So I close in saying that I might have been given a bad break, but I have an
awful lot to live for! Thank you.

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 2

6/18/12 3:10 PM

THE RHEToRICAL SITuATIoN

3

While in our time the word rhetoric may suggest deception, this speech reminds
us that rhetoric can serve sincerity as well. No wonder one commentator wrote,
“Lou Gehrig’s speech almost rocked Yankee Stadium off its feet.”

Occasion, Context, and Purpose
Why is this an effective speech? First of all, rhetoric is always situational. It has an
occasion — the time and place the text was written or spoken. The occasion exists
within a specific context — the circumstances, atmosphere, attitudes, and events
surrounding the text. Purpose is the goal the speaker wants to achieve. In the case
of Gehrig’s speech, the occasion is Lou Gehrig Appreciation Day. More specifically, his moment comes at home plate between games of a doubleheader. The
context is first and foremost Gehrig’s recent announcement of his illness and his
subsequent retirement, but as is often the case, the context goes well beyond that.
Gehrig, known as the Iron Horse, held the record for consecutive games played
(2,130) and was one of the greatest sluggers of all time. For such a durable and
powerful athlete to fall victim to a disease that strips away strength and coordination seemed an especially cruel fate. Just a couple of weeks earlier, Gehrig was still
playing ball; but by the time he gave this speech, he was so weak that his manager
had to help him walk out to the mound for the ceremony.
One of Gehrig’s chief purposes in delivering this speech is to thank his fans and
his teammates, but he also wants to demonstrate that he remains positive: he emphasizes his past luck and present optimism and downplays his illness. He makes a
single reference to the diagnosis and does so in the strong, straightforward language
of an athlete: he got a “bad break.” There is no blame, no self-pity, no plea for sympathy. Throughout, he maintains his focus: to thank his fans and teammates for their
support and get on with watching the ballgame. Gehrig responds as a true Yankee,
not just the team but the can-do Yankee spirit of America, by acknowledging his illness and accepting his fate with dignity, honor, humility, and even a touch of humor.

The Rhetorical Triangle
Another important aspect of the rhetorical situation is the relationship among
the speaker, audience, and subject. One way to conceptualize the relationship
among these elements is through the rhetorical triangle. Some refer to it as the
Aristotelian triangle because Aristotle used a triangle to illustrate how these three
elements are interrelated. How a speaker perceives the relationships among these
elements will go a long way toward determining what he or she says and how he
or she says it.
Let’s use the rhetorical triangle (see p. 4) to analyze Gehrig’s speech.
The speaker is the person or group who creates a text. This might be a politician who delivers a speech, a commentator who writes an article, an artist who
draws a political cartoon, or even a company that commissions an advertisement.

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 3

6/18/12 3:10 PM

4

CHAPTER 1 • AN INTRoDuCTIoN To RHEToRIC

Speaker

Text

Audience

Subject

Aristotle’s Rhetorical Triangle

Don’t think of the speaker solely as a name, but consider a description of who the
speaker is in the context of the text. The speaker of the speech we just read is not
just Lou Gehrig, but baseball hero and ALS victim Lou Gehrig. Sometimes, there
is a slight difference between who the speaker is in real life and the role the speaker
plays when delivering the speech. This is called a persona. Persona comes from
the Greek word for “mask”; it means the face or character that a speaker shows to
his or her audience. Lou Gehrig is a famous baseball hero, but in his speech he
presents himself as a common man who is modest and thankful for the opportunities he’s had.
The audience is the listener, viewer, or reader of a text or performance, but it
is important to note that there may be multiple audiences. When making rhetorical decisions, speakers ask what values their audiences hold, particularly whether
the audience is hostile, friendly, or neutral and how informed it is on the topic at
hand. Sure, Gehrig’s audience was his teammates and the fans in the stadium that
day, but it was also the teams he played against, the fans listening on the radio,
and posterity — us.
The subject is the topic. And the subject should not be confused with the purpose, which is the goal the speaker wants to achieve. Gehrig’s subject is his illness,
but it is also a catalog of all the lucky breaks that preceded his diagnosis.

• ACTIVITY •
Construct and analyze a rhetorical situation for writing a review of a movie,
video game, or concert. Be very specific in your analysis: What is your subject?
What is your purpose? Who is your audience? What is your relationship to the

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 4

6/18/12 3:10 PM

THE RHEToRICAL SITuATIoN

5

audience? Remember, you need not write a full essay; just analyze the rhetorical situation.

SOAPS
In discussing the rhetorical situation surrounding a text, we’ve talked about some
of the background that you should consider (like the occasion, context, and purpose) and relationships that are more directly related to the text (like those among
the speaker, audience, and subject). One way to remember all of these things is to
use the acronym SOAPS, which stands for Subject, Occasion, Audience, Purpose,
and Speaker. It’s a mnemonic device that offers a practical way to approach the
concept of the rhetorical situation. Think of it as a kind of checklist that helps you
organize your ideas rhetorically. Let’s use SOAPS to look at the rhetorical situation
in a letter written by Albert Einstein.
Widely considered the greatest scientist of the twentieth century, Einstein
(1879–1955) is responsible for the theory of relativity, quantum mechanics, and
other foundational scientific concepts. He won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1921.
In 1936, he wrote the following letter to a sixth-grade student, Phyllis Wright, in
response to her questions: Do scientists pray? And if so, what do they pray for?
January 24, 1936
Dear Phyllis,
I have tried to respond to your question as simply as I could. Here is my answer.
Scientific research is based on the idea that everything that takes place is
determined by laws of nature, and therefore this holds for the actions of people. For
this reason, a research scientist will hardly be inclined to believe that events could be
influenced by a prayer, i.e., by a wish addressed to a supernatural being.
However, it must be admitted that our actual knowledge of these laws is only
imperfect and fragmentary, so that, actually, the belief in the existence of basic allembracing laws in Nature also rests on a sort of faith. All the same this faith has been
largely justified so far by the success of scientific research.
But, on the other hand, every one who is seriously involved in the pursuit of
science becomes convinced that a spirit is manifest in the laws of the universe — a
spirit vastly superior to that of man, and one in the face of which we with our modest
powers must feel humble. In this way the pursuit of science leads to a religious feeling of a special sort, which is indeed quite different from the religiosity of someone
more naive.
I hope this answers your question.
Best wishes
Yours,
Albert Einstein

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 5

6/18/12 3:10 PM

6

CHAPTER 1 • AN INTRoDuCTIoN To RHEToRIC

Subject

The explicit subject here is whether scientists pray and, if so, what they pray for.
Implicitly, the subject is the nature of faith.

Occasion

The occasion is Einstein’s receipt of a letter from Phyllis Wright asking questions
about science and religion.

Audience

The primary audience for the letter is Phyllis herself, though the formality of
his response suggests that Einstein realized that his letters would have a larger
audience. (Note that he won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1921, so by 1936 he
was a world-renowned scientist.)

Purpose

Einstein’s purpose is probably the most complex element here. At its most straightforward, his purpose is to respond to a sincere schoolgirl’s question about science
and religion. Beyond that, it seems that Einstein’s purpose is to expand Phyllis’s
horizons a bit, to help her understand that science and religion do not necessarily
represent two antagonistic ways of thinking.

Speaker

The speaker, a scientist approaching age sixty, is responding to a girl who is likely
twelve, so his purpose is intertwined with that speaker–audience relationship: the
wise elder in dialogue with the younger generation.

Ultimately, Einstein does not “answer” Phyllis directly at all; rather, he returns
the question to her by offering different ways to think about the nature of science
and religion and the way spiritual and scientific perspectives interact. Viewed in this
light, Einstein’s purpose can be seen as engaging a younger person — who might
become a scientist — in thinking more deeply about her own question.

• ACTIVITY •
Using SOAPS, analyze the rhetorical situation in the following speech.
9/11 Speech
GeorGe W. Bush
Good evening.
Today, our fellow citizens, our way of life, our very freedom came under
attack in a series of deliberate and deadly terrorist acts.
The victims were in airplanes or in their offices — secretaries, businessmen
and women, military and federal workers. Moms and dads. Friends and
neighbors.
Thousands of lives were suddenly ended by evil, despicable acts of terror.
The pictures of airplanes flying into buildings, fires burning, huge structures
collapsing, have filled us with disbelief, terrible sadness, and a quiet, unyielding anger.
These acts of mass murder were intended to frighten our nation into chaos
and retreat. But they have failed. our country is strong. A great people has been
moved to defend a great nation.

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 6

5

6/18/12 3:10 PM

APPEALS To ETHoS, LoGoS, AND PATHoS

7

Terrorist attacks can shake the foundations of our biggest buildings, but they
cannot touch the foundation of America. These acts shatter steel, but they cannot dent the steel of American resolve.
America was targeted for attack because we’re the brightest beacon for
freedom and opportunity in the world. And no one will keep that light from
shining.
Today, our nation saw evil, the very worst of human nature, and we responded
with the best of America, with the daring of our rescue workers, with the caring
for strangers and neighbors who came to give blood and help in any way they
could.
Immediately following the first attack, I implemented our government’s emergency response plans. our military is powerful, and it’s prepared. our emergency teams are working in New York City and Washington, D.C., to help with
local rescue efforts.
our first priority is to get help to those who have been injured and to take
every precaution to protect our citizens at home and around the world from
further attacks. The functions of our government continue without interruption.
Federal agencies in Washington which had to be evacuated today are reopening for essential personnel tonight and will be open for business tomorrow.
our financial institutions remain strong, and the American economy will be
open for business as well.
The search is under way for those who are behind these evil acts. I’ve directed
the full resources of our intelligence and law enforcement communities to find
those responsible and bring them to justice. We will make no distinction between the
terrorists who committed these acts and those who harbor them.

10

Appeals to Ethos, Logos, and Pathos
Now that we understand how to assess the rhetorical situation, the next step is to
use the tools of rhetoric to persuade an audience. Let’s start with what Aristotle
called rhetorical appeals. He identified three main appeals: ethos, logos, and
pathos.

Ethos
Speakers appeal to ethos (Greek for “character”) to demonstrate that they are
credible and trustworthy. Think, for example, of a speech discouraging teenagers
from drinking. Speakers might appeal to ethos by stressing that they are concerned
parents, psychologists specializing in alcoholism or adolescent behavior, or recovering alcoholics themselves. Appeals to ethos often emphasize shared values between
the speaker and the audience: when a parent speaks to other parents in the same
community, they share a concern for their children’s education or well-being.

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 7

6/18/12 3:10 PM

8

CHAPTER 1 • AN INTRoDuCTIoN To RHEToRIC

Lou Gehrig brings the ethos of being a legendary athlete to his speech, yet in it he
establishes a different kind of ethos — that of a regular guy and a good sport who
shares the audience’s love of baseball and family. And like them, he has known
good luck and bad breaks.
In some instances, a speaker’s reputation immediately establishes ethos. For
example, the speaker may be a scholar in Russian history and economics as well
as the nation’s secretary of state. Or the speaker may be “the dog whisperer,” a wellknown animal behaviorist. In these instances, the speaker brings ethos to the text;
but in other cases, a speaker establishes ethos through what he or she says in the text
by sounding reasonable, acknowledging other opinions, or being thoughtful and
well informed. The speaker’s ethos — expertise, knowledge, experience, sincerity,
common purpose with the audience, or a combination of these factors — gives
the audience a reason for listening to this person on this subject.
Automatic Ethos
Let’s look at an example of how a speaker’s title or status automatically brings
ethos to the rhetorical situation. On September 3, 1939, King George VI gave a radio
address to the British people declaring that the country was at war with Germany.
The very fact that he is king gives him a certain degree of automatic ethos to speak
on the subject of war, yet King George also emphasizes the shared values that
unite everyone.
The King’s Speech (September 3, 1939)
KinG GeorGe Vi

In this grave hour, perhaps the most fateful in history, I send to every household of my
peoples, both at home and overseas, this message, spoken with the same depth of
feeling for each one of you as if I were able to cross your threshold and speak to
you myself.
For the second time in the lives of most of us, we are at war. over and over
again, we have tried to find a peaceful way out of the differences between ourselves and those who are now our enemies, but it has been in vain. We have been
forced into a conflict, for we are called, with our allies to meet the challenge of a
principle which, if it were to prevail, would be fatal to any civilized order in the
world.
It is a principle which permits a state in the selfish pursuit of power to disregard
its treaties and its solemn pledges, which sanctions the use of force or threat of
force against the sovereignty and independence of other states. Such a principle,
stripped of all disguise, is surely the mere primitive doctrine that might is right, and
if this principle were established throughout the world, the freedom of our own
country and of the whole British Commonwealth of nations would be in danger. But
far more than this, the peoples of the world would be kept in bondage of fear, and

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 8

6/18/12 3:10 PM

APPEALS To ETHoS, LoGoS, AND PATHoS

9

all hopes of settled peace and of the security of justice and liberty among nations,
would be ended.
This is the ultimate issue which confronts us. For the sake of all we ourselves hold
dear, and of the world order and peace, it is unthinkable that we should refuse to
meet the challenge.
It is to this high purpose that I now call my people at home and my people
across the seas who will make our cause their own. I ask them to stand calm and
firm and united in this time of trial. The task will be hard. There may be dark days
ahead, and war can no longer be confined to the battlefield, but we can only do the
right as we see the right, and reverently commit our cause to God. If one and all we
keep resolutely faithful to it, ready for whatever service or sacrifice it may demand,
then with God’s help, we shall prevail.
May He bless and keep us all.

At the outset, King George expresses his commitment to his people, his subjects, knowing that he is asking them to make their own commitment and sacrifice. As their king he is not expected to present himself as a common man, yet he
establishes the ethos of a common experience. He tells them he speaks “with the
same depth of feeling . . . as if I were able to cross your threshold and speak to you
myself.”
He uses “we” in order to speak as one of the people. He acknowledges that
“we are at war” for “the second time in the lives of most of us.” He also uses the
inclusive first person plural possessive as he identifies “our enemies,” not Britain’s
enemies. This personalization and emphasis on the people themselves is followed
by several sentences that are much more abstract in discussion of a “principle.” At
the end of that discussion, King George reinforces the nation’s shared values: “For
the sake of all we ourselves hold dear, and of the world order and peace, it is
unthinkable that we should refuse to meet the challenge.”
Later on, he calls the citizenry to “this high purpose” and refers to them not
as citizens or subjects but as “my people,” a description that suggests a closeness
rather than emphasizing the distance between a ruler and his subjects. The penultimate paragraph’s references to “God” are another reminder of their shared
beliefs: they worship the same god and “commit [their] cause” to him. King George
brings ethos to his speech by virtue of his position, but when he assures his audience that “we shall prevail,” rather than saying that England or Britain shall prevail, he is building ethos based on their common plight and common goals. They
are all in this together, from king to commoner.
Building Ethos
So, what do you do if you’re not a king? Writers and speakers often have to build their
ethos by explaining their credentials or background to their readers, or by emphasizing shared values. You’re more likely to listen to someone who is qualified to

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 9

6/18/12 3:10 PM

10

CHAPTER 1 • AN INTRoDuCTIoN To RHEToRIC

speak on a subject or who shares your interests and concerns. Following is the
opening from “The Myth of the Latin Woman: I Just Met a Girl Named Maria” by
Judith Ortiz Cofer. Note how she draws on her own Puerto Rican heritage as she
describes her experience with prejudice as a young Latina:

from The Myth of the Latin Woman: I Just Met a Girl Named Maria
Judith ortiz Cofer

on a bus trip to London from oxford university where I was earning some graduate credits one summer, a young man, obviously fresh from a pub, spotted me
and as if struck by inspiration went down on his knees in the aisle. With both
hands over his heart he broke into an Irish tenor’s rendition of “Maria” from
West Side Story. My politely amused fellow passengers gave his lovely voice the
round of gentle applause it deserved. Though I was not quite as amused, I managed my version of an English smile: no show of teeth, no extreme contortions of
the facial muscles — I was at this time of my life practicing reserve and cool. oh,
that British control, how I coveted it. But Maria had followed me to London, reminding me of a prime fact of my life: you can leave the Island, master the English
language, and travel as far as you can, but if you are a Latina, especially one
like me who so obviously belongs to Rita Moreno’s gene pool, the Island travels
with you.
This is sometimes a very good thing — it may win you that extra minute of
someone’s attention. But with some people, the same things can make you an
island — not so much a tropical paradise as an Alcatraz, a place nobody wants to
visit. As a Puerto Rican girl growing up in the united States and wanting like most
children to “belong,” I resented the stereotype that my Hispanic appearance called
forth from many people I met.

As Cofer develops her argument about common stereotypes of Latin women,
she establishes her authority to speak on the subject of racial prejudice through
her background (Puerto Rican, Latina), education (graduate student at Oxford
University), and experience (firsthand encounter with ethnic bias) — and thus she
gains her readers’ trust.

• ACTIVITY •
Think of a situation in which you are presenting your view on the same subject to two different audiences. For instance, you might be presenting your
ideas on ways to stop bullying (1) to the School Board or a group of parents
and (2) to a group of middle schoolers. Discuss how you would establish ethos
in each situation.

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 10

6/18/12 3:10 PM

APPEALS To ETHoS, LoGoS, AND PATHoS

11

Logos
Speakers appeal to logos, or reason, by offering clear, rational ideas. Appealing to
logos (Greek for “embodied thought”) means thinking logically — having a clear
main idea and using specific details, examples, facts, statistics, or expert testimony
to back it up. Creating a logical argument often involves defining the terms of the
argument and identifying connections such as causality. It can also require considerable research. Evidence from expert sources and authorities, facts, and quantitative data can be very persuasive if selected carefully and presented accurately.
Sometimes, writers and speakers add charts and graphs as a way to present such
information, but often they weave this information into their argument.
Although on first reading or hearing, Lou Gehrig’s speech may seem largely
emotional, it is actually based on irrefutable logic. He starts with the thesis that he
is “the luckiest man on the face of the earth” and supports it with two points: (1) the
love and kindness he’s received in his seventeen years of playing baseball, and (2) a
list of great people who have been his friends, family, and teammates in that time.
Conceding and Refuting
One way to appeal to logos is to acknowledge a counterargument — that is, to
anticipate objections or opposing views. While you might worry that raising an
opposing view might poke a hole in your argument, you’ll be vulnerable if you
ignore ideas that run counter to your own. In acknowledging a counterargument,
you agree (concede) that an opposing argument may be true or reasonable, but
then you deny (refute) the validity of all or part of the argument. This combination
of concession and refutation actually strengthens your own argument; it appeals
to logos by demonstrating that you understand a viewpoint other than your own,
you’ve thought through other evidence, and you stand by your view.
In longer, more complex texts, the writer may address the counterargument
in greater depth, but Lou Gehrig simply concedes what some of his listeners may
think — that his bad break is a cause for discouragement or despair. Gehrig refutes
this by saying that he has “an awful lot to live for!” Granted, he implies his concession rather than stating it outright; but in addressing it at all, he acknowledges a
contrasting way of viewing his situation — that is, a counterargument.
Let’s look at an example by Alice Waters, a famous chef, food activist, and
author. Writing in the Nation, she argues for acknowledgment of the full consequences of what she calls “our national diet”:
from Slow Food Nation
ALiCe WAters

It’s no wonder our national attention span is so short: We get hammered with the message that everything in our lives should be fast, cheap and easy — especially food.

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 11

6/18/12 3:10 PM

12

CHAPTER 1 • AN INTRoDuCTIoN To RHEToRIC

So conditioned are we to believe that food should be almost free that even the rich,
who pay a tinier fraction of their incomes for food than has ever been paid in human
history, grumble at the price of an organic peach — a peach grown for flavor and
picked, perfectly ripe, by a local farmer who is taking care of the land and paying
his workers a fair wage. And yet, as the writer and farmer David Mas Masumoto
recently pointed out, pound for pound, peaches that good still cost less than Twinkies.
When we claim that eating well is an elitist preoccupation, we create a smokescreen
that obscures the fundamental role our food decisions have in shaping the world.
The reason that eating well in this country costs more than eating poorly is that we
have a set of agricultural policies that subsidize fast food and make fresh, wholesome foods, which receive no government support, seem expensive. organic foods
seem elitist only because industrial food is artificially cheap, with its real costs being
charged to the public purse, the public health, and the environment.

To develop a logical argument for better, healthier food for everyone, Waters
refutes the counterargument that any food that is not “fast, cheap and easy” is
“elitist.” She does that by redefining terms such as “cheap,” “[eating] well,” “expensive,” and “cost.” She explains in a step-by-step fashion the “smokescreen” of price
that many people use to argue that mass-produced fast food is the best alternative
for all but the very wealthy. She points out that “[o]rganic foods seem elitist only
because industrial food is artificially cheap” (emphasis added). Waters asks her readers to think more deeply about the relationships among availability, production,
and distribution of food: she appeals to reason.

• ACTIVITY •
Following is an excerpt from an article by George Will, a columnist for the
Washington Post and Newsweek, entitled “King Coal: Reigning in China.” Discuss
how he appeals to logos in this article on “China’s ravenous appetite for coal.”
from King Coal: Reigning in China
GeorGe WiLL
Half of the 6 billion tons of coal burned globally each year is burned in China.
A spokesman for the Sierra Club, which in recent years has helped to block
construction of 139 proposed coal-fired plants in America, says, “This is undermining everything we’ve accomplished.” America, say environmentalists, is
exporting global warming.
Can something really be exported if it supposedly affects the entire planet?
Never mind. America has partners in this crime against nature, if such it is. one
Australian company proposes to build the Cowlitz facility; another has signed
a $60 billion contract to supply Chinese power plants with Australian coal.
The Times says ships — all burning hydrocarbons — hauled about 690 million tons of thermal coal this year, up from 385 million in 2001. China, which

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 12

6/18/12 3:10 PM

APPEALS To ETHoS, LoGoS, AND PATHoS

13

imported about 150 million tons this year, was a net exporter of coal until 2009,
sending abroad its low-grade coal and importing higher-grade, low-sulfur coal
from, for example, the Powder River Basin of Wyoming and Montana. Because
much of China’s enormous coal reserves is inland, far from coastal factories,
it is sometimes more economical to import American and Australian coal.
Writing in the Atlantic on China’s appetite for coal and possible aptitude for
using the old fuel in new, cleaner ways, James Fallows quotes a Chinese official
saying that the country’s transportation system is the only serious limit on how
fast power companies increase their use of coal. one reason China is building
light-rail systems is to get passenger traffic out of the way of coal trains.
Fallows reports that 15 years from now China expects that 350 million
people will be living in cities that do not exist yet. This will require adding to
China’s electrical system a capacity almost as large as America’s current
capacity. The united States, China, Russia and India have 40 percent of the
world’s population and 60 percent of its coal.

Pathos
Pathos is an appeal to emotions, values, desires, and hopes, on the one hand, or fears
and prejudices, on the other. Although an argument that appeals exclusively to
the emotions is by definition weak — it’s generally propagandistic in purpose and
more polemical than persuasive — an effective speaker or writer understands the
power of evoking an audience’s emotions by using such tools as figurative language, personal anecdotes, and vivid images.
Lou Gehrig uses the informal first person (I) quite naturally, which reinforces
the friendly sense that this is a guy who is speaking on no one’s behalf but his
own. He also chooses words with strong positive connotations: grand, greatest,
wonderful, honored, blessing. He uses one image — tower of strength — that may
not seem very original but strikes the right note. It is a well-known description
that his audience understands — in fact, they probably have used it themselves.
But, of course, the most striking appeal to pathos is the poignant contrast between
Gehrig’s horrible diagnosis and his public display of courage.
Let’s look at a more direct example of pathos. As a vice-presidential candidate, Richard Nixon gave a speech in 1952 defending himself against allegations
of inappropriate use of campaign funds. In it, he related this anecdote, which is
the reason that the speech will forever be known as “the Checkers speech”:
from The Checkers Speech
riChArd nixon

one other thing I probably should tell you, because if I don’t they’ll probably be saying this about me, too. We did get something, a gift, after the election. A man down
in Texas heard Pat [his wife] on the radio mention the fact that our two youngsters

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 13

6/18/12 3:10 PM

14

CHAPTER 1 • AN INTRoDuCTIoN To RHEToRIC

would like to have a dog. And believe it or not, the day before we left on this
campaign trip we got a message from union Station in Baltimore, saying they had
a package for us. We went down to get it. You know what it was? It was a little
cocker spaniel dog in a crate that he’d sent all the way from Texas, black and
white, spotted. And our little girl Tricia, the six-year-old, named it “Checkers.” And
you know, the kids, like all kids, love the dog, and I just want to say this, right now,
that regardless of what they say about it, we’re gonna keep it.

This example of pathos tugs at every possible heartstring: puppies, children, warm
paternal feelings, the excitement of getting a surprise package. All of these images
fill us with empathetic feelings toward Nixon: our emotions are engaged far more
than our reason. Despite never truly addressing the campaign funds issue, Nixon’s
speech was a profound success with voters, who sent enough dog food to feed
Checkers for a year! And yet, history has come to view this part of the speech as
baldly manipulative.
Images and Pathos
You can often appeal to pathos by using striking imagery in your writing, so it’s
no surprise that images often serve the same purpose. A striking photograph, for
example, may lend an emotional component that greatly strengthens an argument.
Advertisers certainly make the most of photos and other visual images to entice
or persuade audiences. In the accompanying example, which appeared in both the
New York Times and the New Yorker magazine in 2000, the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) makes a dramatic assertion, an appeal to pathos through both
visual images and written text, as a call to support its organization. According to
its mission statement, the ACLU seeks “to defend and preserve the individual
rights and liberties that the Constitution and laws of the United States guarantee
everyone in this country.”
The headline below the pictures reads:
It happens every day on America’s highways. Police stop drivers based on their skin
color rather than for the way they are driving. For example, in Florida 80% of those
stopped and searched were black and Hispanic, while they constituted only 5% of all
drivers. These humiliating and illegal searches are violations of the Constitution and
must be fought. Help us defend your rights. Support the ACLU.

The advertisement does not name the two men pictured, assuming the audience will
recognize revered civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr. on the left and convicted
serial killer Charles Manson on the right. The headline at the top is an assertion
that is bound to evoke a visceral response. The written text below the photos makes
a series of logical appeals by pointing out that racial profiling accounts for the police
stopping drivers on the basis of their race, and by offering statistical evidence from
the state of Florida. The main appeal, however, is to pathos through the juxtaposition of a hero with a madman presented in a form reminiscent of a “wanted” poster.

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 14

6/18/12 3:10 PM

APPEALS To ETHoS, LoGoS, AND PATHoS

15

Humor and Pathos
Another way to appeal to pathos is through humor. Since we like to hear things
that we already believe are true, our first reaction to anything that challenges our
beliefs is often negative: we think “that’s all wrong!” and get defensive or outright

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 15

6/18/12 3:10 PM

16

CHAPTER 1 • AN INTRoDuCTIoN To RHEToRIC

offended. Humor works rhetorically by wrapping a challenge to our beliefs in something that makes us feel good — a joke — and thus makes us more receptive to the
new idea.
This goes not just for new ideas, but for the people who are presenting those
ideas. Whether it is gentle tongue-in-cheek teasing or bitter irony, humor may help
a writer to make a point without, for instance, seeming to preach to the audience or take himself or herself too seriously. Political commentator Ruth Marcus
employs gentle humor in the following essay from 2010 in which she addresses
the speaker of the House of Representatives and objects to the members of Congress using electronic devices during hearings and other deliberations. Even the
title, a play on words, signals the humorous tone: “Crackberry Congress.” Let’s
look at a few passages:
from Crackberry Congress
ruth MArCus

Mr. Speaker, please don’t.
Go ahead, if you must, and cut taxes. Slash spending. Repeal health care. I
understand. Elections have consequences. But BlackBerrys and iPads and laptops
on the House floor? Reconsider, before it’s too late.
The current rules bar the use of a “wireless telephone or personal computer on
the floor of the House.” The new rules, unveiled last week, add three dangerous
words. They prohibit any device “that impairs decorum.”
In other words, as long as you’ve turned down your cellphone ringer and you’re
not strolling around the floor chatting with your broker or helping the kids with their
homework, feel free to tap away.
If the Senate is the world’s greatest deliberative body, the House is poised to be
the world’s greatest tweeting one.
A few upfront acknowledgements. First, I’m not one to throw stones. I have been
known to sneak a peek, or 10, at my BlackBerry during meetings. For a time my
daughter had my ringtone set to sound like a squawking chicken; when I invariably
forgot to switch to vibrate, the phone would cluck during meetings. In short, I have
done my share of decorum impairing.
Second, let’s not get too dreamy about the House floor. John Boehner, the incoming speaker, once passed out campaign checks from tobacco companies there. one
of his former colleagues once came to the chamber with a paper bag on his head
to dramatize his supposed embarrassment at fellow lawmakers’ overdrafts at the
House bank. Worse things have happened on the House floor than a game of
Angry Birds — check it out! — on the iPad.
Nonetheless, lines have to be drawn, and the House floor is not a bad place to
draw them. Somehow, it has become acceptable to e-mail away in the midst of meetings. Even Emily Post has blessed what once would have been obvious rudeness, ruling that “tapping on a handheld device is okay if it’s related to what’s being discussed.”

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 16

5

6/18/12 3:10 PM

APPEALS To ETHoS, LoGoS, AND PATHoS

17

The larger war may be lost, but not the battle to keep some remaining space in
life free of gadgetry and its distractions. I’m not talking Walden Pond — just a few
minutes of living the unplugged life. There are places — dinner table, church, school
and, yes, the House floor — where multitasking is inappropriate, even disrespectful.

First of all, Marcus structures her criticism as a letter, which obviously is a fiction
and sets a humorous note right away. Who, after all, would begin a letter to the
Speaker of the House by saying, “please don’t”? Marcus often works by teasing
about “decorum,” yet she makes a serious point about “connectivity” as she exaggerates her fear that “the House is poised to be the world’s greatest tweeting [body].”
Humor is also one of her strategies for establishing ethos in this case, as she says,
“I’m not one to throw stones” and admits to checking her own BlackBerry during
meetings. Overall, by taking a more lighthearted approach and not sounding like
Ms. Manners, Marcus makes her point about the inappropriateness of elected officials interacting with their electronic devices while colleagues and others are debating important issues.
Marcus could have marshaled all manner of examples that illustrate the decline
in civility and courtesy in modern life, but readers would likely have dismissed her
as old-fashioned or shrill. By taking a humorous approach, she appeals to readers’
sense of humor as well as their community values: don’t we want our elected officials to forego “instantaneous communication” for more thoughtful deliberations
when they are making decisions about the laws of the land?

• ACTIVITY •
General Dwight D. Eisenhower, Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force in Europe, distributed the following Order of the Day to the
military troops right before the 1944 D-Day invasion of Normandy. Discuss
how General Eisenhower appeals to pathos.

Supreme Headquarters

Allied Expeditionary Force

Soldiers, Sailors and Airmen of the Allied Expeditionary Force!
You are about to embark upon the Great Crusade, toward which we have
striven these many months. The eyes of the world are upon you. The hopes and
prayers of liberty-loving people everywhere march with you. In company with
our brave Allies and brothers-in-arms on other Fronts, you will bring about the
destruction of the German war machine, the elimination of Nazi tyranny over
the oppressed peoples of Europe, and security for ourselves in a free world.
Your task will not be an easy one. Your enemy is well trained, well equipped,
and battle-hardened. He will fight savagely.

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 17

6/18/12 3:10 PM

18

CHAPTER 1 • AN INTRoDuCTIoN To RHEToRIC

But this is the year 1944! Much has happened since the Nazi triumphs of
1940–41. The united Nations have inflicted upon the Germans great defeats,
in open battle, man-to-man. our air offensive has seriously reduced their strength
in the air and their capacity to wage war on the ground. our Home Fronts have
given us an overwhelming superiority in weapons and munitions of war and
placed at our disposal great reserves of trained fighting men. The tide has turned!
The free men of the world are marching together to Victory!
I have full confidence in your courage, devotion to duty, and skill in battle.
We will accept nothing less than full Victory!
Good Luck! And let us all beseech the blessing of Almighty God upon this
great and noble undertaking.

Combining Ethos, Logos, and Pathos
Most authors don’t rely on just a single type of appeal to persuade their audience;
they combine these appeals to create an effective argument. And the appeals themselves are inextricably bound together: if you lay out your argument logically, that
will help to build your ethos. It is only logical to listen to an expert on a subject,
so having ethos can help build a foundation for an appeal to logos. It’s also possible to build your ethos based on pathos — for example, who better to speak
about the pain of losing a loved one than someone who has gone through it? The
best political satirists can say things that are both perfectly logical and completely
hilarious, thus appealing to both logos and pathos at the same time.
Let’s examine a letter that Toni Morrison, the only African American woman
to win the Nobel Prize for Literature, wrote to then-senator Barack Obama endorsing him as the Democratic candidate for president in 2008. The letter was published in the New York Times.
Dear Senator obama,
This letter represents a first for me — a public endorsement of a Presidential candidate. I feel driven to let you know why I am writing it. one reason is it may help
gather other supporters; another is that this is one of those singular moments that
nations ignore at their peril. I will not rehearse the multiple crises facing us, but of one
thing I am certain: this opportunity for a national evolution (even revolution) will not
come again soon, and I am convinced you are the person to capture it.
May I describe to you my thoughts?
I have admired Senator [Hillary] Clinton for years. Her knowledge always
seemed to me exhaustive; her negotiation of politics expert. However I am more
compelled by the quality of mind (as far as I can measure it) of a candidate. I cared
little for her gender as a source of my admiration, and the little I did care was based
on the fact that no liberal woman has ever ruled in America. only conservative or
“new-centrist” ones are allowed into that realm. Nor do I care very much for your

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 18

6/18/12 3:10 PM

APPEALS To ETHoS, LoGoS, AND PATHoS

19

race[s]. I would not support you if that was all you had to offer or because it might
make me “proud.”
In thinking carefully about the strengths of the candidates, I stunned myself when
I came to the following conclusion: that in addition to keen intelligence, integrity, and
a rare authenticity, you exhibit something that has nothing to do with age, experience,
race, or gender and something I don’t see in other candidates. That something is
a creative imagination which coupled with brilliance equals wisdom. It is too bad
if we associate it only with gray hair and old age. or if we call searing vision
naivete. or if we believe cunning is insight. or if we settle for finessing cures tailored
for each ravaged tree in the forest while ignoring the poisonous landscape that feeds
and surrounds it. Wisdom is a gift; you can’t train for it, inherit it, learn it in a class,
or earn it in the workplace—that access can foster the acquisition of knowledge,
but not wisdom.
When, I wondered, was the last time this country was guided by such a leader?
Someone whose moral center was un-embargoed? Someone with courage instead of
mere ambition? Someone who truly thinks of his country’s citizens as “we,” not “they”?
Someone who understands what it will take to help America realize the virtues it
fancies about itself, what it desperately needs to become in the world?
our future is ripe, outrageously rich in its possibilities. Yet unleashing the glory
of that future will require a difficult labor, and some may be so frightened of its
birth they will refuse to abandon their nostalgia for the womb.
There have been a few prescient leaders in our past, but you are the man for
this time.
Good luck to you and to us.

5

Toni Morrison

Let’s take a step back. Who is Morrison’s audience for this letter? Of course,
she claims Senator Obama is, yet it is an open letter printed in a newspaper. Thus,
we have a sense that while she does intend that he read the letter, she also understands that her public endorsement of his candidacy, and not Senator Hillary
Clinton’s, will have an impact on a much larger audience than Obama himself:
her audience is the large national and international readership of the Times, readers who value the viewpoint of a Nobel Prize winner.
Given that audience, Morrison need not establish her ethos as a credible person whose opinion should carry some weight. After all, both Obama and the
readers of the New York Times — in fact, readers in general — know her as an awardwinning author, someone who has written many novels, a professor at Princeton
University, and the winner of a Nobel Prize. She is not, however, a person accustomed to publicly weighing in on political campaigns, so she opens with her
announcement that this endorsement is “a first” for her. She does not assume that
she has the authority or position to make Senator Obama (or others) listen to her;
instead, she asks, deferentially, “May I describe to you my thoughts?” As a woman
in her seventies with a proven record as a respected author and thinker, she could
demand that Obama listen to her, but she does not; asking a question rather than

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 19

6/18/12 3:10 PM

20

CHAPTER 1 • AN INTRoDuCTIoN To RHEToRIC

launching into her viewpoint presents herself as courteous and reasonable. The
ethos she establishes is as a person who cares deeply for the future of America and
is moved to speak out because she believes that the country is at a crossroads (“this
is one of those singular moments that nations ignore at their peril”).
Although she does not offer facts and figures nor cite expert sources, Morrison
develops a logical argument. She addresses two counterarguments: (1) Senator
Clinton is the better candidate, and (2) her support of Obama is driven primarily
by race. In paragraph 3, she concedes and refutes both. She points out that she has
“admired” Senator Clinton over the years and offers reasons; gender is not, however, among them. She effectively makes that argument also serve as evidence that
she would not support Obama purely because of race, saying, “I would not support you if that was all you had to offer or because it might make me ‘proud.’” In
paragraph 4, Morrison provides reasons for her support of Obama. She acknowledges that he is a person of “keen intelligence, integrity, and a rare authenticity,”
yet those qualities are neither her only nor her chief reasons for supporting his
candidacy. She claims that she sees in him “a creative imagination which coupled
with brilliance equals wisdom.” Once Morrison makes this point, she addresses
another counterargument: that Obama is too young. She refutes that belief by
claiming that wisdom is not necessarily a matter of age.
Morrison continues to develop her reasons for supporting Obama as she
adds appeals to pathos. By asking a series of rhetorical questions, she calls up
the shared values of the country; for instance, she asks when the country was
actually guided by “[s]omeone whose moral center was un-embargoed.” She
chooses language likely to evoke emotions, such as her distinction between “courage instead of mere ambition.” By the end of the letter, she uses images of birth
(“the glory of that future will require a difficult labor, and some may be so
frightened of its birth they will refuse to abandon their nostalgia for the womb”)
and language that pulls at our heartstrings, such as “Our future is ripe, outrageously rich.”
She draws the conclusion, again appealing to logos, that given all the evidence presented in the letter Senator Obama is “the man for this time.” Morrison
closes with a final appeal to ethos as she emphasizes that she is an integral part of
the community of the country: “Good luck to you and to us.” The “us” is decidedly not just African Americans but all Americans.

• ACTIVITY •
Select one of the following rhetorical situations, and discuss how you would
establish your ethos and appeal to logos and pathos.
• You are trying to persuade your skeptical parents that a “gap year” —
taking a year off between high school graduation and college — will be
beneficial.

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 20

6/18/12 3:10 PM

RHEToRICAL ANALYSIS oF VISuAL TExTS

21

• You have been asked to make a presentation to your school’s principal
and food service staff to propose healthier food choices in the cafeteria
at a time when the overall school budget is constrained.
• You are making the case for the purchase of a specific model and make
of car that will best fit your family’s needs and resources.
• You are the student representative chosen to go before a group of local
businesspeople to ask them to provide financial support for a proposed
school trip.

Rhetorical Analysis of Visual Texts
Many visual texts are full-fledged arguments. Although they may not be written in
paragraphs or have a traditional thesis, they are occasioned by specific circumstances, they have a purpose (whether it is to comment on a current event or simply
to urge you to buy something), and they make a claim and support it with appeals

sourCe: Toles © 2005 The Washington Post. Reprinted with permission of uNIVERSAL uCLICK. All rights

reserved.

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 21

6/18/12 3:10 PM

22

CHAPTER 1 • an introduction to rhetoric

to authority, emotion, and reason. Consider the cartoon on page 21, which cartoonist Tom Toles drew after the death of civil-rights icon Rosa Parks in 2006. Parks was
the woman who in 1955 refused to give up her seat on the bus in Montgomery, Alabama; that act came to symbolize the struggle for racial equality in the United States.
We can discuss the cartoon rhetorically, just as we’ve been examining texts
that are exclusively verbal: The occasion is the death of Rosa Parks. The speaker is
Tom Toles, a respected and award-winning political cartoonist. The audience is
made up of readers of the Washington Post and other newspapers — ​that is, it’s a
very broad audience. The speaker can assume that his audience shares his admiration and respect for Parks and that they view her passing as the loss of a public
figure as well as a private woman. Finally, the context is a memorial for a wellloved civil-rights activist, and Toles’s purpose is to remember Parks as an ordinary
citizen whose courage and determination brought extraordinary results. The subject is the legacy of Rosa Parks, a well-known person loved by many.
Readers’ familiarity with Toles — along with his obvious respect for his
­subject — establishes his ethos. The image in the cartoon appeals primarily to
pathos. Toles shows Rosa Parks, who was a devout Christian, as she is about to
enter heaven through the pearly gates; they are attended by an angel, probably
Saint Peter, who is reading a ledger. Toles depicts Parks wearing a simple coat and
carrying her pocketbook, as she did while sitting on the bus so many years ago.
Her features are somewhat detailed and realistic, making her stand out despite her
modest posture and demeanor.
The commentary at the bottom right reads, “We’ve been holding it [the front
row in heaven] open since 1955,” a reminder that more than fifty years have
elapsed since Parks resolutely sat where she pleased. The caption can be seen as an
appeal to both pathos and logos. Its emotional appeal is its acknowledgment that, of
course, heaven would have been waiting for this good woman; but the mention of
“the front row” appeals to logic because Parks made her mark in history for refusing to sit in the back of the bus. Some readers might even interpret the caption as a
criticism of how slow the country was both to integrate and to pay tribute to Parks.

• ACTIVITY •
The following advertisement is from the World Wildlife Fund (WWF), a conservation organization that “combines global reach with a foundation in science, involves action at every level from local to global, and ensures the delivery
of innovative solutions that meet the needs of both people and nature.”
What rhetorical strategies does the WWF use to achieve its purpose in
this advertisement? Pay particular attention to the interaction of the written
text with the visual elements. How does the arrangement on the page affect
your response? How does the WWF appeal to ethos, logos, and pathos? How
effective do you think the advertisement is in reaching its intended audience?
Explain.

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 22

6/20/12 10:12 AM

DETERMINING EFFECTIVE AND INEFFECTIVE RHEToRIC

23

(See insert for color version.)

Determining Effective and Ineffective Rhetoric
Not every attempt at effective rhetoric hits its mark. A famous example of humorously ineffective rhetoric is the proposal of Mr. Collins to the high-spirited heroine Elizabeth Bennet in the novel Pride and Prejudice by Jane Austen. Mr. Collins,

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 23

6/18/12 3:10 PM

24

CHAPTER 1 • AN INTRoDuCTIoN To RHEToRIC

a foolish and sycophantic minister, stands to inherit the Bennet estate; thus, he
assumes that any of the Bennet sisters, including Elizabeth, will be grateful for his
offer of marriage. So he crafts his offer as a business proposal that is a series of reasons. Following is a slightly abridged version of Mr. Collins’s proposal:
from Pride and Prejudice
JAne Austen

My reasons for marrying are, first, that I think it a right thing for every clergyman
in easy circumstances (like myself) to set the example of matrimony in his parish.
Secondly, that I am convinced it will add very greatly to my happiness; and
thirdly — which perhaps I ought to have mentioned earlier, that it is the particular
advice and recommendation of the very noble lady whom I have the honour of
calling patroness. . . . But the fact is, that being, as I am, to inherit this estate after
the death of your honoured father (who, however, may live many years longer), I
could not satisfy myself without resolving to chuse a wife from among his daughters, that the loss to them might be as little as possible, when the melancholy event
takes place — which, however, as I have already said, may not be for several
years. This has been my motive, my fair cousin, and I flatter myself it will not sink
me in your esteem. And now nothing remains for me but to assure you in the most
animated language of the violence of my affection. To fortune I am perfectly indifferent, and shall make no demand of that nature on your father, since I am well
aware that it could not be complied with; and that one thousand pounds in the 4 per
cents, which will not be yours till after your mother’s decease, is all that you may
ever be entitled to. on that head, therefore, I shall be uniformly silent; and you may
assure yourself that no ungenerous reproach shall ever pass my lips when we are
married.

Mr. Collins appeals to logos with a sequence of reasons that support his
intent to marry: ministers should be married, marriage will add to his happiness, and his patroness wants him to marry. Of course, these are all advantages
to himself. Ultimately, he claims that he can assure Elizabeth “in the most animated language of the violence of [his] affection,” yet he offers no language at
all about his emotional attachment. Finally, as if to refute the counterargument
that she would not reap many benefits from the proposed alliance, he reminds
her that her financial future will be grim unless she accepts his offer, and he promises to be “uniformly silent” rather than to remind her of that fact once they are
married.
Where did he go wrong? Without devaluing the wry humor of Austen in her
portrayal of Mr. Collins, we can conclude that at the very least he failed to understand his audience. He offers reasons for marriage that would have little appeal to
Elizabeth, who does not share his businesslike and self-serving assumptions. No

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 24

6/18/12 3:10 PM

DETERMINING EFFECTIVE AND INEFFECTIVE RHEToRIC

25

(See insert for color version.)

wonder she can hardly wait to get way from him; no wonder he responds with
shocked indignation.
Unlike Mr. Collins’s clearly bad attempt at rhetoric, in the real world deciding whether rhetoric hits or misses its mark is often a matter of debate. Consider the advertisement above from PETA (People for the Ethical Treatment of
Animals).
It’s important to note that PETA, an animal rights group, sponsors this ad.
A positive reading would see the image of an overweight child about to bite into
a burger as an effective attention-getter. The headline, with “meat” the only word
in red, makes the bold assertion that parents who allow children to eat meat are
guilty of child abuse. Since most people would not have thought of this connection, its boldness might have the shock value to make them stop and think. By
choosing a particularly unappetizing burger and plump-looking kid, PETA presents an image of childhood obesity that might want to make the viewer grab the
burger from the child before she gets it in her mouth! The smaller print calls for
a “vegan” diet to combat obesity, asserting that replacing burgers with vegetables
is a healthier alternative — a claim few people would find questionable.
But that’s not the only way to interpret this ad. Claiming that allowing a child
to eat a hamburger is the same as committing child abuse is a serious allegation,
and it could be seen as hyperbole. If you read the large print as an unfounded exaggeration, then the ad’s purpose is lost. It’s unlikely that anyone would argue with
the exhortation to “fight the fat,” but to link consumption of any kind of meat
with a heinous act of child abuse might not seem logical to every view, which could
undermine the ad’s effectiveness.
Let’s turn to an essay, an op-ed piece that appeared in the Washington Post
in 2011 after Japan was hit by a massive earthquake and tsunami that severely damaged nuclear reactors. Columnist Anne Applebaum uses this devastating situation

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 25

6/18/12 3:10 PM

26

CHAPTER 1 • AN INTRoDuCTIoN To RHEToRIC

to argue against further use of nuclear power. As you read the article, analyze it
rhetorically and ask yourself if she is likely to achieve her purpose or if her strategies miss the mark.
If the Japanese Can’t Build a Safe Reactor, Who Can?
Anne AppLeBAuM

In the aftermath of a disaster, the strengths of any society become immediately visible.
The cohesiveness, resilience, technological brilliance and extraordinary competence
of the Japanese are on full display. one report from Rikuzentakata — a town of
25,000, annihilated by the tsunami that followed Friday’s massive earthquake —
describes volunteer firefighters working to clear rubble and search for survivors;
troops and police efficiently directing traffic and supplies; survivors are not only
“calm and pragmatic” but also coping “with politeness and sometimes amazingly
good cheer.”
Thanks to these strengths, Japan will eventually recover. But at least one Japanese nuclear power complex will not. As I write, three reactors at the Fukushima
Daiichi nuclear power station appear to have lost their cooling capacity. Engineers
are flooding the plant with seawater — effectively destroying it — and then letting off
radioactive steam. There have been two explosions. The situation may worsen in the
coming hours.
Yet Japan’s nuclear power stations were designed with the same care and precision as everything else in the country. More to the point, as the only country in the
world to have experienced true nuclear catastrophe, Japan had an incentive to build
well, as well as the capability, laws and regulations to do so. Which leads to an
unavoidable question: If the competent and technologically brilliant Japanese can’t
build a completely safe reactor, who can?
It can — and will — be argued that the Japanese situation is extraordinary.
Few countries are as vulnerable to natural catastrophe as Japan, and the scale of
this earthquake is unprecedented. But there are other kinds of extraordinary situations and unprecedented circumstances. In an attempt to counter the latest worstpossible scenarios, a Franco-German company began constructing a super-safe,
“next-generation” nuclear reactor in Finland several years ago. The plant was designed
to withstand the impact of an airplane — a post–Sept. 11 concern — and includes a
chamber allegedly able to contain a core meltdown. But it was also meant to cost
$4 billion and to be completed in 2009. Instead, after numerous setbacks, it is still
unfinished — and may now cost $6 billion or more.
Ironically, the Finnish plant was meant to launch the renaissance of the nuclear
power industry in Europe — an industry that has, of late, enjoyed a renaissance
around the world, thanks almost entirely to fears of climate change. Nuclear plants
emit no carbon. As a result, nuclear plants, after a long, post-Chernobyl lull, have

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 26

5

6/18/12 3:10 PM

DETERMINING EFFECTIVE AND INEFFECTIVE RHEToRIC

27

became fashionable again. Some 62 nuclear reactors are under construction at the
moment, a further 158 are being planned and 324 others have been proposed.
Increasingly, nuclear power is also promoted because it is safe. Which it is —
except, of course, when it is not. Chances of a major disaster are tiny, one in a
hundred million. But in the event of a statistically improbable major disaster, the
damage could include, say, the destruction of a city or the poisoning of a country.
The cost of such a potential catastrophe is partly reflected in the price of plant construction, and it partly explains the cost overruns in Finland: Nobody can risk the
tiniest flaw in the concrete or the most minimal reduction in the quality of the steel.
But as we are about to learn in Japan, the true costs of nuclear power are
never reflected even in the very high price of plant construction. Inevitably, the enormous costs of nuclear waste disposal fall to taxpayers, not the nuclear industry. The
costs of cleanup, even in the wake of a relatively small accident, are eventually
borne by government, too. Health-care costs will also be paid by society at large,
one way or another. If there is true nuclear catastrophe in Japan, the entire world will
pay the price.
I hope that this will never, ever happen. I feel nothing but admiration for the
Japanese nuclear engineers who have been battling catastrophe for several days.
If anyone can prevent a disaster, the Japanese can do it. But I also hope that a
near-miss prompts people around the world to think twice about the true “price” of
nuclear energy, and that it stops the nuclear renaissance dead in its tracks.

Does Applebaum miss her mark? Does she use a worst-case scenario to make
her case? Do her references to September 11 and World War II make nuclear
power seem alarming, or do they just make Applebaum sound alarmist? Are her
fears fully justified, or is this nothing but fear mongering? Consider that she does
acknowledge that Japan’s situation is unusual because the country is so “vulnerable to natural catastrophe” and the earthquake that struck was unusually strong.
She cites facts and figures about the efforts in Finland to build a nuclear plant that
is meant to be “super-safe” and withstand every imaginable contingency. She
explains that other European nations are following the Finnish lead (“158 are
being planned and 324 others have been proposed”) because nuclear power, which
does not emit carbon dioxide, is not thought to contribute to climate change.
There is quite a bit to consider, even in this relatively brief piece.

• ACTIVITY •
Following is a rhetorical analysis of the effectiveness of Applebaum’s argument written by an AP student, Tamar Demby. How does she develop her
position? Why do you agree or disagree with her? How might she improve
her essay?

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 27

6/18/12 3:10 PM

28

CHAPTER 1 • AN INTRoDuCTIoN To RHEToRIC

Alarmist or Alarming Rhetoric?
tAMAr deMBy
In an age when threats to life as we know it seem to grow too enormous to
face, it becomes tempting to regard any danger as an apocalypse waiting to happen.
But however huge and urgent an incident appears, it is important to look at the
big picture and calmly analyze the true risks of all responses. Within the context
of Japan’s struggle to avert a nuclear meltdown in Fukushima Prefecture, Anne
Applebaum, writing for the Washington Post, argues against any further expansion
of nuclear power. However, she undermines her own purpose by basing her argument
on unsupported claims, relying on highly emotional language, and failing to
establish her ethos as a credible authority on the issue.
As a journalist rather than a nuclear physicist or someone with credentials
earned by education and training, she has to present a clear viewpoint supported by
solid evidence. If she has a history of reporting on nuclear power issues, then she
should have explained that expertise. Instead, she relies on hot-button issues such
as Chernobyl to alarm her readers, who are likely an educated and well-informed
audience. Even though she is writing in the midst of the crisis in Japan when no
one knew what would happen to the reactors, she needs to establish a fair-minded
ethos and build a more fact-based case. Unless she moves her audience to share her
concern and alarm, she fails to achieve her purpose of making them see the true
“cost” of nuclear power and oppose further expansion.
Applebaum’s central point is spelled out in the title of her piece: “If the
Japanese Can’t Build a Safe Reactor, Who Can?” In order to ask and then answer this
question, she must establish the supremacy of the Japanese to build a safe nuclear
reactor. In her first paragraph, she highlights the strengths of the Japanese:
“cohesiveness, resilience, technological brilliance and extraordinary competence”
and cites examples of all these traits except technological brilliance — leaving the
reader with no reason to agree with her assessment of Japanese technological prowess.
This pattern continues in the second paragraph, as Applebaum attempts to explain
that the Japanese can be expected to have built the safest possible nuclear reactors
because they were “designed with the same care and precision as everything else in
the country” — a statement she fails to support. Verified details seem to be reserved
for viscerally effective descriptions of the situation in the Fukushima Daiichi plant.
Applebaum states that the plant will not “eventually recover,” as three reactors are
“letting off radioactive steam . . . (and) there have been two explosions.” These facts
serve only to appeal to the reader’s emotions, focusing on the horrifying results of
the catastrophe but not addressing — or supporting — Applebaum’s claims. Ultimately,
Applebaum’s position seems to be based more on personal alarm than analysis of facts.

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 28

6/18/12 3:10 PM

DETERMINING EFFECTIVE AND INEFFECTIVE RHEToRIC

29

• ACTIVITY •
Examine the following advertisement sponsored by the Federal Highway
Administration. Analyze the rhetorical situation and appeals used in the
advertisement, and determine whether you think this advertisement is effective or ineffective.

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 29

6/18/12 3:10 PM

30

CHAPTER 1 • AN INTRoDuCTIoN To RHEToRIC

• CulmInATIng ACTIVITY •
By this point, you have analyzed what we mean by the rhetorical situation,
and you have learned a number of key concepts and terms. It’s time to put all
the ideas together to examine a series of texts on a single subject. Following
are four texts related to the 1969 Apollo 11 mission that landed the first
humans on the moon. The first is a news article from the Times of London
reporting the event; the next is a speech by William Safire that President
Nixon would have given had the mission not been successful; the third is a
commentary by novelist Ayn Rand; the last is a political cartoon that appeared
at the time. Discuss the purpose of each text and how the interaction among
speaker, audience, and subject affects the text. How does each text appeal to
ethos, pathos, and logos? Finally, how effective is each text in achieving its
purpose?

Man Takes First Steps on the Moon
the Times
The following article appeared in a special 5 a.m. edition of the Times of London.

Neil Armstrong became the first man to take a walk on the moon’s surface
early today. The spectacular moment came after he had inched his way down
the ladder of the fragile lunar bug Eagle while colleague Edwin Aldrin watched
his movements from inside the craft. The landing, in the Sea of Tranquillity,
was near perfect and the two astronauts on board Eagle reported that it had
not tilted too far to prevent a take-off. The first word from man on the moon
came from Aldrin: “Tranquillity base. The Eagle has landed.” of the first view
of the lunar surface, he said: “There are quite a few rocks and boulders in the
near area which are going to have some interesting colours in them.” Armstrong
said both of them were in good shape and there was no need to worry about
them. They had experienced no difficulty in manoeuvring the module in the
moon’s gravity. There were tense moments in the mission control centre at
Houston while they awaited news of the safe landing. When it was confirmed,
one ground controller was heard to say: “We got a bunch of guys on the ground
about to turn blue. We’re breathing again.” Ten minutes after landing, Aldrin
radioed: “We’ll get to the details of what’s around here. But it looks like a collection of every variety, shape, angularity, granularity; a collection of just about
every kind of rock.” He added: “The colour depends on what angle you’re
looking at . . . rocks and boulders look as though they’re going to have some
interesting colours.”

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 30

6/18/12 3:10 PM

Culminating Activity

31

Armstrong says: one giant leap for mankind
From the News Team in Houston and London
It was 3.56 a.m. (British Standard Time) when Armstrong stepped off the ladder
from Eagle and on to the moon’s surface. The module’s hatch had opened at
3.39 a.m.
“That’s one small step for man but one giant leap for mankind,” he said as
he stepped on the lunar surface.
The two astronauts opened the hatch of their lunar module at 3.39 a.m. in
preparation for Neil Armstrong’s walk. They were obviously being ultra careful
over the operation for there was a considerable time lapse before Armstrong
moved backwards out of the hatch to start his descent down the ladder.
Aldrin had to direct Armstrong out of the hatch because he was walking
backwards and could not see the ladder.
Armstrong moved on to the porch outside Eagle and prepared to switch the
television cameras which showed the world his dramatic descent as he began
to inch his way down the ladder.
By this time the two astronauts had spent 25 minutes of their breathing time
but their oxygen packs on their backs last four hours.
When the television cameras switched on there was a spectacular shot of
Armstrong as he moved down the ladder. Viewers had a clear view as they saw
him stepping foot by foot down the ladder, which has nine rungs.
He reported that the lunar surface was a “very fine-grained powder.”
Clutching the ladder Armstrong put his left foot on the lunar surface and
reported it was like powdered charcoal and he could see his footprints on the
surface. He said the L.E.M.’s engine had left a crater about a foot deep but they
were “on a very level place here.”
Standing directly in the shadow of the lunar module Armstrong said he could see
very clearly. The light was sufficiently bright for everything to be clearly visible.
The next step was for Aldrin to lower a hand camera down to Armstrong. This
was the camera which Armstrong was to use to film Aldrin when he descends
from Eagle.
Armstrong then spent the next few minutes taking photographs of the area
in which he was standing and then prepared to take the “contingency” sample
of lunar soil.
This was one of the first steps in case the astronauts had to make an emergency
take-off before they could complete the whole of their activities on the moon.
Armstrong said: “It is very pretty out here.”
Using the scoop to pick up the sample Armstrong said he had pushed six
to eight inches into the surface. He then reported to the mission control centre
that he placed the sample lunar soil in his pocket.
The first sample was in his pocket at 4.08 a.m. He said the moon “has soft
beauty all its own,” like some desert of the United States. . . .

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 31

5

10

15

6/20/12 10:12 AM

32

CHAPTER 1 • AN INTRoDuCTIoN To RHEToRIC

Greatest moment of time
President Nixon, watching the events on television, described it as “one of the
greatest moments of our time.” He told Mr. Ron Ziegler, the White House press
secretary, that the last 22 seconds of the descent were the longest he had ever
lived through.
Mr. Harold Wilson, in a television statement, expressed “our deep wish for
a safe return at the end of what has been a most historic scientific achievement
in the history of man.” The Prime Minister, speaking from 10 Downing Street,
said: “The first feeling of all in Britain is that this very dangerous part of the
mission has been safely accomplished.”
Moscow Radio announced the news solemnly as the main item in its 11.30
news broadcast. There was no immediate news of Luna 15.
At Castelgandolfo the Pope greeted news of the lunar landing by exclaiming:
“Glory to God in the highest and peace on earth to men of good will!”
In an unscheduled speech from his summer residence the Pope, who followed the flight on colour television, said: “We, humble representatives of that
Christ, who, coming among us from the abyss of divinity, has made to resound
in the heavens this blessed voice, today we make an echo, repeating it in a
celebration on the part of the whole terrestrial globe, with no more unsurpassable bounds of human existence, but openness to the expanse of endless
space and a new destiny.”
“Glory to God!” President Saragat of Italy said in a statement: “May this victory be a good omen for an even greater victory: the definite conquest of peace,
of justice, of liberty, for all peoples of the World.”
President Charles Helou of Lebanon followed the flight and landing with special dispatches from the Information Ministry. A spokesman said he would send
an official message later.
In Jordan King Husain sent a congratulatory message to the astronauts and
President Nixon.
In Stockholm Mr. Tage Erlander, the Swedish Prime Minister, said he planned
to cable President Nixon his congratulations as soon as the astronauts returned
to Earth. King Gustav Adolf was watching television at touchdown time and
told friends he was “thrilled” by the Apollo performance.
In Cuba the national radio announced the moon landing 12 minutes after
it was accomplished.
Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of the Jodrell Bank observatory, said: “The
moment of touchdown was one of the moments of greatest drama in the history of man. The success in this part of the enterprize opens the most enormous
opportunities for the future exploration of the universe.”

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 32

20

25

6/18/12 3:10 PM

Culminating Activity

33

In Event of Moon Disaster
William Safire
The following speech, revealed in 1999, was prepared by President Nixon’s
speechwriter, William Safire, to be used in the event of a disaster that would maroon
the astronauts on the moon.
Fate has ordained that the men who went to the moon to explore in peace will
stay on the moon to rest in peace.
These brave men, Neil Armstrong and Edwin Aldrin, know that there is no
hope for their recovery. But they also know that there is hope for mankind in
their sacrifice. These two men are laying down their lives in mankind’s most
noble goal: the search for truth and understanding.
They will be mourned by their families and friends; they will be mourned
by their nation; they will be mourned by the people of the world; they will be
mourned by a Mother Earth that dared send two of her sons into the unknown.
In their exploration, they stirred the people of the world to feel as one; in
their sacrifice, they bind more tightly the brotherhood of man.
In ancient days, men looked at stars and saw their heroes in the constellations. In modern times, we do much the same, but our heroes are epic men of
flesh and blood.
Others will follow, and surely find their way home. Man’s search will not be
denied. But these men were the first, and they will remain the foremost in our
hearts. For every human being who looks up at the moon in the nights to come
will know that there is some corner of another world that is forever mankind.

5

The July 16, 1969, Launch: A Symbol of Man’s Greatness
Ayn Rand
The following commentary by novelist Ayn Rand first appeared in the Objectivist,
a publication created by Rand and others to put forward their philosophy of
objectivism, which values individualism, freedom, and reason.

“No matter what discomforts and expenses you had to bear to come here,”
said a NASA guide to a group of guests, at the conclusion of a tour of the
Space Center on Cape Kennedy, on July 15, 1969, “there will be seven minutes
tomorrow morning that will make you feel it was worth it.”
It was.
[The launch] began with a large patch of bright, yellow-orange flame shooting sideways from under the base of the rocket. It looked like a normal kind
of flame and I felt an instant’s shock of anxiety, as if this were a building on
fire. In the next instant the flame and the rocket were hidden by such a sweep of

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 33

6/20/12 10:12 AM

34

CHAPTER 1 • AN INTRoDuCTIoN To RHEToRIC

dark red fire that the anxiety vanished: this was not part of any normal experience and could not be integrated with anything. The dark red fire parted into
two gigantic wings, as if a hydrant were shooting streams of fire outward and
up, toward the zenith — and between the two wings, against a pitch-black sky,
the rocket rose slowly, so slowly that it seemed to hang still in the air, a pale
cylinder with a blinding oval of white light at the bottom, like an upturned
candle with its flame directed at the earth. Then I became aware that this was
happening in total silence, because I heard the cries of birds winging frantically away from the flames. The rocket was rising faster, slanting a little, its tense
white flame leaving a long, thin spiral of bluish smoke behind it. It had risen
into the open blue sky, and the dark red fire had turned into enormous billows
of brown smoke, when the sound reached us: it was a long, violent crack, not
a rolling sound, but specifically a cracking, grinding sound, as if space were
breaking apart, but it seemed irrelevant and unimportant, because it was a
sound from the past and the rocket was long since speeding safely out of its
reach — though it was strange to realize that only a few seconds had passed.
I found myself waving to the rocket involuntarily, I heard people applauding and
joined them, grasping our common motive; it was impossible to watch passively,
one had to express, by some physical action, a feeling that was not triumph,
but more: the feeling that that white object’s unobstructed streak of motion was
the only thing that mattered in the universe.
What we had seen, in naked essentials — but in reality, not in a work of
art — was the concretized abstraction of man’s greatness.
The fundamental significance of Apollo 11’s triumph is not political; it is
philosophical; specifically, moral-epistemological.
The meaning of the sight lay in the fact that when those dark red wings of
fire flared open, one knew that one was not looking at a normal occurrence,
but at a cataclysm which, if unleashed by nature, would have wiped man out
of existence — and one knew also that this cataclysm was planned, unleashed,
and controlled by man, that this unimaginable power was ruled by his power
and, obediently serving his purpose, was making way for a slender, rising
craft. one knew that this spectacle was not the product of inanimate nature,
like some aurora borealis, or of chance, or of luck, that it was unmistakably
human — with “human,” for once, meaning grandeur — that a purpose and a
long, sustained, disciplined effort had gone to achieve this series of moments,
and that man was succeeding, succeeding, succeeding! For once, if only for
seven minutes, the worst among those who saw it had to feel — not “How small
is man by the side of the Grand Canyon!” — but “How great is man and how
safe is nature when he conquers it!”
That we had seen a demonstration of man at his best, no one could doubt —
this was the cause of the event’s attraction and of the stunned numbed state in
which it left us. And no one could doubt that we had seen an achievement of
man in his capacity as a rational being — an achievement of reason, of logic,
of mathematics, of total dedication to the absolutism of reality.

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 34

5

6/18/12 3:10 PM

Culminating Activity

35

Frustration is the leitmotif in the lives of most men, particularly today — the
frustration of inarticulate desires, with no knowledge of the means to achieve
them. In the sight and hearing of a crumbling world, Apollo 11 enacted the
story of an audacious purpose, its execution, its triumph, and the means that
achieved it — the story and the demonstration of man’s highest potential.

Transported
Herblock
The following editorial cartoon by the famous cartoonist Herb Lock, or Herblock,
appeared in the Washington Post on July 18, 1969.

source: A 1969 Herblock Cartoon, copyright by The Herb Block Foundation.

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 35

6/20/12 10:12 AM

36

CHAPTER 1 • AN INTRoDuCTIoN To RHEToRIC

Glossary of Rhetorical Terms
Aristotelian triangle

See rhetorical triangle.

audience The listener, viewer, or reader of a text. Most texts are likely to have
multiple audiences.
Gehrig’s audience was his teammates and fans in the stadium that day, but it was also
the teams he played against, the fans listening on the radio, and posterity — us.

concession An acknowledgment that an opposing argument may be true or reasonable. In a strong argument, a concession is usually accompanied by a refutation challenging the validity of the opposing argument.
Lou Gehrig concedes what some of his listeners may think — that his bad break is a
cause for discouragement or despair.

connotation Meanings or associations that readers have with a word beyond its
dictionary definition, or denotation. Connotations are usually positive or negative, and they can greatly affect the author’s tone. Consider the connotations
of the words below, all of which mean “overweight.”
That cat is plump. That cat is fat. That cat is obese.

context The circumstances, atmosphere, attitudes, and events surrounding
a text.
The context for Lou Gehrig’s speech is the recent announcement of his illness and his
subsequent retirement, but also the poignant contrast between his potent career and his
debilitating disease.

counterargument An opposing argument to the one a writer is putting forward.
Rather than ignoring a counterargument, a strong writer will usually address it
through the process of concession and refutation.
Some of Lou Gehrig’s listeners might have argued that his bad break was a cause for
discouragement or despair.

ethos Greek for “character.” Speakers appeal to ethos to demonstrate that they
are credible and trustworthy to speak on a given topic. Ethos is established by
both who you are and what you say.
Lou Gehrig brings the ethos of being a legendary athlete to his speech, yet in it he
establishes a different kind of ethos — that of a regular guy and a good sport who shares
the audience’s love of baseball and family. And like them, he has known good luck and
bad breaks.

logos Greek for “embodied thought.” Speakers appeal to logos, or reason, by
offering clear, rational ideas and using specific details, examples, facts, statistics, or expert testimony to back them up.
Gehrig starts with the thesis that he is “the luckiest man on the face of the earth” and
supports it with two points: (1) the love and kindness he’s received in his seventeen
years of playing baseball, and (2) a list of great people who have been his friends,
family, and teammates.

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 36

6/18/12 3:10 PM

GLoSSARY oF RHEToRICAL TERMS

occasion

37

The time and place a speech is given or a piece is written.

In the case of Gehrig’s speech, the occasion is Lou Gehrig Appreciation Day. More
specifically, his moment comes at home plate between games of a doubleheader.

pathos Greek for “suffering” or “experience.” Speakers appeal to pathos to emotionally motivate their audience. More specific appeals to pathos might play on
the audience’s values, desires, and hopes, on the one hand, or fears and prejudices, on the other.
The most striking appeal to pathos is the poignant contrast between Gehrig’s horrible
diagnosis and his public display of courage.

persona Greek for “mask.” The face or character that a speaker shows to his or
her audience.
Lou Gehrig is a famous baseball hero, but in his speech he presents himself as a
common man who is modest and thankful for the opportunities he’s had.

polemic Greek for “hostile.” An aggressive argument that tries to establish the
superiority of one opinion over all others. Polemics generally do not concede
that opposing opinions have any merit.
propaganda The spread of ideas and information to further a cause. In its negative
sense, propaganda is the use of rumors, lies, disinformation, and scare tactics
in order to damage or promote a cause. For more information, see How to Detect
Propaganda on page 756.
purpose

The goal the speaker wants to achieve.

One of Gehrig’s chief purposes in delivering his Farewell Address is to thank his fans
and his teammates, but he also wants to demonstrate that he remains positive: he
emphasizes his past luck and present optimism and downplays his illness.

refutation A denial of the validity of an opposing argument. In order to sound
reasonable, refutations often follow a concession that acknowledges that an
opposing argument may be true or reasonable.
Lou Gehrig refutes that his bad break is a cause for discouragement by saying that he
has “an awful lot to live for!”

rhetoric As Aristotle defined the term, “the faculty of observing in any given
case the available means of persuasion.” In other words, it is the art of finding
ways to persuade an audience.
rhetorical appeals Rhetorical techniques used to persuade an audience by emphasizing what they find most important or compelling. The three major appeals
are to ethos (character), logos (reason), and pathos (emotion).
rhetorical triangle (Aristotelian triangle) A diagram that illustrates the interrelationship among the speaker, audience, and subject in determining a text. See p. 4.
SOAPS A mnemonic device that stands for Subject, Occasion, Audience, Purpose, and Speaker. It is a handy way to remember the various elements that
make up the rhetorical situation.

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 37

6/18/12 3:10 PM

38

CHAPTER 1 • AN INTRoDuCTIoN To RHEToRIC

speaker The person or group who creates a text. This might be a politician who
delivers a speech, a commentator who writes an article, an artist who draws a
political cartoon, or even a company that commissions an advertisement.
In his Farewell Address, the speaker is not just Lou Gehrig, but baseball hero and ALS
victim Lou Gehrig, a common man who is modest and thankful for the opportunities
he’s had.

subject

The topic of a text. What the text is about.

Lou Gehrig’s subject in his speech is his illness, but it is also a catalog of all the lucky
breaks that preceded his diagnosis.

text While this term generally means the written word, in the humanities it has
come to mean any cultural product that can be “read” — meaning not just consumed and comprehended, but investigated. This includes fiction, nonfiction,
poetry, political cartoons, fine art, photography, performances, fashion, cultural trends, and much more.

01_SHE_67650_Ch01_001_038.indd 38

6/18/12 3:10 PM

2
Close Reading
The Art and Craft of Analysis

D

o you ever wonder how your teachers can teach the same books year
after year and not be bored by them? One reason is that the works we
study in school have many layers of meaning, revealing something new each time
we read them. That quality is what distinguishes them from literary potato chips —
works that are satisfying, even delicious, but that offer little nutritional value. A
mystery, romance, gossip blog, or sports rant may absorb us completely, but usually we do not read it a second time.
How do you find the “nutritional value” in the essays, speeches, stories, and
poems you study in school? Your teacher may lead you through a work, putting it
in context, focusing your attention on themes and techniques, asking for a response.
Or you might do these things yourself through a process called close reading.
When you read closely, you develop an understanding of a text that is based first
on the words themselves and then on the larger ideas those words suggest. That
is, you start with the small details, and as you think about them, you discover how
they affect the text’s larger meaning. When you write a close analysis, you start with
the larger meaning you’ve discovered and use the small details — the language
itself — to support your interpretation.
Of course, as you read the speeches, essays, letters, editorials, and even blog
posts in this book and in your class, you will find that many different factors dictate the stylistic choices a writer makes. Sometimes, it’s the genre: a blog post will
likely be less formal than, say, an acceptance speech; an editorial will be less personal than an exchange of letters between two friends. Sometimes, it’s the context
or rhetorical situation — considering subject matter, occasion, audience, purpose,
and the persona of the speaker. Often, however, the choices writers make are
related to the rhetorical strategies of the text: what words in what arrangement
are most likely to create the desired effect in the audience?

39

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 39

6/18/12 3:10 PM

40

CHAPTER 2 • CLosE REAdInG

Analyzing Style
As with any skill, close reading becomes easier with practice, but it’s important to
remember that we use it unconsciously — and instantaneously — every day as we
respond to people and situations. Just as we notice body language, gestures, facial
expressions, and volume in our conversations, we can understand a text better by
examining its sentence structure, vocabulary, imagery, and figurative language.
These elements make up the style of the written piece and help us to discover layers of meaning. Style contributes to the meaning, purpose, and effect of a text,
whether it is written, oral, or visual.

A Model Analysis
Let’s take a look at a very famous speech given by Queen Elizabeth I in 1588 to the
English troops at Tilbury that were assembled in preparation for an attack by the
Spanish Armada. Working with older pieces such as this one sometimes seems
more difficult than working with texts from the twentieth or twenty-first century,
yet you may find that you read the older ones more carefully and that their riches
reveal themselves more quickly than you might expect. Often the biggest challenge is understanding the tone of the piece, but if you look carefully at the speaker’s choices of words (also called diction) and how those words are arranged
(called syntax), you will find plenty of clues.
It may help you to begin by picturing Queen Elizabeth as she might have been
on that day in 1588. (Consider watching a reenactment of this speech; Helen Mirren’s
performance of it in the 2005 miniseries Elizabeth I is especially good and easy to
find online.) Tradition has it that when Queen Elizabeth, known as the Virgin Queen,
gave this speech, she was dressed in armor and left her bodyguards in order to walk
among her subjects. Her troops were vastly outnumbered by a Spanish Armada
that was the most formidable naval force in the world, and it had been preparing
to invade England for three years. England, in contrast, was in a precarious financial
situation that made it impossible for its troops to go on the offensive; they had to
wait for the attack. The English troops were bedraggled, underpaid, and hungry.
Speech to the Troops at Tilbury
Queen elizabeth

My loving people,
We have been persuaded by some that are careful of our safety, to take heed
how we commit our selves to armed multitudes, for fear of treachery; but I assure
you I do not desire to live to distrust my faithful and loving people. Let tyrants fear,
I have always so behaved myself that, under God, I have placed my chiefest strength
and safeguard in the loyal hearts and good-will of my subjects; and therefore I am
come amongst you, as you see, at this time, not for my recreation and disport, but

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 40

6/18/12 3:10 PM

AnALyzInG sTyLE

41

being resolved, in the midst and heat of the battle, to live and die amongst you all;
to lay down for my God, and for my kingdom, and my people, my honour and my
blood, even in the dust.
I know I have the body but of a weak and feeble woman; but I have the heart and
stomach of a king, and of a king of England too, and think foul scorn that Parma or
spain, or any prince of Europe, should dare to invade the borders of my realm; to
which rather than any dishonour shall grow by me, I myself will take up arms, I myself
will be your general, judge, and rewarder of every one of your virtues in the field.
I know already, for your forwardness you have deserved rewards and crowns;
and We do assure you in the word of a prince, they shall be duly paid you. In the
mean time, my lieutenant general shall be in my stead, than whom never prince commanded a more noble or worthy subject; not doubting but by your obedience to my
general, by your concord in the camp, and your valour in the field, we shall shortly
have a famous victory over those enemies of my God, of my kingdom, and of my
people.

Using what you learned in Chapter 1, you can begin by identifying the passage’s rhetorical situation. The speaker is the Queen of England, not — and this is
important — the king. She is exhorting her troops to face the battle with courage
and determination on the eve of a confrontation in which England is the underdog. We can analyze the passage through the rhetorical triangle, considering the
interaction of subject, audience, and speaker. The subject is Queen Elizabeth’s support for her troops, and the audience is those soldiers gathered around to hear her.
Of course, we can assume Elizabeth knew that her words would be communicated to the larger world as well.
You can also consider the ways the queen appealed to ethos, pathos, and logos.
A popular queen, walking alone but with her loyal retinue nearby, her ethos as the
monarch is established; nevertheless, she begins the speech humbly by stating her
confidence in her subjects. She appeals to pathos in her characterization of herself as a “weak and feeble woman,” although she reassures her listeners that on the
inside she is as strong as a king. Less apparent is Elizabeth’s appeal to logos; we
could, however, consider her promise to repay her loyal troops with “rewards and
crowns” to be a logical extension of her support for them.

• ACTIVITY •
Reread the speech, and think about the rhetorical strategies and style choices
that help Queen Elizabeth convey her message. Think also about the persona
she creates for herself and how that helps her achieve her purpose.
You probably noticed that Elizabeth begins by speaking of herself in the first
person plural. This is a convention: the “royal we,” meant to show that the ruling

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 41

6/18/12 3:10 PM

42

CHAPTER 2 • CLosE REAdInG

monarch embodies the entire nation. Even though it is conventional, you can see
that it helps Elizabeth create a sense of common purpose. Interestingly, she quickly
moves to the singular personal pronouns, “I” and “my,” appropriate in a speech
she is making on the same ground (literally) as her audience. She starts off by
acknowledging those who might warn her against walking among her soldiers,
those who urge her to “take heed how we commit our selves to armed multitudes.”
She asserts her independence and fortitude here, telling the troops that she considers them her “chiefest strength” and assures them that she is not that day among
them for “recreation and disport.” We can imagine that Elizabeth knew the power
of image and even mythmaking; there in the flesh among her soldiers, her wish to
“live and die amongst you all” would inspire confidence and courage. The sentence that begins the speech creates a sense of equity between Elizabeth and her
troops. The second sentence builds up to the queen’s dramatic commitment to
die in the dust with her subjects.
The speech switches gears a bit in the third sentence (para. 2) with the speech’s
most famous phrase: “I know I have the body but of a weak and feeble woman;
but I have the heart and stomach of a king, and of a king of England too. . . .” Here
Elizabeth reinforces her image as the Virgin Queen. She never married, most
likely for political reasons, and considered herself married to England. She reminds
the assembled troops that she is the daughter of a king, however, and is, therefore,
connected to the long line of royalty and the divine right of kings — the idea that
royal power is bestowed by God. It is worth noting that only then, when she has
characterized herself as a “weak and feeble woman,” does she mention the enemies:
Spain, Parma (Italy), and Europe in general. These references may serve a few
purposes. They appeal to the gallantry of the troops who would feel obligated as
gentlemen to defend their queen; they may also be a way to suggest that an attack
by Spain is a Catholic threat to English Protestantism. In either case, Elizabeth
reassures her troops that she is with them every step of the way and that their
“virtues in the field” will be rewarded.
The final part of the speech reinforces the earlier call for national unity and
a reassurance that Elizabeth has the interests of her people at heart. She reminds
the troops of the rewards they will receive and reaffirms her support for her lieutenant general, who serves “in [her] stead.” The last clause invokes the rule of
three — “your obedience,” “your concord,” “your valour” — to predict a “famous
victory over those enemies of my God, of my kingdom, and of my people.”
Although the Armada was defeated largely by bad weather and the light English
boats that were able to ride out the storms, Elizabeth’s troops were certainly
strengthened by her glorious words of trust and confidence.
Let’s discuss the tone of Elizabeth’s speech, as this is a good way to begin
thinking about how to write about what you’ve discovered in your close reading.
We often consider tone and mood together: tone is the speaker’s attitude toward
the subject as revealed by his or her choice of language, and mood is the feeling
created by the work. As always, it’s important to be able to support your description of tone and mood with evidence from the text. Elizabeth’s speech at Tilbury

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 42

6/18/12 3:10 PM

AnALyzInG sTyLE

43

begins with Elizabeth humbling herself to the soldiers: she drops the “royal we”;
she puts her subjects before her own safety; she offers her life for her kingdom. In
the second paragraph, Elizabeth makes a transition from humble (she has the body
of a “weak and feeble woman”) to defiant: she dares the Europeans to invade.
Finally, she makes some practical concessions, promising her troops that they will
be led by her most loyal lieutenant and amply rewarded for their loyalty. We could
describe the tone of her speech as humble yet inspiring and defiant.

• ACTIVITY •
Read Winston Churchill’s first speech to the House of Commons as Prime
Minister of Britain in May 1940. Describe the tone of the speech by using two
adjectives or an adjective and an adverb; then explain why you chose those
words, making specific reference to the text.
Blood, Toil, Tears, and Sweat
Winston ChurChill
I beg to move,
That this House welcomes the formation of a Government representing the
united and inflexible resolve of the nation to prosecute the war with Germany
to a victorious conclusion.
on Friday evening last I received His Majesty’s commission to form a new
Administration. It is the evident wish and will of Parliament and the nation that
this should be conceived on the broadest possible basis and that it should
include all parties, both those who supported the late Government and also
the parties of the opposition. I have completed the most important part of this
task. A War Cabinet has been formed of five Members, representing, with the
opposition Liberals, the unity of the nation. The three party Leaders have agreed
to serve, either in the War Cabinet or in high executive office. The three Fighting services have been filled. It was necessary that this should be done in one
single day, on account of the extreme urgency and rigour of events. A number
of other positions, key positions, were filled yesterday, and I am submitting a
further list to His Majesty tonight. I hope to complete the appointment of the
principal Ministers during tomorrow. The appointment of the other Ministers
usually takes a little longer, but I trust that, when Parliament meets again, this
part of my task will be completed, and that the Administration will be complete
in all respects.
I considered it in the public interest to suggest that the House should be summoned to meet today. Mr. speaker agreed, and took the necessary steps, in
accordance with the powers conferred upon him by the Resolution of the House.
At the end of the proceedings today, the Adjournment of the House will be
proposed until Tuesday, 21st May, with, of course, provision for earlier meeting,

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 43

6/18/12 3:10 PM

44

CHAPTER 2 • CLosE REAdInG

if need be. The business to be considered during that week will be notified to
Members at the earliest opportunity. I now invite the House, by the Motion which
stands in my name, to record its approval of the steps taken and to declare its
confidence in the new Government.
To form an Administration of this scale and complexity is a serious undertaking in itself, but it must be remembered that we are in the preliminary stage of
one of the greatest battles in history, that we are in action at many other points
in norway and in Holland, that we have to be prepared in the Mediterranean,
that the air battle is continuous and that many preparations, such as have been
indicated by my hon. Friend below the Gangway, have to be made here at
home. In this crisis I hope I may be pardoned if I do not address the House at
any length today. I hope that any of my friends and colleagues, or former colleagues, who are affected by the political reconstruction, will make allowance,
all allowance, for any lack of ceremony with which it has been necessary to act.
I would say to the House, as I said to those who have joined this government:
“I have nothing to offer but blood, toil, tears and sweat.”
We have before us an ordeal of the most grievous kind. We have before
us many, many long months of struggle and of suffering. you ask, what is our
policy? I can say: It is to wage war, by sea, land and air, with all our might and
with all the strength that God can give us; to wage war against a monstrous
tyranny, never surpassed in the dark, lamentable catalogue of human crime.
That is our policy. you ask, what is our aim? I can answer in one word: It is victory, victory at all costs, victory in spite of all terror, victory, however long and
hard the road may be; for without victory, there is no survival. Let that be realised;
no survival for the British Empire, no survival for all that the British Empire has
stood for, no survival for the urge and impulse of the ages, that mankind will
move forward towards its goal. But I take up my task with buoyancy and hope.
I feel sure that our cause will not be suffered to fail among men. At this time I
feel entitled to claim the aid of all, and I say, “come then, let us go forward
together with our united strength.”

Talking with the Text
Effective close reading requires active reading, an exchange between the reader
and the text that eventually reveals layers of meaning. The first step is to read and
reread. That’s a good start, but at some point you will have to talk back, ask questions, make comments. In other words, have a conversation with the text. Let’s
look at some close reading techniques that will help you talk with the text.

Asking Questions
One of the simplest ways to talk with the text is to interrogate it — ask questions.
Remember that we’re always trying to consider the choices writers make, so as

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 44

6/18/12 3:10 PM

TALkInG WITH THE TExT

45

you read, ask yourself why they chose the words or sentence patterns they did.
You don’t always need to know the answers to your questions; sometimes, just
asking them will give you insights into a writer’s choices.
Let’s take a look at this excerpt from Ralph Ellison’s “On Bird, Bird-Watching
and Jazz,” an essay in which the writer considers the legend — and style — of jazz
saxophonist and composer Charlie Parker, nicknamed Yardbird. In the essay, which
was published in the Saturday Review in 1962, Ellison refers to both Robert Reisner’s
Bird: The Legend of Charlie Parker (a collection of interviews of Parker’s friends,
family, and colleagues) and Roger Tory Peterson’s A Field Guide to the Birds (the
bird-watcher’s bible) as he comments on jazz as art and examines the myths surrounding Parker’s nickname.
from On Bird, Bird-Watching and Jazz
ralph ellison

oddly enough, while several explanations are advanced as to how Charles Parker, Jr.,
became known as “Bird” (“yardbird,” in an earlier metamorphosis), none is conclusive. There is, however, overpowering internal evidence that whatever the true
circumstance of his ornithological designation, it had little to do with the chicken
yard. Randy roosters and operatic hens are familiars to fans of the animated cartoons, but for all the pathetic comedy of his living — and despite the crabbed and
constricted character of his style — Parker was a most inventive melodist, in birdwatcher’s terminology, a true songster.
This failure in the exposition of Bird’s legend is intriguing, for nicknames are
indicative of a change from a given to an achieved identity, whether by rise or fall,
and they tell us something of the nicknamed individual’s interaction with his fellows. Thus, since we suspect that more of legend is involved in his renaming than
Mr. Reisner’s title indicates, let us at least consult Roger Tory Peterson’s Field Guide
to the Birds for a hint as to why, during a period when most jazzmen were labeled
“cats,” someone hung the bird on Charlie. Let us note too that “legend” originally
meant “the story of a saint,” and that saints were often identified with symbolic
animals.
Two species won our immediate attention, the goldfinch and the mockingbird —
the goldfinch because the beatnik phrase “Bird lives,” which, following Parker’s
death, has been chalked endlessly on Village buildings and subway walls, reminds
us that during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries a symbolic goldfinch frequently
appeared in European devotional paintings. An apocryphal story has it that upon
being given a clay bird for a toy, the infant Jesus brought it miraculously to life as
a goldfinch. Thus the small, tawny-brown bird with a bright red patch about the
base of its bill and a broad yellow band across its wings became a representative
of the soul, the Passion and the sacrifice. In more worldly late-Renaissance art, the
little bird became the ambiguous symbol of death and the soul’s immortality. For our
own purposes, however, its song poses a major problem: it is like that of a canary —
which soul or no soul, rules the goldfinch out.

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 45

6/18/12 3:10 PM

46

CHAPTER 2 • CLosE REAdInG

The mockingbird, Mimus polyglottos, is more promising. Peterson informs us
that its song consists of “long successions of notes and phrases of great variety, with
each phrase repeated a half dozen times before going on to the next,” that mockingbirds are “excellent mimics” who “adeptly imitate a score or more species found in
the neighborhood,” and that they frequently sing at night — a description which not
only comes close to Parker’s way with a saxophone but even hints at a trait of his
character. For although he usually sang at night, his playing was characterized by
velocity, by long-continued successions of notes and phrases, by swoops, bleats,
echoes, rapidly repeated bebops — I mean rebopped bebops — by mocking mimicry
of other jazzmen’s styles, and by interpolations of motifs from extraneous melodies,
all of which added up to a dazzling display of wit, satire, burlesque and pathos.
Further, he was as expert at issuing his improvisations from the dense brush as from
the extreme treetops of the harmonic landscape, and there was, without doubt, as
irrepressible a mockery in his personal conduct as his music.

Reread the excerpt, and see what you notice on a second reading. Jot down questions as you go, asking why Ellison might have used the language he did.
Here are some questions about Ellison’s style that might come to mind, based
on first and second impressions of the passage:
1. Why do the first two sentences contain qualifiers (“Oddly enough,”
“however”)?
2. Why does Ellison suggest that his audience might be “fans of the animated
cartoons”?
3. Why does Ellison think a book about bird-watching might be more edifying than a biography of Parker?
4. Why does Ellison say “hung the bird on Charlie” (para. 2) instead of “nicknamed him”?
5. What is the effect of Ellison’s references to the story about the infant Jesus
(para. 3)?
6. Why does Ellison provide the mockingbird’s scientific name (Mimus polyglottos) (para. 4)?
7. How does Ellison manage to make this description of jazz sound so
jazzy: “by long-continued successions of notes and phrases, by swoops,
bleats, echoes, rapidly repeated bebops — I mean rebopped bebops — . . .”
(para. 4)?
8. What is the effect of the dashes in the phrase above?
You may notice that these questions fall into the two categories we talked
about in relation to Queen Elizabeth’s speech: the choice of words (diction) and
the way the words are arranged (syntax). When we talk about diction, we might

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 46

6/18/12 3:10 PM

TALkInG WITH THE TExT

47

look for interesting or powerful vocabulary, but we also consider figures of speech
like metaphors, similes, personification, and hyperbole. When we consider syntax we want to notice interesting constructions like parallelism, juxtaposition,
and antithesis, along with sentence types such as compound, complex, periodic,
cumulative, and imperative, among others. We also might look at the pacing of
a piece of work: Does the writer reveal details quickly or slowly? How does he or
she build suspense?
Here are some questions to ask when you analyze diction:
1. What type of words draw your attention? Do they tend to be a particular
part of speech, such as verbs, nouns, adjectives, or adverbs? Is the language
general and abstract or specific and concrete?
2. Is the language formal, informal, colloquial, or slang?
3. Are some words nonliteral or figurative, creating figures of speech such as
metaphors?
4. Are there words with strong connotations? Words with a particular emotional punch?
When you analyze syntax, you might ask:
1. What is the order of the parts of the sentence? Is it the usual order (subjectverb-object), or is it inverted (object-subject-verb, or any other pattern that
is out of the ordinary)?
2. What are the sentences like? Are they periodic (moving toward something
important at the end) or cumulative (beginning with an important idea
and then adding details)?
3. Are many of the sentences simple? Complex? Compound? Are the sentences on the long side, or are they short?
4. Does the writer ask questions?
5. How does the writer connect words, phrases, and clauses?
These questions do not have simple yes or no answers. They lend themselves
to discussion, but as you discuss them, be sure you can support your ideas with
evidence from the text. Coming up with answers to questions like these will put
you well on your way toward making an analysis of an author’s style and how that
style helps the author make his or her point.

• ACTIVITY •
Read the next paragraph from Ellison’s essay, then generate two or three questions each about diction and syntax.

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 47

6/18/12 3:10 PM

48

CHAPTER 2 • CLosE REAdInG

from On Bird, Bird-Watching and Jazz
ralph ellison
Mimic thrushes, which include the catbird and brown thrasher, along with the
mockingbird, are not only great virtuosi, they are the tricksters and con men of
the bird world. Like Parker, who is described as a confidence man and a practical joker by several of the commentators, they take off on the songs of other
birds, inflating, inverting and turning them wrong side out, and are capable
of driving a prowling (“square”) cat wild. Utterly irreverent and romantic, they
are not beyond bugging human beings. Indeed, on summer nights in the south,
when the moon hangs low, mockingbirds sing as though determined to heat
every drop of romance in the sleeping adolescent’s heart to fever pitch. Their
song thrills and swings the entire moon-struck night to arouse one’s sense of
the mystery, promise and frustration of being human, alive and hot in the blood.
They are as delightful to the eye as to the ear, but sometimes a similarity of
voice and appearance makes for a confusion with the shrike, a species given
to impaling insects and smaller songbirds on the points of thorns, and they are
destroyed. They are fond of fruit, especially mulberries, and if there is a tree in
your yard, there will be, along with the wonderful music, much chalky, blue-tinted
evidence of their presence. Under such conditions, be careful and heed Parker’s
warning to his friends — who sometimes were subjected to a shrikelike treatment — “you must pay your dues to Bird.”

Annotating
Another close reading technique you can use is annotation. Annotating a text
requires reading with a pencil in hand. If you are not allowed to write in your
book, then write on sticky notes. As you read, circle words you don’t know,
or write them on the sticky notes. Identify main ideas — thesis statements,
topic sentences — and also words, phrases, or sentences that appeal to you,
that seem important, or that you don’t understand. Look for figures of speech
such as metaphors, similes, and personification — as well as imagery and striking
detail. If you don’t know the technical term for something, just describe it. For
example, if you come across an adjective-and-noun combination that seems
contradictory, such as “meager abundance,” and you don’t know that the term for
it is oxymoron, you might still note the juxtaposition of two words that have
opposite meanings. Ask questions or comment on what you have read. In short,
as you read, listen to the voice in your head, and write down what that voice is
saying.
Let’s try out this approach using a passage by Joan Didion about California’s
Santa Ana winds from her 1965 essay “Los Angeles Notebook.” Read the passage
first, and see if you can come up with some ideas about Didion’s purpose. Then we
will look closely at the choices she makes and the effects of those choices.

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 48

6/18/12 3:10 PM

TALkInG WITH THE TExT

49

The Santa Ana Winds
Joan DiDion

There is something uneasy in the Los Angeles air this afternoon, some unnatural stillness, some tension. What it means is that tonight a santa Ana will begin to blow,
a hot wind from the northeast whining down through the Cajon and san Gorgonio
Passes, blowing up sand storms out along Route 66, drying the hills and the nerves
to flash point. For a few days now we will see smoke back in the canyons, and
hear sirens in the night. I have neither heard nor read that a santa Ana is due, but
I know it, and almost everyone I have seen today knows it too. We know it because
we feel it. The baby frets. The maid sulks. I rekindle a waning argument with the
telephone company, then cut my losses and lie down, given over to whatever it is
in the air. To live with the santa Ana is to accept, consciously or unconsciously, a
deeply mechanistic view of human behavior.
I recall being told, when I first moved to Los Angeles and was living on an isolated beach, that the Indians would throw themselves into the sea when the bad wind
blew. I could see why. The Pacific turned ominously glossy during a santa Ana
period, and one woke in the night troubled not only by the peacocks screaming in
the olive trees but by the eerie absence of surf. The heat was surreal. The sky had a
yellow cast, the kind of light sometimes called “earthquake weather.” My only neighbor would not come out of her house for days, and there were no lights at night,
and her husband roamed the place with a machete. one day he would tell me that
he had heard a trespasser, the next a rattlesnake.
“on nights like that,” Raymond Chandler once wrote about the santa Ana,
“every booze party ends in a fight. Meek little wives feel the edge of the carving
knife and study their husbands’ necks. Anything can happen.” That was the kind of
wind it was. I did not know then that there was any basis for the effect it had on all
of us, but it turns out to be another of those cases in which science bears out folk
wisdom. The santa Ana, which is named for one of the canyons it rushes through,
is a foehn wind, like the foehn of Austria and switzerland and the hamsin of Israel.
There are a number of persistent malevolent winds, perhaps the best known of which
are the mistral of France and the Mediterranean sirocco, but a foehn wind has
distinct characteristics: it occurs on the leeward slope of a mountain range and,
although the air begins as a cold mass, it is warmed as it comes down the mountain
and appears finally as a hot dry wind. Whenever and wherever foehn blows, doctors hear about headaches and nausea and allergies, about “nervousness,” about
“depression.” In Los Angeles some teachers do not attempt to conduct formal classes
during a santa Ana, because the children become unmanageable. In switzerland
the suicide rate goes up during the foehn, and in the courts of some swiss cantons
the wind is considered a mitigating circumstance for crime. surgeons are said to
watch the wind, because blood does not clot normally during a foehn. A few years
ago an Israeli physicist discovered that not only during such winds, but for the ten or
twelve hours which precede them, the air carries an unusually high ratio of positive

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 49

6/18/12 3:10 PM

50

CHAPTER 2 • CLosE REAdInG

to negative ions. no one seems to know exactly why that should be; some talk about
friction and others suggest solar disturbances. In any case the positive ions are there,
and what an excess of positive ions does, in the simplest terms, is make people
unhappy. one cannot get much more mechanistic than that.

You probably noticed that while Didion seems to be writing about a natural
phenomenon — the Santa Ana winds — she is also commenting on human nature
and the way nature affects human behavior. Her purpose, then, is social commentary as much as the observation of an event in nature. In addition, you may notice
on a second or third reading that her tone gives you another message: the way
Didion sees human nature.
Following is an annotated version of the Didion passage:
There is something uneasy in the Los Angeles air this afternoon, some unnatural stillness, some tension. What it means
words.
is that tonight a Santa Ana will begin to blow, a hot wind Related
Anxiety,
foreboding
Long
from the northeast whining down through the Cajon and
sentence
San Gorgonio Passes, blowing up sand storms out along
Route 66, drying the hills and the nerves to flash point. For a
few days now we will see smoke back in the canyons, and
Appeal to senses
hear sirens in the night. I have neither heard nor read that a
Santa Ana is due, but I know it, and almost everyone I have
seen today knows it too. We know it because we feel it. The Short
sentences
baby frets. The maid sulks. I rekindle a waning argument
with the telephone company, then cut my losses and lie
down, given over to whatever it is in the air. To live with the
Santa Ana is to accept, consciously or unconsciously, a deeply
Look up word mechanistic view of human behavior.
I recall being told, when I first moved to Los Angeles and
was living on an isolated beach, that the Indians would throw Folktale?
themselves into the sea when the bad wind blew. I could see
why. The Pacific turned ominously glossy during a Santa Ana Echo of foreboding
period, and one woke in the night troubled not only by the in opening
Vivid images
peacocks screaming in the olive trees but by the eerie absence
of surf. The heat was surreal. The sky had a yellow cast, the
kind of light sometimes called “earthquake weather.” My
only neighbor would not come out of her house for days, and
More anxiety there were no lights at night, and her husband roamed the Personal anecdote
words
place with a machete. One day he would tell me that he had
heard a trespasser, the next a rattlesnake.

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 50

6/18/12 3:10 PM

TALkInG WITH THE TExT

51

“On nights like that,” Raymond Chandler once wrote Look up name
about the Santa Ana, “every booze party ends in a fight. Meek
little wives feel the edge of the carving knife and study their
husbands’ necks. Anything can happen.” That was the kind of
wind it was. I did not know then that there was any basis for
the effect it had on all of us, but it turns out to be another of
Seemingly
those cases in which science bears out folk wisdom. The contradictory
Santa Ana, which is named for one of the canyons it rushes sources of
information
through, is a foehn wind, like the foehn of Austria and Switzerland and the hamsin of Israel. There are a number of persistent
malevolent winds, perhaps the best known of which are the
Good description
mistral of France and the Mediterranean sirocco, but a foehn
wind has distinct characteristics: it occurs on the leeward
slope of a mountain range and, although the air begins as a
cold mass, it is warmed as it comes down the mountain and
appears finally as a hot dry wind. Whenever and wherever
foehn blows, doctors hear about headaches and nausea and
allergies, about “nervousness,” about “depression.” In Los AngeWhy in quotes?
les some teachers do not attempt to conduct formal classes durAt least 7 ing a Santa Ana, because the children become unmanageable.
scientific facts In Switzerland the suicide rate goes up during the foehn, and
in the courts of some Swiss cantons the wind is considered a
mitigating circumstance for crime. Surgeons are said to watch
the wind, because blood does not clot normally during a
foehn. A few years ago an Israeli physicist discovered that not
only during such winds, but for the ten or twelve hours which
precede them, the air carries an unusually high ratio of positive to negative ions. No one seems to know exactly why that
should be; some talk about friction and others suggest solar
disturbances. In any case the positive ions are there, and what
an excess of positive ions does, in the simplest terms, is make
Strange —
should be positive people unhappy. One cannot get much more mechanistic
than that.

Using a Graphic Organizer
Another way to organize your thoughts about a specific text is to use a graphic
organizer. A graphic organizer lets you systematically look at short passages from a
longer text. Your teacher may divide the text for you, or you may divide it yourself;

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 51

6/18/12 3:10 PM

52

CHAPTER 2 • CLosE REAdInG

you might use the paragraph divisions as natural breaking points, or you might
consider smaller sections that seem interesting stylistically. Although a graphic
organizer takes time to complete, it lets you gather a great deal of information that
you can use as you prepare to write an essay.
The accompanying graphic organizer asks you to take something the writer
QUOTATiOn

PArAPhrASe Or SUMMArize

There is something uneasy in the Los Angeles
air this afternoon, some unnatural stillness,
some tension. What it means is that tonight
a Santa Ana will begin to blow, a hot wind
from the northeast whining down through
the Cajon and San Gorgonio Passes, blowing
up sand storms out along Route 66, drying
the hills and the nerves to flash point. For a
few days now we will see smoke back in the
canyons, and hear sirens in the night. I have
neither heard nor read that a Santa Ana is due,
but I know it, and almost everyone I have
seen today knows it too. We know it because
we feel it. The baby frets. The maid sulks. I
rekindle a waning argument with the telephone company, then cut my losses and lie
down, given over to whatever it is in the air. To
live with the Santa Ana is to accept, consciously
or unconsciously, a deeply mechanistic view
of human behavior.

The winds are creepy. They bring sand
storms and cause fires. People know
they’re coming without being told because
babies and maids act strange. The speaker
picks a fight and then gives up. The Santa
Ana winds make us aware that human
behavior can be explained in terms of
physical causes and processes.

I recall being told, when I first moved to Los
Angeles and was living on an isolated beach,
that the Indians would throw themselves into
the sea when the bad wind blew. I could see
why. The Pacific turned ominously glossy during a Santa Ana period, and one woke in the
night troubled not only by the peacocks
screaming in the olive trees but by the eerie
absence of surf. The heat was surreal. The sky
had a yellow cast, the kind of light sometimes
called “earthquake weather.” My only neighbor
would not come out of her house for days, and
there were no lights at night, and her husband
roamed the place with a machete. One day he
would tell me that he had heard a trespasser,
the next a rattlesnake.

Didion talks about her early experiences
with the winds, plus the folklore about
them. She mentions things that seem
weird — peacocks screeching and a very
quiet ocean. She says her neighbors are
strange too; one stays indoors, and the
other walks around with a big knife.

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 52

6/18/12 3:10 PM

TALkInG WITH THE TExT

53

has said, restate it in your own words, identify some of the devices that the writer has
used, and then analyze how the writer uses those devices to make his or her point.
Note that you become increasingly analytical as you move from left to right. The
following graphic organizer has been filled in for you using a portion of the Joan
Didion passage that we read above.
rheTOricAl STrATeGy Or STyle eleMenT

effecT Or fUncTiOn

Personification: the wind whines

Giving the wind a human quality makes it
even more threatening.

Cumulative sentence

She makes her point by accumulating
details about what it means that the Santa
Ana is beginning to blow.

Two short sentences: “The baby frets. The
maid sulks.”

Those simple sentences reduce human
behavior to irrefutable evidence. We can’t
argue with what we see so clearly.

“rekindle”

Though she’s talking about restarting an
argument with the phone company, the
word makes us think of starting a fire, like
the wind does up in the hills.

Subordinate clause in the middle of that first
sentence: “when I first moved to Los Angeles
and was living on an isolated beach.”

The clause accentuates Didion’s isolation
and because it’s so long almost makes her
experience more important than the Indians
who threw themselves into the ocean.

“peacocks screaming in the olive trees”

Kind of an upside-down image. Peacocks
are usually regal and elegant; these are
screaming. Also olive trees are associated
with peace (the olive branch). Supports
the idea that the Santa Ana turns everything upside down.

Compound sentence: My only neighbor
would not come out of her house for days,
and there were no lights at night, and her
husband roamed the place with a machete.

“And” as the coordinating conjunction
makes the wife hiding and the husband
with the machete equally important.

“machete”

“Machete” is associated with revolutions in
banana republics, vigilantes. Suggests danger.

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 53

6/18/12 3:10 PM

54

CHAPTER 2 • CLosE REAdInG
QUOTATiOn

PArAPhrASe Or SUMMArize

“On nights like that,” Raymond Chandler once
wrote about the Santa Ana, “every booze party
ends in a fight. Meek little wives feel the edge
of the carving knife and study their husbands’
necks. Anything can happen.” That was the
kind of wind it was. I did not know then that
there was any basis for the effect it had on all
of us, but it turns out to be another of those
cases in which science bears out folk wisdom.

Didion quotes a writer who describes the
effects of the wind as causing women to
want to kill their husbands. She says that
folklore sometimes has a basis in science.

The Santa Ana, which is named for one of
the canyons it rushes through, is a foehn
wind, like the foehn of Austria and Switzerland and the hamsin of Israel. . . . A few

This section gives scientific facts about the
Santa Ana wind, including its generic name,
foehn. Didion names other winds like it in
other parts of the world, but says the foehn
has its own characteristics. She names some
of the effects the foehn has on people in
various places.

years ago an Israeli physicist discovered
that not only during such winds, but for
the ten or twelve hours which precede
them, the air carries an unusually high
ratio of positive to negative ions.

Breaking the text into small sections, looking at them closely, and writing down
your ideas about them helps you notice the stylistic details in Didion’s writing.
For example, in paragraph 1, she connects two seemingly different things in the
same grammatical construction (“drying the hills and the nerves”; the technical
name for this figure of speech is zeugma). Later in the essay she alludes to crime
writer Raymond Chandler, to facts, even to some scientific data. Collecting these
bits of information from the text and considering their impression on you prepares you to answer the following questions about Didion’s style.
• What effect is she striving for?
• How does she create that effect?
• How does the effect serve the purpose of her writing?

from close reading to Analysis
No matter what technique you choose, as you interact with the text you should
keep in mind that you’re not only identifying techniques and strategies, but also
analyzing their effect — you’re moving from close reading to analysis. As you read
the Didion passage, you probably got a feel for its mood. But how is that mood
created? You probably noticed the anxiety-related words in the first paragraph:
“uneasy,” “unnatural,” “tension,” “flash point.” There is an echo in the second paragraph: the ocean is “ominously glossy.” That sense of foreboding imbues even the
personal anecdote: a neighbor with a “machete,” fear of a “trespasser,” hints of a
“rattlesnake.” Didion uses the word “rekindle” to describe her effort to restart an

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 54

6/18/12 3:10 PM

TALkInG WITH THE TExT
rheTOricAl STrATeGy Or STyle eleMenT

55

effecT Or fUncTiOn

Allusion to Raymond Chandler

Chandler, who wrote crime fiction, was
known for his hard-boiled style and
cynical views. The allusion to Chandler
helps create the ominous tone.

Complex sentence: “There are a number of
persistent malevolent winds, perhaps the best
known of which are the mistral of France
and the Mediterranean sirocco, but a foehn
wind has distinct characteristics: it occurs on
the leeward slope of a mountain range and,
although the air begins as a cold mass, it is
warmed as it comes down the mountain and
appears finally as a hot dry wind.”

The details accumulate, ending in “hot dry
wind,” to create a picture of the “persistent
malevolent winds.”

ongoing argument with the phone company; it serves to remind us of the brush
fires that so often threaten Southern California. Of course, if you’ve read other work
by Joan Didion you may recognize that foreboding as a hallmark of her style. In
either case, you can begin to see how Didion creates an unsettled mood through
her word choice, especially in the first two paragraphs.
The passage’s syntax also has a role. The second sentence in the first paragraph
is long, a cumulative sentence that gathers details (and steam) as it describes the
path of the Santa Ana wind and its destination in “flash point.” Again, those Southern California brush fires come to mind. The sentence stands, too, in contrast to
the short sentences later in the paragraph, simple declarative sentences that observe
without comment the behavior that precedes the Santa Ana winds. Didion notes
that she has “neither heard nor read that a Santa Ana is due”; nevertheless, the evidence is irrefutable: “The baby frets. The maid sulks.”
The third paragraph is different even though it begins in the anxiety-laden
mood of the first two, with its quotation from crime fiction writer Raymond
Chandler. Though he is a fiction writer, Chandler is nevertheless an authority on
both crime and Los Angeles. The quotation helps Didion transition to showing
that sometimes “science bears out folk wisdom.” What follows are at least seven
examples of data — including the names and characteristics of various winds; the
effects of the winds on schoolchildren, personal health, and criminals; and the
changes in the atmosphere described in terms of positive and negative ions. This
scientific language contrasts with the moodiness of the previous paragraphs.
Notice the complex sentence that begins by noting a “number of persistent malevolent winds.” Didion provides a couple of examples, foregrounding the foehn. The

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 55

6/18/12 3:10 PM

56

CHAPTER 2 • CLosE REAdInG

second independent clause provides the details of that wind, ending with its impact
at the bottom of the mountain as a “hot dry wind.”
So let’s go back to those three key questions:
• What effect is Didion striving for?
• How does she create that effect?
• How does the effect serve the purpose of her writing?
For the first question, we might say that she is trying to both re-create the effect
of the Santa Ana winds and explain the effect scientifically. For the second, we might
say that she does this by simulating the feeling of anxiety that precedes the Santa
Ana winds at the same time that she offers scientific facts and figures. The mood of
foreboding, the tone of barely subdued fear and anger, and the language of violence
and natural disaster are juxtaposed with the essay’s pseudoscientific information.
For the third question, we could agree that her purpose is to show that some human
behavior is mechanistic, meaning it is less a matter of choice than a direct result
of outside forces. We might go even further to say that Didion wants to scare us a
bit: we sometimes can’t help the way we behave. But it’s not our fault. Maybe it’s a
full moon. Maybe a storm is brewing. Or maybe it’s the Santa Ana winds.

• ACTIVITY •
Read Virginia Woolf ’s “The Death of the Moth,” an essay in which she contemplates life and death by reflecting on the death of a small “day moth,” a type of
moth that is active in the daytime. Try one of the techniques you have learned
for talking with the text. Then answer these questions: What effect is Woolf
striving for? How does she create that effect? How does the effect serve the purpose of her writing? Try developing a thesis statement and an outline for an
essay in which you analyze the way Woolf’s style helps her achieve her purpose.
The Death of the Moth
Virginia Woolf
Moths that fly by day are not properly to be called moths; they do not excite
that pleasant sense of dark autumn nights and ivy-blossom which the commonest yellow-underwing asleep in the shadow of the curtain never fails to rouse in
us. They are hybrid creatures, neither gay like butterflies nor somber like their
own species. nevertheless the present specimen, with his narrow hay-colored
wings, fringed with a tassel of the same color, seemed to be content with life.
It was a pleasant morning, mid-september, mild, benignant, yet with a keener
breath than that of the summer months. The plough was already scoring the field
opposite the window, and where the share had been, the earth was pressed
flat and gleamed with moisture. such vigor came rolling in from the fields and
the down beyond that it was difficult to keep the eyes strictly turned upon the

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 56

6/18/12 3:10 PM

TALkInG WITH THE TExT

57

book. The rooks too were keeping one of their annual festivities; soaring round
the tree tops until it looked as if a vast net with thousands of black knots in it
had been cast up into the air; which, after a few moments sank slowly down
upon the trees until every twig seemed to have a knot at the end of it. Then, suddenly, the net would be thrown into the air again in a wider circle this time, with
the utmost clamor and vociferation, as though to be thrown into the air and
settle slowly down upon the tree tops were a tremendously exciting experience.
The same energy which inspired the rooks, the ploughmen, the horses, and
even, it seemed, the lean bare-backed downs, sent the moth fluttering from side
to side of his square of the windowpane. one could not help watching him.
one, was, indeed, conscious of a queer feeling of pity for him. The possibilities
of pleasure seemed that morning so enormous and so various that to have only
a moth’s part in life, and a day moth’s at that, appeared a hard fate, and his
zest in enjoying his meager opportunities to the full, pathetic. He flew vigorously to one corner of his compartment, and, after waiting there a second, flew
across to the other. What remained for him but to fly to a third corner and then
to a fourth? That was all he could do, in spite of the size of the downs, the width
of the sky, the far-off smoke of houses, and the romantic voice, now and then,
of a steamer out at sea. What he could do he did. Watching him, it seemed as
if a fiber, very thin but pure, of the enormous energy of the world had been thrust
into his frail and diminutive body. As often as he crossed the pane, I could fancy
that a thread of vital light became visible. He was little or nothing but life.
yet, because he was so small, and so simple a form of the energy that was
rolling in at the open window and driving its way through so many narrow and
intricate corridors in my own brain and in those of other human beings, there
was something marvelous as well as pathetic about him. It was as if someone
had taken a tiny bead of pure life and decking it as lightly as possible with
down and feathers, had set it dancing and zigzagging to show us the true nature
of life. Thus displayed one could not get over the strangeness of it. one is apt to
forget all about life, seeing it humped and bossed and garnished and cumbered
so that it has to move with the greatest circumspection and dignity. Again, the
thought of all that life might have been had he been born in any other shape
caused one to view his simple activities with a kind of pity.
After a time, tired by his dancing apparently, he settled on the window ledge
in the sun, and, the queer spectacle being at an end, I forgot about him. Then,
looking up, my eye was caught by him. He was trying to resume his dancing,
but seemed either so stiff or so awkward that he could only flutter to the bottom
of the windowpane; and when he tried to fly across it he failed. Being intent on
other matters I watched these futile attempts for a time without thinking, unconsciously waiting for him to resume his flight, as one waits for a machine, that
has stopped momentarily, to start again without considering the reason of its
failure. After perhaps a seventh attempt he slipped from the wooden ledge and
fell, fluttering his wings, on to his back on the windowsill. The helplessness of
his attitude roused me. It flashed upon me that he was in difficulties; he could no

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 57

6/18/12 3:10 PM

58

CHAPTER 2 • CLosE REAdInG

longer raise himself; his legs struggled vainly. But, as I stretched out a pencil,
meaning to help him to right himself, it came over me that the failure and awkwardness were the approach of death. I laid the pencil down again.
The legs agitated themselves once more. I looked as if for the enemy against
which he struggled. I looked out of doors. What had happened there? Presumably it was midday, and work in the fields had stopped. stillness and quiet had
replaced the previous animation. The birds had taken themselves off to feed in
the brooks. The horses stood still. yet the power was there all the same, massed
outside, indifferent, impersonal, not attending to anything in particular. somehow it was opposed to the little hay-colored moth. It was useless to try to do
anything. one could only watch the extraordinary efforts made by those tiny legs
against an oncoming doom which could, had it chosen, have submerged an
entire city, not merely a city, but masses of human beings; nothing, I knew, had
any chance against death. nevertheless after a pause of exhaustion the legs fluttered again. It was superb this last protest, and so frantic that he succeeded at
last in righting himself. one’s sympathies, of course, were all on the side of life.
Also, when there was nobody to care or to know, this gigantic effort on the part
of an insignificant little moth, against a power of such magnitude, to retain what
no one else valued or desired to keep, moved one strangely. Again, somehow,
one saw life, a pure bead. I lifted the pencil again, useless though I knew it to be.
But even as I did so, the unmistakable tokens of death showed themselves. The
body relaxed, and instantly grew stiff. The struggle was over. The insignificant
little creature now knew death. As I looked at the dead moth, this minute wayside triumph of so great a force over so mean an antagonist filled me with wonder. Just as life had been strange a few minutes before, so death was now as
strange. The moth having righted himself now lay most decently and uncomplainingly composed. o yes, he seemed to say, death is stronger than I am.

Writing a close Analysis essay
We’re going to look now at steps you can take toward writing a close analysis essay.
Good writing comes from careful reading, so the first steps will always be to read,
reread, ask questions, and either annotate or create a graphic organizer for the
text you will be working with. We’re going to look at a 1947 letter from comedian
and film star Groucho Marx. Marx performed with his brothers Zeppo, Chico, and
Harpo — they were known as the Marx Brothers. The letter is a part of his correspondence with the film production company Warner Bros., which had concerns
about an upcoming Marx Brothers film entitled A Night in Casablanca; the company worried that the title was too similar to the title of its 1942 film Casablanca.
Read the letter carefully, and then read it again. Ask some questions, and either
annotate the letter or make a graphic organizer. Pay close attention to the diction
and syntax choices Marx made and how they might help him achieve his purpose.

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 58

6/18/12 3:10 PM

WRITInG A CLosE AnALysIs EssAy

59

dear Warner Brothers,
Apparently there is more than one way of conquering a city and holding it as
your own. For example, up to the time that we contemplated making a picture, I had
no idea that the city of Casablanca1 belonged exclusively to Warner Brothers. However, it was only a few days after our announcement appeared that we received a
long, ominous legal document warning us not to use the name “Casablanca.”
It seems that in 1471, Ferdinand Balboa Warner, your great-great-grandfather,
while looking for a shortcut to the city of Burbank, had stumbled on the shores of
Africa and, raising his alpenstock,2 which he later turned in for a hundred shares
of common,3 named it Casablanca.
I just can’t understand your attitude. Even if you plan on releasing your picture, I
am sure that the average movie fan could learn in time to distinguish between Ingrid
Bergman4 and Harpo.5 I don’t know whether I could, but I certainly would like to try.
you claim you own Casablanca and that no one else can use that name without your permission. What about “Warner Brothers”? do you own that too? you
probably have the right to use the name Warner, but what about the name Brothers?
Professionally, we were brothers long before you were. We were touring the sticks
as the Marx Brothers when Vitaphone6 was still a gleam in the inventor’s eye, and
even before us there had been other brothers — the smith Brothers; the Brothers
karamazov; dan Brouthers, an outfielder with detroit; and “Brother, Can you spare
a dime?” (This was originally “Brothers, Can you spare a dime?” but this was
spreading a dime pretty thin, so they threw out one brother, gave all the money to
the other one, and whittled it down to “Brother, Can you spare a dime?”)
now Jack, how about you? do you maintain that yours is an original name?
Well it’s not. It was used long before you were born. offhand, I can think of two
Jacks — there was Jack of “Jack and the Beanstalk,” and Jack the Ripper, who cut
quite a figure in his day.
As for you, Harry, you probably sign your checks sure in the belief that you
are the first Harry of all time and that all other Harrys are impostors. offhand I can
think of two Harrys that preceded you. There was Lighthorse Harry of Revolutionary fame and a Harry Appelbaum who lived on the corner of 93rd street and Lexington Avenue. Unfortunately, Appelbaum wasn’t too well-known. The last I heard of
him, he was selling neckties at Weber and Heilbroner; but I’ll never forget his
mother, she made the best apple strudle in yorkville.

5

1Casablanca is the title of a romantic — and perennially popular — film released by Warner Bros.
in 1942 that won the Academy Award for Best Picture. It starred Humphrey Bogart in his first
romantic role. — Eds.
2Walking stick. — Eds.
3Common stock in a company. — Eds.
4The beautiful female star of Casablanca. — Eds.
5Harpo was Groucho’s brother and part of the Marx Brothers; he wore a red, curly-haired wig
and did not speak, communicating instead by blowing a horn or whistling. — Eds.
6Vitaphone was the process developed by Warner Bros. for adding sound to film. — Eds.

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 59

6/18/12 3:10 PM

60

CHAPTER 2 • CLosE REAdInG

now about the Burbank studio.7 I believe this is what you brothers call your
place. old man Burbank is gone. Perhaps you remember him. He was a great
man in a garden. He was the wizard who crossed all those fruits and vegetables
until he had the poor plants in such confused and jittery condition that they could
never decide whether to enter the dining room on the meat platter or the dessert dish.
This is pure conjecture, of course, but who knows — perhaps Burbank’s survivors aren’t too happy with the fact that a plant that grinds out pictures on a quota
settled in their town, appropriated Burbank’s name and uses it as a front for their
films. It is even possible that the Burbank family is prouder of the potato produced
by the old man than they are of the fact that your studio emerged “Casablanca” or
even “Gold diggers of 1931.”
This all seems to add up to a pretty bitter tirade, but I assure you it’s not meant
to. I love Warners. some of my best friends are Warner Brothers. It is even possible
that I am doing you an injustice and that you, yourselves, know nothing about this
dog-in-the-Wanger8 attitude. It wouldn’t surprise me at all to discover that the heads
of your legal department are unaware of this absurd dispute, for I am acquainted
with many of them and they are fine fellows with curly black hair, double-breasted
suits and a love of their fellow man that out-saroyans saroyan.9
I have a hunch that this attempt to prevent us from using the title is the brainchild of some ferret-faced shyster, serving a brief apprenticeship in your legal department. I know the type well — hot out of law school, hungry for success and too
ambitious to follow the natural laws of promotion. This bar sinister probably needled
your attorneys, most of whom are fine fellows with curly black hair, double-breasted
suits, etc., into attempting to enjoin us. Well, he won’t get away with it! We’ll fight
him to the highest court! no pasty-faced legal adventurer is going to cause bad
blood between the Warners and the Marxes. We are all brothers under the skin,
and we’ll remain friends till the last reel of A Night in Casablanca goes tumbling
over the spool.

10

sincerely,
Groucho Marx

7Movie production studios located in Burbank, California, a city close to Los Angeles where
many movie production companies have their headquarters. Although there is a Luther Burbank
Middle School in Burbank, the city is not named after the botanist Luther Burbank —who
invented the Idaho potato — but after a dentist named David Burbank, who was originally
from Maine. Casablanca was filmed at the Burbank studio. — Eds.
8A double play on words. Dog-in-the-Manger is one of Aesop’s fables, about a dog that didn’t
eat the grain in the manger but wouldn’t let the other animals eat it either. Walter Wanger was
a film producer who produced the first Marx Brothers talkie. — Eds.
9A reference to William Saroyan, a writer and dramatist whose work was known for its optimism
in the face of hardship. — Eds.

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 60

6/18/12 3:10 PM

WRITInG A CLosE AnALysIs EssAy

61

There is some doubt about whether Warner Bros. had actually objected to the
title of the Marx Brothers film; but there’s little doubt that this letter was primarily
a publicity stunt by Groucho. In any case, it is a great example of the persuasive
powers of humor. Groucho’s style was instantly recognizable to fans of popular
culture in the first half of the twentieth century. Now let’s ask some questions to
help determine the purpose of Marx’s letter, what makes his style so distinctive,
and how this style helps him achieve his purpose.
1. Why does Marx begin with “Apparently”?
2. Why does he say he had no idea that the city of Casablanca belonged to
Warner Bros.?
3. What is the effect of Groucho’s short history of Casablanca (para. 2)?
4. Would it really be difficult to distinguish between Ingrid Bergman and
Harpo Marx (para. 3)?
5. Why does Marx offer so many examples of “Brothers” (para. 4)?
6. What is the effect of the parenthetical story about “Brother, Can You Spare
a Dime” (para. 4)?
7. Why does Marx bring up Luther Burbank’s experiments with fruits and
vegetables (para. 7)?
8. Why does Marx qualify his statement that he loves Warners (para. 9) with
“Some of my best friends are Warner Brothers”?
9. Why does Marx suggest that the source of Warner Bros.’ concerns about
his film come from an ambitious young lawyer, referring to him as a “pastyfaced legal adventurer” (para. 10)?

Developing a Thesis Statement
Answering these questions or others like them may help you to get some ideas
for a thesis statement, the first step in writing a close analysis essay. You may
change it as you go along, but having an idea about the argument you want to
make will help you stay focused. As we mentioned, Groucho Marx uses humor to
create his argument; we might even call this letter a kind of satire — the use of
sarcasm or irony to criticize — so let’s think first about Marx’s purpose in writing
the letter and why he might have chosen to use humor. Even if this letter was a
publicity stunt, we can imagine that Marx wanted to highlight the differences
between his film and the romantic adventure Casablanca to show Warner Bros.
that it had little to fear from the Marx Brothers film A Night in Casablanca. It’s
also likely that Marx wanted to comment on the hot air that sometimes emerges
from big corporations and their lawyers — especially, in this case, the enormous
and powerful movie studio Warner Bros. But he chooses not to take these goals
on directly.

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 61

6/18/12 3:10 PM

62

CHAPTER 2 • CLosE REAdInG

As you think about a thesis statement, you will want to be careful that your
thesis isn’t too broad or just a summary:
Groucho Marx uses humor to defend his movie.

And you will also want to make sure that it’s not too narrow or just your personal
opinion:
Groucho Marx’s letter to Warner Bros. is rude and disrespectful.

Most important, a close analysis essay must focus on the choices writers make to
help them achieve their purpose. Here’s a thesis statement that might work:
Rather than take on Warner Bros. directly, Groucho Marx jabs and feints until the
studio couldn’t possibly take its own claim seriously.

A Sample close Analysis essay
Once you have a working thesis statement (remember, you may change it as you
plan and write), think about the ways you will support it. Your essay may look closely
at different style elements; it may focus on the way the writer organized the paragraphs and developed his or her argument; it may be a combination of both. It is
important to cite the text, weaving quotes into your essay and explaining each
example with at least two sentences of analysis or commentary. Take a look at this
sample essay:
Like a boxer who weighs less than his opponent, Groucho Marx circles the great
movie moguls — the Warner Bros. — baiting them, drawing them out, blinding them with
his fancy footwork in his response to a letter from the studio forbidding the Marx Brothers
from using the word “Casablanca” in the title of their upcoming film, A Night in Casablanca.
Rather than take Warner Bros. on directly, Groucho Marx jabs and feints — humorously,
of course — until Warner Bros. couldn’t possibly take its own claim seriously.
Marx opens the letter with an intentional misunderstanding, the first way
he highlights the absurdity of Warner Bros.’ threat of legal action. He claims not to
have understood that Warner Bros. had conquered the city of Casablanca until he
received their “long, ominous legal document.” It’s not a big leap from there for Marx
to imagine Ferdinand Balboa Warner, conveniently named after a real explorer, claiming
the city of Casablanca by “raising his alpenstock.” The image conjures up scenes from
the lavish epics of early Hollywood, casting Warner as Moses in Cecil B. DeMille’s The
Ten Commandments. Marx extends his misunderstanding by imagining that the
studio’s main worry might be the trouble that the “average movie fan” will have in
distinguishing Ingrid Bergman from Harpo Marx. Humbly, Marx says he “certainly
would like to try.” This slightly salacious offer reinforces the silliness of Warner Bros.’
worries: Bergman was beautiful, blonde and dignified; Harpo Marx was a short, bewigged
mute clown.

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 62

6/18/12 3:10 PM

WRITInG A CLosE AnALysIs EssAy

63

Marx creates a sense of familiarity, which serves his purpose by reminding his
audience — Warner Bros. and their legal team — that they’re all in the same boat,
moviemakers with similar cultural knowledge, even shared heritage. Using classic Marx
Brothers absurdist humor Groucho claims that he and his brothers — the Marx Brothers —
have been around longer than Harry and Jack have and that they might have more right
to use the word “Brothers” in their name. He piles on a list of other sets of brothers:
“the Smith Brothers” (of cough drop fame), “the Brothers Karamazov” (title of a
nineteenth-century Russian novel), a baseball player with the last name of “Brouthers.”
He even riffs a bit on the song “Brother, Can You Spare a Dime?” He gets even more
personal, addressing each Warner brother by name: “Now Jack, how about you?”, “As for
you, Harry,” and throws in some well-known examples of Harrys and Jacks, just for good
measure. Unwilling to stop, Marx even questions the right of Warner Bros. to name its
workplace “Burbank studio,” suggesting — “pure conjecture, of course” — that Luther
Burbank’s survivors might not be happy to be associated with the Warner Bros.’ body of
work. One can imagine the effect of Marx’s onslaught of examples on the movie studio’s
large and serious legal team, who also come under fire.
Content to let the logic of his defense rest, Marx gives Warner Bros.’ legal team a
break, suggesting that the letter was the brainchild of a young lawyer “hot out of law
school, hungry for success and too ambitious to follow the natural laws of promotion.”
He claims sympathy and admiration for the heads of the legal department, “fine fellows
with curly black hair, double-breasted suits and a love of their fellow man,” a formulation
he uses twice — the second time slightly truncated and ending in “etc.” Effortlessly,
Marx calls up a vision of mindless automatons, led astray by the “pasty-faced legal
adventurer” who Marx calls responsible for the possible “bad blood between the Warners
and the Marxes.” Here he reinforces that bond between moviemaking families —
“brothers under the skin” — and highlights once more the absurdity of imagining that
the reputation or box office receipts of Casablanca, the 1942 Academy Award winner for
Best Picture, will be sullied by a film made by the likes of Groucho and his brothers.
In this hilarious letter — and in the two letters that followed — Groucho Marx
underscored the ridiculousness of comparing the classic Casablanca with the silliness of a
Marx Brothers film in very much the style of his own films. Fast, clever, not especially
logical, but certainly tireless, Marx wore out his bigger opponent. It took two more
letters from Marx to get Warner Bros. off his back: each one outlined plots that were
so far-fetched as to be nearly incomprehensible, and Warner Bros. finally gave up.

• ACTIVITY •
Read the following essay written by Christopher Morley in 1920. Annotate it or
create a graphic organizer; generate some questions about its style. Develop
a thesis statement, and write an essay in which you analyze the ways that the
style of the essay helps Morley achieve his purpose.

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 63

6/18/12 3:10 PM

64

CHAPTER 2 • CLosE REAdInG

On Laziness
Christopher Morley
Today we rather intended to write an essay on Laziness, but were too indolent
to do so.
The sort of thing we had in mind to write would have been exceedingly persuasive. We intended to discourse a little in favour of a greater appreciation of
Indolence as a benign factor in human affairs.
It is our observation that every time we get into trouble it is due to not having
been lazy enough. Unhappily, we were born with a certain fund of energy. We
have been hustling about for a number of years now, and it doesn’t seem to
get us anything but tribulation. Henceforward we are going to make a determined effort to be more languid and demure. It is the bustling man who always
gets put on committees, who is asked to solve the problems of other people
and neglect his own.
The man who is really, thoroughly, and philosophically slothful is the only
thoroughly happy man. It is the happy man who benefits the world. The conclusion is inescapable.
We remember a saying about the meek inheriting the earth. The truly meek
man is the lazy man. He is too modest to believe that any ferment and hubbub
of his can ameliorate the earth or assuage the perplexities of humanity.
o. Henry said once that one should be careful to distinguish laziness from
dignified repose. Alas, that was a mere quibble. Laziness is always dignified,
it is always reposeful. Philosophical laziness, we mean. The kind of laziness
that is based upon a carefully reasoned analysis of experience. Acquired laziness. We have no respect for those who were born lazy; it is like being born
a millionaire: they cannot appreciate their bliss. It is the man who has hammered his laziness out of the stubborn material of life for whom we chant
praise and allelulia.
The laziest man we know — we do not like to mention his name, as the brutal
world does not yet recognize sloth at its community value — is one of the greatest poets in this country; one of the keenest satirists; one of the most rectilinear
thinkers. He began life in the customary hustling way. He was always too busy
to enjoy himself. He became surrounded by eager people who came to him
to solve their problems. “It’s a queer thing,” he said sadly; “no one ever comes to
me asking for help in solving my problems.” Finally the light broke upon him.
He stopped answering letters, buying lunches for casual friends and visitors
from out of town, he stopped lending money to old college pals and frittering
his time away on all the useless minor matters that pester the good-natured. He
sat down in a secluded cafe with his cheek against a seidel of dark beer and
began to caress the universe with his intellect.
The most damning argument against the Germans is that they were not lazy
enough. In the middle of Europe, a thoroughly disillusioned, indolent, and delightful old continent, the Germans were a dangerous mass of energy and bumptious

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 64

5

6/18/12 3:10 PM

CLosE REAdInG A VIsUAL TExT

65

push. If the Germans had been as lazy, as indifferent, and as righteously laissezfairish as their neighbours the world would have been spared a great deal.
People respect laziness. If you once get a reputation for complete, immovable,
and reckless indolence the world will leave you to your own thoughts, which are
generally rather interesting.
doctor Johnson, who was one of the world’s great philosophers, was lazy.
only yesterday our friend the Caliph showed us an extraordinarily interesting
thing. It was a little leather-bound notebook in which Boswell jotted down memoranda of his talks with the old doctor.10 These notes he afterward worked up
into the immortal Biography. And lo and behold, what was the very first entry
in this treasured little relic?

10

Doctor Johnson told me in going to Ilam from Ashbourne, 22
September, 1777, that the way the plan of his Dictionary came to be
addressed to Lord Chesterfield was this: He had neglected to write it by
the time appointed. Dodsley suggested a desire to have it addressed to
Lord C. Mr. J. laid hold of this as an excuse for delay, that it might be
better done perhaps, and let Dodsley have his desire. Mr. Johnson said to
his friend, Doctor Bathurst: “Now if any good comes of my addressing to
Lord Chesterfield it will be ascribed to deep policy and address, when, in
fact, it was only a casual excuse for laziness.”
Thus we see that it was sheer laziness that led to the greatest triumph of
doctor Johnson’s life, the noble and memorable letter to Chesterfield in 1775.
Mind your business is a good counsel; but mind your idleness also. It’s a
tragic thing to make a business of your mind. save your mind to amuse yourself with.
The lazy man does not stand in the way of progress. When he sees progress
roaring down upon him he steps nimbly out of the way. The lazy man doesn’t
(in the vulgar phrase) pass the buck. He lets the buck pass him. We have
always secretly envied our lazy friends. now we are going to join them. We
have burned our boats or our bridges or whatever it is that one burns on the
eve of a momentous decision.
Writing on this congenial topic has roused us up to quite a pitch of enthusiasm and energy.

close reading a Visual Text
Many of the same tools of rhetorical analysis and close reading that we have practiced on written texts are also useful for detecting how visual texts convey their
10Samuel Johnson (1709–1784) was a British scholar who wrote A Dictionary of the English

Language. James Boswell wrote his famous biography. — Eds.

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 65

6/18/12 3:10 PM

66

CHAPTER 2 • CLosE REAdInG

(see insert for color version.)

messages. These tools work whether the visual texts are advertisements, photos,
fine art, or political cartoons. Let’s start by looking at an ad for the Dodge Durango.
The rhetorical triangle still applies: what are the relationships among the text’s
subject (a powerful sport utility vehicle), its audience (the potential SUV buyer), and
the speaker (in this case, Dodge and the advertising agency it hired to create the ad)?
The advertisement appeals to ethos in the text at the top left: it banks on associations

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 66

6/18/12 3:10 PM

CLosE REAdInG A VIsUAL TExT

67

to Dodge cars and trucks — power, dependability, toughness. Its appeals to pathos
play on preconceptions about food: a cheeseburger is real food, tofu is somehow
fake; cheeseburgers are what you want to eat, tofu is what you’re supposed to eat; a
big powerful truck is what you really want, a small fuel-efficient car is what you are
supposed to have. As for logos, the Durango is affordable; it makes sense to own one.
Why not enjoy life, drive an affordable SUV, and eat big juicy cheeseburgers?
When we analyze a visual text, we still look at the words, both individually and
in the way they are placed on the page. Look at the text at the top left part of the ad.
Dodge Durango. This is the most affordable SUV with a V-8. Dodge Durango.
With nearly four tons of towing, this baby carries around chunks of those wimpy
wanna-bes in its tail pipe.

Note the aggressive tone. How is that aggressiveness created? It may be the repetition of “Dodge Durango” with its hard consonant sounds; it may be the prepositional phrase announcing that the vehicle can tow four tons. It’s a “baby” that
carries “chunks” of its competitors in its tailpipe. The use of the colloquialism “baby”
contrasts nicely with the image of the car as a predator eating the competition.
The owner of a Dodge Durango will be the kind of person whose car is his or her
“baby” and who is the leader of the pack, not one “of those wimpy wanna-bes.”
The Dodge logo — a ram’s head — and slogan “grab life by the horns” appear at
the top right of the ad. Both the image and the words play with the connotations of
horns: strength, masculinity, and noise. The imperative sentence is a call to action
that can be paraphrased as “Don’t be a wimp! Enjoy life now!” Finally, the text at
the bottom of the ad has yet another message. The large white letters on the dark
road are boldly designed, but the message is gentle and even funny. “[B]ig fat juicy
cheeseburger” acknowledges our natural desire for pleasures that are not always
healthy. But who can resist when the alternative is tofu? The antecedent of It’s is, of
course, the SUV; but the pronoun suggests an understanding, an insider’s wink.
We study the images in the text the same way: individually and in terms of
composition, or arrangement on the page. For instance, notice that even though
the Dodge logo is very aggressive, the photo is less so. In fact, the photo shows a
man and a woman in the car, pulling a vintage Airstream motor home, thus suggesting not only a family atmosphere but also good taste, as Airstreams are collectibles. Perhaps it is a pitch to the rising number of women car buyers or to the
use of an SUV as a less stodgy replacement for a minivan. Though the front of the
Dodge Durango is outsized, a reminder of the power under the hood, the ocean
and sky in the background temper the aggressiveness of the looming SUV; it looks
like a beautiful day for a cool couple with great taste to be out for a ride.
So what is the advertisement’s message? Or are there a few different messages?
If you were to write an essay analyzing the “language” of the visual text, you might
consider a thesis that argues for the ad’s multiple messages. Here’s one example:
The Dodge Durango ad balances aggressiveness with humor; it appeals to men and
women with its reminder that life is too short not to enjoy its guilty pleasures.

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 67

6/18/12 3:10 PM

68

CHAPTER 2 • CLosE REAdInG

• ACTIVITY •
Use the following ad, or find one on your own that either appeals to you or
provokes you, and analyze it as we have done with the Durango ad.

(see insert for color version.)

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 68

6/18/12 3:10 PM

CULMInATInG ACTIVITy

69

• CulmInATIng ACTIVITY •
Look carefully at the three documents below. The first is John F. Kennedy’s
1961 inaugural address. The second is an article that appeared in January 2011,
first on the Web site Daily Beast and then in Newsweek. In “Inside Kennedy’s
Inauguration, 50 Years On,” writer Eleanor Clift reports on what intimates of
JFK remember from that cold January day. The last document is a photograph
of the swearing-in ceremony.
Begin by reading the Kennedy speech and the analysis that follows. As you
read the speech, take the time to generate some questions on style, annotate
the speech, or create a graphic organizer, noting passages that stand out, interest you, or even confuse you. Then do the same with the Clift article: read it
closely, and generate questions, annotate the article, or create a graphic organizer. Finally, study the photo, and consider the arrangement of the figures in it.
Once you have analyzed all three pieces, develop a thesis statement for an
essay that compares and contrasts the styles of the three documents, focusing
on how they convey the legacy of John Fitzgerald Kennedy.
Inaugural Address, January 20, 1961
John f. KenneDy
Given on a cold January afternoon in 1961, John F. Kennedy’s inaugural address
was hailed as a return to the tradition of political eloquence. It offers great pleasures to students of rhetoric, rewarding the close reader’s efforts with details large
and small that lend themselves to analysis, that inspire imitation, and that have
stood the test of time.

Vice President Johnson, Mr. speaker, Mr. Chief Justice, President Eisenhower,
Vice President nixon, President Truman, Reverend Clergy, fellow citizens:
We observe today not a victory of party but a celebration of freedom —
symbolizing an end as well as a beginning — signifying renewal as well as
change. For I have sworn before you and Almighty God the same solemn oath
our forebears prescribed nearly a century and three-quarters ago.
The world is very different now. For man holds in his mortal hands the power
to abolish all forms of human poverty and all forms of human life. And yet the
same revolutionary beliefs for which our forebears fought are still at issue
around the globe — the belief that the rights of man come not from the generosity of the state but from the hand of God.
We dare not forget today that we are the heirs of that first revolution. Let the
word go forth from this time and place, to friend and foe alike, that the torch
has been passed to a new generation of Americans — born in this century,
tempered by war, disciplined by a hard and bitter peace, proud of our ancient

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 69

6/18/12 3:10 PM

70

CHAPTER 2 • CLosE REAdInG

heritage — and unwilling to witness or permit the slow undoing of those human
rights to which this nation has always been committed, and to which we are
committed today at home and around the world.
Let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any
price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any
foe to assure the survival and the success of liberty.
This much we pledge — and more.
To those old allies whose cultural and spiritual origins we share, we pledge
the loyalty of faithful friends. United there is little we cannot do in a host of cooperative ventures. divided there is little we can do — for we dare not meet a
powerful challenge at odds and split asunder.
To those new states whom we welcome to the ranks of the free, we pledge
our word that one form of colonial control shall not have passed away merely
to be replaced by a far more iron tyranny. We shall not always expect to find
them supporting our view. But we shall always hope to find them strongly supporting their own freedom — and to remember that, in the past, those who
foolishly sought power by riding the back of the tiger ended up inside.
To those people in the huts and villages of half the globe struggling to
break the bonds of mass misery, we pledge our best efforts to help them help
themselves, for whatever period is required — not because the communists may
be doing it, not because we seek their votes, but because it is right. If a free
society cannot help the many who are poor, it cannot save the few who are rich.
To our sister republics south of our border, we offer a special pledge — to
convert our good words into good deeds — in a new alliance for progress — to
assist free men and free governments in casting off the chains of poverty. But
this peaceful revolution of hope cannot become the prey of hostile powers. Let
all our neighbors know that we shall join with them to oppose aggression or
subversion anywhere in the Americas. And let every other power know that
this Hemisphere intends to remain the master of its own house.
To that world assembly of sovereign states, the United nations, our last best
hope in an age where the instruments of war have far outpaced the instruments
of peace, we renew our pledge of support — to prevent it from becoming merely
a forum for invective — to strengthen its shield of the new and the weak — and
to enlarge the area in which its writ may run.
Finally, to those nations who would make themselves our adversary, we offer
not a pledge but a request: that both sides begin anew the quest for peace,
before the dark powers of destruction unleashed by science engulf all humanity
in planned or accidental self-destruction.
We dare not tempt them with weakness. For only when our arms are sufficient beyond doubt can we be certain beyond doubt that they will never be
employed.
But neither can two great and powerful groups of nations take comfort from
our present course — both sides overburdened by the cost of modern weapons,

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 70

5

10

6/18/12 3:10 PM

CULMInATInG ACTIVITy

both rightly alarmed by the steady spread of the deadly atom, yet both racing to
alter that uncertain balance of terror that stays the hand of mankind’s final war.
so let us begin anew — remembering on both sides that civility is not a sign
of weakness, and sincerity is always subject to proof. Let us never negotiate out
of fear. But let us never fear to negotiate.
Let both sides explore what problems unite us instead of belaboring those
problems which divide us.
Let both sides, for the first time, formulate serious and precise proposals for
the inspection and control of arms — and bring the absolute power to destroy
other nations under the absolute control of all nations.
Let both sides seek to invoke the wonders of science instead of its terrors.
Together let us explore the stars, conquer the deserts, eradicate disease, tap the
ocean depths and encourage the arts and commerce.
Let both sides unite to heed in all corners of the earth the command of Isaiah —
to “undo the heavy burdens . . . [and] let the oppressed go free.”
And if a beachhead of cooperation may push back the jungle of suspicion,
let both sides join in creating a new endeavor, not a new balance of power,
but a new world of law, where the strong are just and the weak secure and
the peace preserved.
All this will not be finished in the first one hundred days. nor will it be finished
in the first one thousand days, nor in the life of this Administration, nor even
perhaps in our lifetime on this planet. But let us begin.
In your hands, my fellow citizens, more than mine, will rest the final success
or failure of our course. since this country was founded, each generation of
Americans has been summoned to give testimony to its national loyalty. The
graves of young Americans who answered the call to service surround the
globe.
now the trumpet summons us again — not as a call to bear arms, though
arms we need — not as a call to battle, though embattled we are — but a call
to bear the burden of a long twilight struggle, year in and year out, “rejoicing
in hope, patient in tribulation” — a struggle against the common enemies of
man: tyranny, poverty, disease and war itself.
Can we forge against these enemies a grand and global alliance, north
and south, East and West, that can assure a more fruitful life for all mankind?
Will you join in that historic effort?
In the long history of the world, only a few generations have been granted
the role of defending freedom in its hour of maximum danger. I do not shrink
from this responsibility — I welcome it. I do not believe that any of us would
exchange places with any other people or any other generation. The energy,
the faith, the devotion which we bring to this endeavor will light our country and
all who serve it — and the glow from that fire can truly light the world.
And so, my fellow Americans: ask not what your country can do for you —
ask what you can do for your country.

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 71

71

15

20

25

6/18/12 3:10 PM

72

CHAPTER 2 • CLosE REAdInG

My fellow citizens of the world: ask not what America will do for you, but
what together we can do for the freedom of man.
Finally, whether you are citizens of America or citizens of the world, ask
of us here the same high standards of strength and sacrifice which we ask
of you. With a good conscience our only sure reward, with history the final
judge of our deeds, let us go forth to lead the land we love, asking His blessing and His help, but knowing that here on earth God’s work must truly be
our own.

Let’s start by looking at the rhetorical situation in Kennedy’s inaugural
address with SOAPS (p. 5). John F. Kennedy makes his subject not policy
proposals, but the common heritage, purpose, and obligations of the American people. The occasion is the inauguration, a very cold day in January. The
speech is short, only 1,343 words; its length is, perhaps, the new president’s
nod to the live audience standing in the cold on the Capitol grounds. The
audience — those who were there on that icy morning and the millions watching on television — is vast and diverse. Kennedy was the youngest U.S. president, the first Roman Catholic president, and the winner of the election by a
very small margin. His audience was, perhaps, watching more closely than
usual. Knowing that, it is likely that Kennedy and his speechwriters considered their purpose to be one of unification and conciliation. As a speaker,
Kennedy played up his youthful energy, giving the speech while standing
coatless and hatless. The speech’s strongest appeals are to pathos and ethos:
Kennedy appeals to pathos, in part, by reaching his audience psychologically,
asking them to consider what they can do for their country. He establishes
ethos by offering America as a partner with the “citizens of the world” to
champion the “freedom of man.”
You may have generated questions like the ones listed below. Try your
hand at answering the ones here as well as any you may have generated on your
own. Don’t worry if you can’t answer all of them.
1. Why are so many of the words abstract? How do words like freedom,
poverty, devotion, loyalty, and sacrifice set the tone of the speech?
2. Find examples of rhetorical devices such as metaphor and personification.
3. Does Kennedy use any figures of speech that might be considered
clichés? Which metaphors are fresher? Is there a pattern to their use?
4. Do any words in the speech seem archaic, or old-fashioned? If so,
what are they? What is their effect?
5. The speech is a succession of twenty-seven short paragraphs. Twelve
paragraphs have only one sentence, eight have two, and six have three
sentences. Why do you think Kennedy used these short paragraphs?

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 72

6/18/12 3:10 PM

CULMInATInG ACTIVITy

73

6. The speech contains two extremes of sentence length, ranging from
ninety-four words (para. 3) to six words (para. 5). A high proportion
of the sentences are on the short side. Why?
7. More than twenty sentences are complex sentences — that is, sentences
that contain a subordinate clause. What is their effect? How are they
different from the speech’s simple or compound sentences?
8. The speech has many examples of antithesis in parallel grammatical
structures: “To those old allies” (para. 6); “to those new states” (para. 7);
“If a free society cannot help the many who are poor, it cannot save
the few who are rich” (para. 8); and of course, “[A]sk not what your
country can do for you — ask what you can do for your country”
(para 25). What does this use of opposites suggest about the purpose
of Kennedy’s speech?
9. Why is the dominance of declarative sentences, which make statements, appropriate in an inaugural address?
10. Paragraph 23 consists of two rhetorical questions. How do they act as
a transition to Kennedy’s call for action?
11. Find examples of rhetorical schemes such as anaphora (the repetition
of a word or phrase at the beginning of successive phrases, clauses,
or lines) and zeugma (one verb or adjective having multiple and
incongruous objects).
12. Consider the speech’s many examples of parallelism: “born in this century, tempered by war, disciplined by a hard and bitter peace, proud
of our ancient heritage” (para. 3); “pay any price, bear any burden,
meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe” (para. 4).
How do they lend themselves to Kennedy’s purpose?
13. Kennedy uses hortative sentences (language that urges or calls to
action) in paragraphs 3 through 20: “Let the word,” “Let both sides,”
and so on. Later, in paragraphs 25 and 26, he uses the imperative:
“ask” and “ask not.” What is the difference between the two forms,
and why did he start with one and end with the other?
Look at your answers to the preceding questions. Even if you weren’t able
to answer them all, you may be able to see one or more patterns.
Kennedy’s address is formal; the archaic diction (asunder, foe, writ, forebears) underscores the formality. The figures of speech make traditional yet
powerful connections — tyranny and iron, power and tiger, poverty and chains —
and they are a strong source of emotional persuasion. Such figures of speech
as personification (“our sister republics”) elevate the speech to a grand style.
The image of the “beachhead of cooperation” pushing back the “jungle of
suspicion” is especially vivid.

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 73

6/18/12 3:10 PM

74

CHAPTER 2 • CLosE REAdInG

The speech’s syntax reveals other meanings and adds to the development
of the speech’s tone. Formality is sustained by devices such as anaphora: “not
as a call to bear arms, though arms we need — not as a call to battle, though
embattled we are” (para. 22). The many examples of parallelism (especially
antithesis) — “If a free society cannot help the many who are poor, it cannot
save the few who are rich” (para. 8), juxtaposing the many and the few, the
poor with the rich — are intended to unite disparate groups and also to reassure the country that despite Kennedy’s narrow margin of victory he will
be everyone’s president.
This short address covers a lot of ground. Each of its short paragraphs
reveals another one of Kennedy’s principles or promises — an early version
of what we now call bullet points. There are a variety of sentence types: many
are very short, declarative sentences; a few are compound; and more than twenty
are complex, usually beginning with the subordinate clause to allow steam to
build in order to energize the sentence’s main idea. The speech is a call to action,
but Kennedy uses hortatory forms (“let us”) more than imperatives (“ask”
and “ask not”); his intention is to persuade rather than coerce. And the rhetorical questions in paragraph 23 are also reminders that the young president
is building consensus rather than dictating. Finally, many sentences begin with
coordinating conjunctions, such as so, for, and but. These transitional words
move us smoothly from one sentence into the next and represent continuity —
the passing of the torch — in the same way an inauguration helps the country
make the transition to a new era.
Inside Kennedy’s Inauguration, 50 Years On
eleanor Clift
This article, in which friends and family of JFK share their memories of the inauguration with reporter Eleanor Clift, originally appeared in January 2011 on the Web
site Daily Beast and was then reprinted in newsweek.

Weather forecasters had predicted light snow turning to rain on the eve of
President kennedy’s inauguration, but the snow fell heavily and steadily, covering Pennsylvania Avenue with an eight-inch white blanket and forcing the Army
Corps of Engineers’ snow-removal force to work through the night to clear the
parade route. Jan. 20, 1961, dawned sunny and cold, with gusty winds that
made the 22 degrees registered at noon for the swearing-in feel like 7 degrees.
It had just begun to snow when press aide sue Vogelsinger made her way
to the Mayflower Hotel to give Harry Truman an advance copy of the inaugural speech.
she found one secret service agent standing guard, told him why she was
there, and he said, “sure, just knock on the door.” The former president came

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 74

6/18/12 3:10 PM

CULMInATInG ACTIVITy

to the door in his bedroom slippers. “Have you met Bess?” he asked, inviting
the young aide in and introducing her to Mrs. Truman, who sat there knitting away.
It was a day, 50 years ago, frozen in our memories, at least those of us old
enough to remember it. But the haze of history masks the random collection of
personal experiences and inconveniences for those who were there.
The Mayflower was the favored gathering place for politicians and democratic activists coming to Washington to celebrate their return to power. Journalist John seigenthaler was having drinks at the Mayflower with two veteran new
york congressmen. “What’s the best inaugural you’ve been to?” he asked. “The
one we’re going to tomorrow,” said Rep. Charles Buckley of new york.
“What about FdR?” exclaimed seigenthaler. “What Charlie means is tomorrow night an Irish Catholic sleeps in the White House,” explained Brooklyn Rep.
Eugene keogh. “We forget, looking back on it, how powerful the anti-Catholic
effort was,” seigenthaler says now. “There were frozen tears of joy on the
cheeks of Irish Catholics that day,” says the journalist, who would go to the
Justice department as a top assistant to Robert kennedy. “It sounds a bit clichéd now to talk about the new Frontier and what it meant, and sure it was
political sloganeering, but for those of us in the campaign and planning to
stay on in the administration, it was a meaningful mantra — a passing of the
torch and changing of the guard.”
dignitaries assembled on the inaugural platform with seating marked for the
various political tribes: the Eisenhower and nixon contingents, the kennedy–
Johnson family and friends. Philip Bobbitt, age 12, a nephew of Lyndon Johnson,
sat next to Gov. Pat Brown of California (father of current governor Jerry). As
Cardinal Cushing, a traditionalist with a heavy Boston accent, went on at some
length with his prayer, Governor Brown leaned over to the young boy and said,
“If he doesn’t stop now, I’m quitting the church.”
The glare from the sun made it impossible for Robert Frost to read the poem
he had written for kennedy, titled “dedication.” Bobbitt, now a law professor
at Columbia University and lecturer at the University of Texas, remembers his
Uncle Lyndon gallantly using his hat to try to shield the sun, but it didn’t work,
and Frost fell back on an earlier poem he knew well, “The Gift outright,” reciting
it from memory. “We were all very excited,” Bobbitt says, “but my memory is
mostly about being cold.”
kathleen, the oldest of the kennedy grandchildren, watched the swearingin from the camera platform facing the ceremony. she was with her four younger
siblings — Joe, Bobby, david, and Courtney — and to a 9-year-old, standing
and cold, the whole thing felt kind of remote. “I knew I was supposed to think
this was very historic, but all the adults were taller and we couldn’t see well. I
remember scooting up to see what I could on a small TV.” she does remember
how Frank sinatra stuck his head into her bedroom to say hello: “I thought that
was cool.” sinatra had recorded a kennedy campaign song to the tune of

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 75

75

5

6/18/12 3:10 PM

76

CHAPTER 2 • CLosE REAdInG

“High Hopes,” which kathleen sings unprompted. Another memorable moment
was actress kim novak “tobogganing with us in the snow.” Joan kennedy had
campaigned in West Virginia for her brother-in-law, going down into a coal
mine with him, and sitting there that day she thought how remarkable it was
that “you could be in a coal mine and two months later be inaugurated president.
The contrast says a lot about democratic politics that’s good.” she had campaigned for Jack all over the country, but West Virginia stood out. “Jack said
we had to win in West Virginia to prove that a Catholic could win because there
were so few Catholics there, only 1 or 2 percent.” she remembered how cold
and dark and dank the mine was, and how the coal miners were so eager to
meet them.
As family and friends descended on the White House, cold and hungry,
Jackie kennedy’s newly appointed social secretary, Letitia Baldridge, bustled
about, worrying whether there was enough heat in the corner bedrooms and
whether the food passed muster with Rose kennedy, the family matriarch. “she
wanted proper little sandwiches, the kind they had at tea time, and little cream
desserts — she was very thrifty, wanted to make sure we used up everything,
and also that we had enough. she whispered in our ears, and when Mama Rose
whispered, you jumped. . . . she was the bountiful grandmother orchestrating
everybody’s stomach.”
What Ambassador Jean kennedy smith, the last surviving kennedy sibling,
remembers most from the inauguration is an impromptu family lunch of hot
soup and sandwiches in the White House. “It was just us,” she says, “my brother
and sisters and their husbands, and Bobby and Teddy. We just talked about
the campaign and how we won everything and that’s why he was president,
just jokes. And then he signed a picture for us, and it said, ‘To Jean, don’t deny
you did it,’ and I thought how wonderful, and of course he put the same thing
to Pat. He meant that we made him president. . . . He always had a terrific sense
of humor. And you know he didn’t seem young to us because of course he was
older than all of us.”
After the swearing-in, speechwriter and new special assistant to the president
Richard Goodwin, hatless and coatless, walked the two miles from the Capitol
to the White House. Freezing, he retreated to the White House to look for his
new office, when who should he encounter walking down the hallway but “the
guy I had been traveling the country with for the last year and a half — kennedy.
And he said, ‘dick, did you see the Coast Guard contingent in the parade?
There was not a single black face in that delegation, and I want you to do something about it right away.’
“so I ran upstairs to my office in the West Wing and I said, ‘Who’s in charge
of the Coast Guard?’ I learned they’re not under the defense department;
they’re under the Treasury department. so I called douglas dillon, the new Treasury secretary. And it struck me as I went up the stairs that we’ll no longer just
make speeches, we actually can do something about this. I told dillon and within
a few months the Coast Guard Academy was integrated.”

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 76

10

6/18/12 3:10 PM

CULMInATInG ACTIVITy

77

nBC correspondent sander Vanocur covered the inauguration from inside
the rotunda of the Capitol, watching it on TV. Print still ruled, but the networks were beginning to gain a greater foothold, and the kennedy campaign wasn’t suspicious of the press as the nixon campaign had been, which
made for a freer and easier exchange. Vanocur remembers the new president
stopping by a democratic national Committee meeting at the Mayflower,
and when a reporter asked what Truman thought of the changes in the
White House he’d left eight years earlier, kennedy responded that all Truman
would say about Eisenhower is “the sonofabitch moved my piano to the
basement.”
sue Vogelsinger, the young press aide, ended up checking herself in to the
hospital that evening, suffering from exhaustion after months on the campaign
trail. she didn’t get to the White House until the following day, and the next
night she ran into the new president, who was walking around by himself checking out the West Wing and fretting about the state of disrepair. “This is really
bad,” he said, looking at the chipped floors. “you think that’s bad, come see the
press office,” Vogelsinger told him, which he pronounced “worse than the senate office.” The press office was around the corner from the oval office (it still
is), and the three wire machines (AP, UP and Agence France-Presse) were kept
in the press secretary’s private bathroom. kennedy could hear the bells go off
signaling urgent news and he’d be there.
kennedy paid close attention to what journalists wrote about him. He would
say, “I’d rather be krocked than Fleesonized,” a reference to liberal democratic
columnist doris Fleeson versus the more conservative New York Times’s Arthur
krock. Fleeson was a kennedy favorite, and in early May 1961, she had a
medical problem and needed someone to ghostwrite her column. she was a
good friend of kennedy special assistant Fred dutton, and he agreed to take on
the task, two columns a week for three weeks. “And Fred uses this as a way to
goad the president for not being liberal enough, that he’s selling out on taxes,”
recalls dutton’s widow, nancy. “so the president walks in with the Washington
Star one afternoon, throws it on dutton’s desk, and says, ‘Can’t you control that
friend of yours?’”
Fifty years after kennedy’s inauguration, the memories that linger remind us
of a time when all seemed possible, when a politician could capture the imagination of a country. Those who were there knew it was special, and while
kennedy’s presidency was brief, his impact endures.

15

Inauguration of John F. Kennedy
uniteD states arMy signal Corps
This photo, credited to the United States Army Signal Corps, shows Chief Justice
Earl Warren administering the Oath of Office to John F. Kennedy during the ceremony at the Capitol on January 20, 1961. Among the notables are poet Robert
Frost; former presidents Eisenhower and Truman with their wives, Mamie and Bess;

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 77

6/18/12 3:10 PM

78

CHAPTER 2 • CLosE REAdInG

Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson and his wife, Lady Bird; as well as the new first
lady, Jacqueline, seen at the lower left in her signature pillbox hat.

Glossary of Style elements
John F. Kennedy’s inaugural address is almost a textbook of style elements. The
following brief glossary of terms uses examples from Kennedy’s speech.
alliteration Repetition of the same sound beginning several words or syllables
in sequence.
[L]et us go forth to lead the land we love . . .

allusion Brief reference to a person, event, or place (real or fictitious) or to a
work of art.
Let both sides unite to heed in all corners of the earth the command of Isaiah . . .

anaphora Repetition of a word or phrase at the beginning of successive phrases,
clauses, or lines.
. . . not as a call to bear arms, though arms we need — not as a call to battle, though
embattled we are . . .

antimetabole

Repetition of words in reverse order.

[A]sk not what your country can do for you — ask what you can do for your country.

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 78

6/18/12 3:10 PM

GLossARy oF sTyLE ELEMEnTs

antithesis

79

Opposition, or contrast, of ideas or words in a parallel construction.

[W]e shall . . . support any friend, oppose any foe . . .

archaic diction

Old-fashioned or outdated choice of words.

beliefs for which our forebears fought

asyndeton
words.

Omission of conjunctions between coordinate phrases, clauses, or

[W]e shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend,
oppose any foe to assure the survival and the success of liberty.

cumulative sentence Sentence that completes the main idea at the beginning of
the sentence and then builds and adds on.
But neither can two great and powerful groups of nations take comfort from our present
course — both sides overburdened by the cost of modern weapons, both rightly alarmed
by the steady spread of the deadly atom, yet both racing to alter that uncertain balance
of terror that stays the hand of mankind’s final war.

hortative sentence
action.

Sentence that exhorts, urges, entreats, implores, or calls to

Let both sides explore what problems unite us instead of belaboring those problems
which divide us.

imperative sentence

Sentence used to command or enjoin.

My fellow citizens of the world: ask not what America will do for you, but what
together we can do for the freedom of man.

inversion Inverted order of words in a sentence (variation of the subject-verbobject order).
United there is little we cannot do in a host of cooperative ventures. Divided there is
little we can do . . .

juxtaposition Placement of two things closely together to emphasize similarities
or differences.
[W]e are the heirs of that first revolution. Let the word go forth . . . that the torch has
been passed to a new generation of Americans — born in this century . . .

metaphor

Figure of speech that compares two things without using like or as.

And if a beachhead of cooperation may push back the jungle of suspicion . . .

oxymoron Paradoxical juxtaposition of words that seem to contradict one
another.
But this peaceful revolution . . .

parallelism Similarity of structure in a pair or series of related words, phrases,
or clauses.
Let both sides explore. . . . Let both sides, for the first time, formulate serious and precise
proposals. . . . Let both sides seek to invoke. . . . Let both sides unite to heed . . .

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 79

6/18/12 3:10 PM

80

CHAPTER 2 • CLosE REAdInG

periodic sentence

Sentence whose main clause is withheld until the end.

To that world assembly of sovereign states, the United Nations, our last best hope in an
age where the instruments of war have far outpaced the instruments of peace, we renew
our pledge of support . . .

personification Attribution of a lifelike quality to an inanimate object or an idea.
with history the final judge of our deeds

rhetorical question Figure of speech in the form of a question posed for rhetorical effect rather than for the purpose of getting an answer.
Will you join in that historic effort?

synedoche

Figure of speech that uses a part to represent the whole.

In your hands, my fellow citizens, more than mine, will rest the final success or failure
of our course.

zeugma Use of two different words in a grammatically similar way that produces different, often incongruous, meanings.
Now the trumpet summons us again — not as a call to bear arms, though arms we
need — not as a call to battle, though embattled we are — but a call to bear the
burden . . .

02_SHE_67650_Ch02_039_080.indd 80

6/18/12 3:10 PM

3
Analyzing Arguments
From Reading to Writing

H

ave you ever changed your mind about something? What caused you to
re-examine a belief or idea? Most likely, you read or heard someone
else’s perspective that challenged you to think about an issue in a different way.
It might have been a clear, thoughtful presentation of information, a personal
story that tugged at your conscience, a startling statistic, or even a bit of humor
or satire that presented a familiar issue in a new and enlightening way. It’s less
likely that you were bullied into reconsidering your opinion by a loud voice
that belittled your ideas. By carefully and respectfully reading the viewpoints of
others and considering a range of ideas on an issue, we develop a clearer understanding of our own beliefs — a necessary foundation to writing effective arguments. In this chapter, we’re going to analyze elements of argument as a means of
critical thinking and an essential step toward crafting your own argumentative
essays.

What Is Argument?
Although we have been discussing argument in previous chapters, the focus has
been primarily on rhetorical appeals and style. We’ll continue examining those
elements, but here we take a closer look at an argument’s claim, evidence, and
organization.
Let’s start with some definitions. What is argument? Is it a conflict? A contest
between opposing forces to prove the other side wrong? A battle with words? Or
is it, rather, a process of reasoned inquiry and rational discourse seeking common
ground? If it is the latter, then we engage in argument whenever we explore ideas
rationally and think clearly about the world. Yet these days argument is often no
more than raised voices interrupting one another, exaggerated assertions without
adequate support, and scanty evidence from sources that lack credibility. We
might call this “crazed rhetoric,” as political commentator Tom Toles does in the
following cartoon.

81

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 81

6/18/12 3:10 PM

82

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

(see insert for color version.)
source: Toles © 2005 The Washington Post. Reprinted with permission of universal uclick. All rights

reserved.

This cartoon appeared on January 16, 2011, a few days after Arizona congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords was the victim of a shooting; six people were killed and
another thirteen injured. Many people saw this tragedy as stemming from vitriolic political discourse that included violent language. Toles argues that Uncle Sam,
and thus the country, is in danger of being devoured by “crazed rhetoric.” There
may not be a “next trick” or a “taming” if the rhetorical lion continues to roar.
Is Toles’s view exaggerated? Whether you answer yes or no to that question, it
seems quite clear that partisanship and polarization often hold sway over dialogue and civility when people think of argument. In our discussions, however,
we define argument as a persuasive discourse, a coherent and considered movement from a claim to a conclusion. The goal of this chapter is to avoid thinking
of argument as a zero-sum game of winners and losers but, instead, to see it as a
means of better understanding other people’s ideas as well as your own.
In Chapter 1 we discussed concession and refutation as a way to acknowledge
a counterargument, and we want to re-emphasize the usefulness of that approach.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 82

6/18/12 3:10 PM

WHAT is ARgumEnT?

83

Viewing anyone who disagrees with you as an adversary makes it very likely that
the conversation will escalate into an emotional clash, and treating opposing
ideas disrespectfully rarely results in mutual understanding. Twentieth-century
psychologist Carl Rogers stressed the importance of replacing confrontational
argument tactics with ones that promote negotiation, compromise, and cooperation. Rogerian arguments are based on the assumption that having a full understanding of an opposing position is essential to responding to it persuasively and
refuting it in a way that is accommodating rather than alienating. Ultimately, the
goal of a Rogerian argument is not to destroy your opponents or dismantle their
viewpoints but rather to reach a satisfactory conclusion.
So what does a civil argument look like? Let’s examine a short article that
appeared in Ode magazine in 2009 entitled “Why Investing in Fast Food May Be
a Good Thing.” In this piece Amy Domini, a financial advisor and leading voice
for socially responsible investing, argues the counterintuitive position that investing in the fast-food industry can be an ethically responsible choice.
Why Investing in Fast Food May Be a Good Thing
Amy Domini

my friends and colleagues know i’ve been an advocate of the slow Food movement for many years. Founded in italy 20 years ago, slow Food celebrates harvests from small-scale family farms, prepared slowly and lovingly with regard for
the health and environment of diners. slow Food seeks to preserve crop diversity,
so the unique taste of “heirloom” apples, tomatoes and other foods don’t perish
from the Earth. i wish everyone would choose to eat this way. The positive effects
on the health of our bodies, our local economies and our planet would be incalculable. Why then do i find myself investing in fast-food companies?
The reason is social investing isn’t about investing in perfect companies. (Perfect companies, it turns out, don’t exist.) We seek to invest in companies that are
moving in the right direction and listening to their critics. We offer a road map to
bring those companies to the next level, step by step. no social standard causes
us to reject restaurants, even fast-food ones, out of hand. Although we favor local,
organic food, we recognize it isn’t available in every community, and is often
priced above the means of the average household. many of us live more than 100
miles from a working farm.
Fast food is a way of life. in America, the average person eats it more than
150 times a year. in 2007, sales for the 400 largest u.s.-based fast-food chains
totaled $277 billion, up 7 percent from 2006.
Fast food is a global phenomenon. major chains and their local competitors
open restaurants in nearly every country. For instance, in greece, burgers and
pizza are supplanting the traditional healthy mediterranean diet of fish, olive oil
and vegetables. Doctors are treating greek children for diabetes, high cholesterol
and high blood pressure — ailments rarely seen in the past.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 83

6/18/12 3:10 PM

84

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

The fast-food industry won’t go away anytime soon. But in the meantime, it
can be changed. And because it’s so enormous, even seemingly modest changes
can have a big impact. in 2006, new york City banned the use of trans-fats (a
staple of fast food) in restaurants, and in 2008, California became the first state to
do so. When mcDonald’s moved to non-trans-fats for making French fries, the
health benefits were widespread. Another area of concern is fast-food packaging,
which causes forest destruction and creates a lot of waste. in the u.s. alone,
1.8 million tons of packaging is generated each year. Fast-food containers make
up about 20 percent of litter, and packaging for drinks and snacks adds another
20 percent.
A north Carolina–based organization called the Dogwood Alliance has
launched an effort to make fast-food companies reduce waste and source paper
responsibly. Through a campaign called no Free Refills, the group is pressing fastfood companies to reduce their impact on the forests of the southern u.s., the
world’s largest paper-producing region. They’re pushing companies to:

5

• Reduce the overuse of packaging.
• maximize use of 100 percent post-consumer recycled boxboard.
• Eliminate paper packaging from the most biologically important endangered
forests.
• Eliminate paper packaging from suppliers that convert natural forests into industrial pine plantations.
• Encourage packaging suppliers to source fiber from responsibly managed forests certified by the Forest stewardship Council.
• Recycle waste in restaurants to divert paper and other material from landfills.
Will the fast-food companies adopt all these measures overnight? no. But
along with similar efforts worldwide, this movement signals that consumers and
investors are becoming more conscious of steps they can take toward a better
world — beginning with the way they eat.
While my heart will always be with slow Food, i recognize the fast-food industry can improve and that some companies are ahead of others on that path.

Domini begins by reminding her readers of her ethos as “an advocate of the
Slow Food movement for many years.” By describing some of the goals and tenets
of that movement, including the “positive effects” it can have, she establishes
common ground before she discusses her position — one that the Slow Food
advocates are not likely to embrace, at least not initially. In fact, instead of asserting her position in a strong declarative sentence, Domini asks a question that
invites her audience to hear her explanation: “Why then do I find myself investing
in fast-food companies?” She provides evidence that supports her choice to take
that action: she uses statistics to show that slow food is not available in all communities, while fast food is an expanding industry. She uses the example of Greece

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 84

6/18/12 3:10 PM

sTAking A ClAim

85

to show that fast food is becoming a global phenomenon. She gives numerous
examples of how fast-food companies are improving ingredients and reducing
waste to illustrate how working to change fast-food practices can have a significant impact on public health and the environment. After presenting her viewpoint, Domini ends by acknowledging that her “heart will always be with Slow
Food”; but that fact should not preclude her supporting those in the fast-food
industry who are making socially and environmentally responsible decisions.

• ACTIVITY •
Identify at least two points in Domini’s article where she might have given
way to accusation or blame or where she might have dismissed the Slow Food
movement as being short-sighted or elitist. Discuss how, instead, she finds
common ground and promotes dialogue with her audience through civil
discourse.

• EssAY In PRogREss: selecting a Topic •
What are two controversial topics that interest you? Brainstorm how you
might develop an argument about each from two different viewpoints. Consider the potential for volatile or highly emotional responses to each. What
could you do to encourage a civil tone and approach? Make sure to choose
ideas that you could develop into a full essay. You will have an opportunity to
return to them throughout the chapter.

Staking a Claim
Every argument has a claim — also called an assertion or proposition — that
states the argument’s main idea or position. A claim differs from a topic or a subject in that a claim has to be arguable. It can’t just be a simple statement of fact; it
has to state a position that some people might disagree with and others might
agree with. Going from a simple topic to a claim means stating your informed
opinion about a topic. In the essay you just read, the general topic is social
investing — specifically, social investing in the fast-food industry. The arguable
claim, however, is that investing in fast-food companies can be socially responsible. Notice that the topic may be a single word or a phrase, but the arguable
claim has to be stated as a complete sentence.
It’s important to note that neither a published author nor a student writer is
likely to develop a strong claim without exploring a topic through reading about
it, discussing it with others, brainstorming, taking notes, and rethinking. After
looking into a topic thoroughly, then you are ready to develop a position on an

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 85

6/18/12 3:10 PM

86

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

issue. For example, let’s use the topic of single-sex classrooms. You will notice,
first of all, that a simple statement of the topic does not indicate whether you
support the notion or challenge it. Let’s consider several directions to take with
this topic.
• Many schools have single-sex classrooms.
• Single-sex classrooms have been around for years, especially in private
schools.
• Single-sex classrooms are ineffective because they do not prepare students
for the realities of the workplace.
The first statement may be true, but it is easily verified and not arguable;
thus, it is simply a topic and not a claim. The second statement has more detail,
but it’s easy to verify whether it is true or not. Since it is not arguable, it is not a
claim. The third statement is a claim because it is arguable. It argues that singlesex classrooms are ineffective and that preparation for the workplace is an important way to measure the effectiveness of an education. There are those who would
disagree with both statements and those who would agree with both. Thus, it
presents an arguable position and is a viable claim.

• ACTIVITY •
For each of the following statements, evaluate whether it is arguable or too
easily verifiable to develop into an effective argument. Try revising the ones
you consider too easily verifiable to make them into arguable claims.
1. SUV owners should be required to pay an energy surcharge.
2. Charter schools are an alternative to public schools.
3. Ronald Reagan was the most charismatic president of the twentieth
century.
4. Requiring students to wear uniforms improves school spirit.
5. The terms global warming and climate change describe different perspectives on this complex issue.
6. Students graduating from college today can expect to have more debt
than any previous generation.
7. People who read novels are more likely to attend sports events and movies than those who do not.
8. Print newspapers will not survive another decade.
9. The competition among countries to become a site for the Olympic
Games is fierce.
10. Plagiarism is a serious problem in today’s schools.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 86

6/18/12 3:10 PM

sTAking A ClAim

87

Types of Claims
Typically, we speak of three types of claims: claims of fact, claims of value, and
claims of policy. Each type can be used to guide entire arguments, which we would
call arguments of fact, arguments of value, and arguments of policy. While it is
helpful to separate the three for analysis, in practice it is not always that simple.
Indeed, it is quite common for an argument to include more than one type of
claim, as you will see in the following examples.
Claims of Fact
Claims of fact assert that something is true or not true. You can’t argue whether
Zimbabwe is in Africa or whether restaurants on Main Street serve more customers at breakfast than at lunch. These issues can be resolved and verified — in the
first case by checking a map, in the second through observation or by checking
sales figures. You can, however, argue that Zimbabwe has an unstable government
or that restaurants on Main Street are more popular with older patrons than
younger ones. Those statements are arguable: What does “unstable” mean? What
does “popular” mean? Who is “older” and who is “younger”?
Arguments of fact often pivot on what exactly is “factual.” Facts become
arguable when they are questioned, when they raise controversy, when they challenge people’s beliefs. “It’s a fact that the Social Security program will go bankrupt by 2025” is a claim that could be developed in an argument of fact. Very
often, so-called facts are a matter of interpretation. At other times, new “facts” call
into question older ones. The claim that cell phones increase the incidence of
brain tumors, for instance, requires sifting through new “facts” from medical
research and scrutinizing who is carrying out the research, who is supporting it
financially, and so on. Whenever you are evaluating or writing an argument of
fact, it’s important to approach your subject with a healthy skepticism.
In “Why Investing in Fast Food May Be a Good Thing,” Domini makes two
claims of fact. The argument in paragraph 3 is guided by the claim of fact that
“fast food is a way of life.” Is it? She supports this claim with sales statistics and
information on the growth of this industry. Paragraph 4 is guided by the claim of
fact that “fast food is a global phenomenon.” She supports this claim with an
explanation of fast-food restaurants opening “in nearly every country” and a specific example discussing the changing diet in Greece.
We commonly see arguments of fact that challenge stereotypes or social beliefs.
For instance, in Chapter 8, Gender, there is an argument of fact by Matthias Mehl
and his colleagues about whether women are more talkative than men (p. 557).
Mehl and his colleagues recorded conversations and concluded that the differences are, in fact, very minor. Their findings call into question the stereotype that
women are excessively chatty and more talkative than their male counterparts.
Mehl’s essay is a clear argument of fact that re-evaluates earlier “facts” and challenges a social myth.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 87

6/18/12 3:10 PM

88

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

Claims of Value
Perhaps the most common type of claim is a claim of value, which argues that
something is good or bad, right or wrong, desirable or undesirable. Of course,
just like any other claim, a claim of value must be arguable. Claims of value may
be personal judgments based on taste, or they may be more objective evaluations
based on external criteria. For instance, if you argue that Brad Pitt is the best leading man in Hollywood, that is simply a matter of taste. The criteria for what is
“best” and what defines a “leading man” are strictly personal. Another person
could argue that while Pitt might be the best-looking actor in Hollywood, Leonardo DiCaprio is more highly paid and his movies tend to make more money.
That is an evaluation based on external criteria — dollars and cents.
To develop an argument from a claim of value, you must establish specific
criteria or standards and then show to what extent the subject meets your criteria. Amy Domini’s argument is largely one of value as she supports her claim
that investing in fast-food companies can be a positive thing. The very title of
Domini’s essay suggests a claim of value: “Why Investing in Fast Food May Be a
Good Thing.” She develops her argument by explaining the impact that such
investing can have on what food choices are available, and what the impact of
those choices is.
Entertainment reviews — of movies, television shows, concerts, books — are
good examples of arguments developed from claims of value. Take a look at this
one, movie critic Roger Ebert’s 1977 review of the first Star Wars movie. He raved.
Notice how he states his four-star claim — it’s a great movie! — in several ways
throughout the argument and sets up his criteria at each juncture.
Star Wars
roger ebert

Ebert’s claim of
value. Stated
more formally,
it might read:
“Star Wars is
so good that it
will completely
draw you in.”

Every once in a while i have what i think of as an out-of-thebody experience at a movie. When the EsP people use a phrase
like that, they’re referring to the sensation of the mind actually
leaving the body and spiriting itself off to China or Peoria or a
galaxy far, far away. When i use the phrase, i simply mean that
my imagination has forgotten it is actually present in a movie
theater and thinks it’s up there on the screen. in a curious sense,
the events in the movie seem real, and i seem to be a part of
them.
Star Wars works like that. my list of other out-of-the-body
films is a short and odd one, ranging from the artistry of Bonnie
and Clyde or Cries and Whispers to the slick commercialism of
Jaws and the brutal strength of Taxi Driver. On whatever level
(sometimes i’m not at all sure) they engage me so immediately

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 88

Ebert’s first
criterion is
whether a film
transports him.

6/18/12 3:10 PM

sTAking A ClAim

Ebert elaborates
on why it is
“unique” —
pointing out that
its power lies in
directness and
simplicity rather
than violence
and brutality.

Ebert
addresses a
counterargument.
He knows that
many people will
praise the special
effects in the film.
He acknowledges
that they are
“good” — but that
is not one of his
chief criteria.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 89

and powerfully that i lose my detachment, my analytical reserve.
The movie’s happening, and it’s happening to me.
What makes the Star Wars experience unique, though, is
that it happens on such an innocent and often funny level. it’s usually violence that draws me so deeply into a movie — violence
ranging from the psychological torment of a Bergman character
to the mindless crunch of a shark’s jaws. maybe movies that scare
us find the most direct route to our imaginations. But there’s hardly
any violence at all in Star Wars (and even then it’s presented as
essentially bloodless swashbuckling). instead, there’s entertainment so direct and simple that all of the complications of the
modern movie seem to vaporize.
Star Wars is a fairy tale, a fantasy, a legend, finding its roots
in some of our most popular fictions. The golden robot, lion-faced
space pilot, and insecure little computer on wheels must have
been suggested by the Tin man, the Cowardly lion, and the
scarecrow in The Wizard of Oz. The journey from one end of the
galaxy to another is out of countless thousands of space operas.
The hardware is from Flash Gordon out of 2001: A Space Odyssey, the chivalry is from Robin Hood, the heroes are from Westerns, and the villains are a cross between nazis and sorcerers.
Star Wars taps the pulp fantasies buried in our memories, and
because it’s done so brilliantly, it reactivates old thrills, fears, and
exhilarations we thought we’d abandoned when we read our last
copy of Amazing Stories.
The movie works so well for several reasons, and they don’t
all have to do with the spectacular special effects. The effects
are good, yes, but great effects have been used in such movies
as Silent Running and Logan’s Run without setting all-time boxoffice records. no, i think the key to Star Wars is more basic
than that.
The movie relies on the strength of pure narrative, in the most
basic storytelling form known to man, the Journey. All of the best
tales we remember from our childhoods had to do with heroes
setting out to travel down roads filled with danger, and hoping
to find treasure or heroism at the journey’s end. in Star Wars,
george lucas takes this simple and powerful framework into
outer space, and that is an inspired thing to do, because we no
longer have maps on Earth that warn, “Here there be dragons.”
We can’t fall off the edge of the map, as Columbus could, and
we can’t hope to find new continents of prehistoric monsters or
lost tribes ruled by immortal goddesses. not on Earth, anyway,
but anything is possible in space, and lucas goes right ahead

89

Ebert asserts
that Star Wars
is not just
different from
the other films
he has cited; it
is “unique.”

Another
criterion is the
effectiveness of
the storytelling.
Here it is
literally the
stuff of legends,
managing
somehow to be
both new and
nostalgic.

5

Ebert moves
into his
principal
criterion: the
value of the
classic hero’s
journey that
Star Wars
embodies.

6/18/12 3:10 PM

90
Another
criterion: The
movie is good
because the
characters are
both familiar . . .

. . . and
unfamiliar.

He reiterates
his claim by
emphasizing
that it is not
the technology
of special
effects but the
humanity of
the characters
that makes the
film great.

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

and shows us very nearly everything. We get involved quickly,
because the characters in Star Wars are so strongly and simply
drawn and have so many small foibles and large, futile hopes for
us to identify with. And then lucas does an interesting thing. As
he sends his heroes off to cross the universe and do battle with the
Forces of Darth Vader, the evil Empire, and the awesome Death
star, he gives us lots of special effects, yes — ships passing into
hyperspace, alien planets, an infinity of stars — but we also get a
wealth of strange living creatures, and lucas correctly guesses
that they’ll be more interesting for us than all the intergalactic
hardware.
The most fascinating single scene, for me, was the one set in
the bizarre saloon on the planet Tatooine. As that incredible collection of extraterrestrial alcoholics and bug-eyed martini drinkers
lined up at the bar, and as lucas so slyly let them exhibit characteristics that were universally human, i found myself feeling a combination of admiration and delight. Star Wars had placed me in
the presence of really magical movie invention: Here, all mixed
together, were whimsy and fantasy, simple wonderment and quietly sophisticated storytelling.
When stanley kubrick was making 2001 in the late 1960s,
he threw everything he had into the special effects depicting
outer space, but he finally decided not to show any aliens at
all — because they were impossible to visualize, he thought. But
they weren’t at all, as Star Wars demonstrates, and the movie’s
delight in the possibilities of alien life forms is at least as much fun
as its conflicts between the space cruisers of the Empire and the
Rebels.
And perhaps that helps to explain the movie’s one weakness,
which is that the final assault on the Death star is allowed to go
on too long. maybe, having invested so much money and sweat
in his special effects, lucas couldn’t bear to see them trimmed. But
the magic of Star Wars is only dramatized by the special effects;
the movie’s heart is in its endearingly human (and non-human)
people.

Ebert applies
his criteria to
one specific
scene.

Ebert
concedes
that the
film does
have a flaw.

• ACTIVITY •
Find a review of a movie, a television show, a concert, an album or a song, or
another form of popular culture. Identify the claim in the review. What criteria does the reviewer use to justify a thumbs-up or a thumbs-down?

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 90

6/18/12 3:10 PM

sTAking A ClAim

91

Claims of Policy
Anytime you propose a change, you’re making a claim of policy. It might be local:
A group at your school proposes to raise money to contribute to a school in Haiti.
You want your parents to let you spend more time with friends on weeknights. Or
it might be a bigger issue such as a proposal for transitioning to alternative energy
sources, a change in copyright laws for digital music, a shift in foreign policy, a
change in legislation to allow former felons to vote.
An argument of policy generally begins with a definition of the problem
(claim of fact), explains why it is a problem (claim of value), and then explains
the change that needs to happen (claim of policy). Also, keep in mind that while
an argument of policy usually calls for some direct action to take place, it may be
a recommendation for a change in attitude or viewpoint.
Let’s take a look at the opening paragraphs of an argument of policy. In this
piece, published in 1999 in Newsweek, Anna Quindlen argues for a change in attitude toward the treatment of mental illness. Notice how she combines claims of
fact and value to ground her claim of policy — that is, that attitudes toward mental illness must change so that treatment options become more available.
from The C Word in the Hallways
AnnA QuinDlen

The saddest phrase i’ve read in a long time is this one: psychological autopsy. That’s what the doctors call it when a kid kills
himself and they go back over the plowed ground of his short life,
and discover all the hidden markers that led to the rope, the
blade, the gun.
There’s a plague on all our houses, and since it doesn’t
announce itself with lumps or spots or protest marches, it has
Claim of value
gone unremarked in the quiet suburbs and busy cities where it
has been laying waste. The number of suicides and homicides
Claim of fact committed by teenagers, most often young men, has exploded in
the last three decades, until it has become commonplace to have
black-bordered photographs in yearbooks and murder suspects
with acne problems. And everyone searches for reasons, and
scapegoats, and solutions, most often punitive. yet one solution
continues to elude us, and that is ending the ignorance about
Claim of policy
mental health, and moving it from the margins of care and into
the mainstream where it belongs. As surely as any vaccine, this
would save lives.
so many have already been lost. This month kip kinkel was
sentenced to life in prison in Oregon for the murders of his parents and a shooting rampage at his high school that killed two

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 91

6/18/12 3:10 PM

92

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

students. A psychiatrist who specializes in the care of adolescents
testified that kinkel, now 17, had been hearing voices since he
was 12. sam manzie is also 17. He is serving a 70-year sentence for luring an 11-year-old boy named Eddie Werner into his
new Jersey home and strangling him with the cord of an alarm
clock because his sega genesis was out of reach. manzie had
his first psychological evaluation in the first grade.

Quindlen calls for “ending the ignorance” about mental health and its care.
As she develops her argument, she supports this claim of policy by considering
both personal examples and general facts about mental health in America. To
arrive at this claim of policy, however, she first makes a claim of value — “There’s
a plague on all our houses”: that is, this is a problem deserving of our attention.
She then offers a claim of fact that demonstrates the scope of the problem: teenage suicide and homicide in the last decades have “exploded.” Granted, all three of
these claims need to be explained with appropriate evidence, and Quindlen does
that in subsequent paragraphs; but at the outset, she establishes claims of value
and fact that lay the foundation for the claim of policy that is the main idea of her
argument.

• ACTIVITY •
Read the following argument of policy that appeared as an editorial in the
New York Times in 2004. Annotate it to identify claims of fact, value, and
policy; then describe how these interact throughout the argument.
Felons and the Right to Vote
New York Times eDitoriAl boArD
About 4.7 million Americans, more than 2 percent of the adult population, are
barred from voting because of a felony conviction. Denying the vote to exoffenders is antidemocratic, and undermines the nation’s commitment to rehabilitating people who have paid their debt to society. Felon disenfranchisement
laws also have a sizable racial impact: 13 percent of black men have had
their votes taken away, seven times the national average. But even if it were
acceptable as policy, denying felons the vote has been a disaster because of
the chaotic and partisan way it has been carried out.
Thirty-five states prohibit at least some people from voting after they have
been released from prison. The rules about which felonies are covered and
when the right to vote is restored vary widely from state to state, and often
defy logic. in four states, including new york, felons on parole cannot vote,
but felons on probation can. in some states, felons must formally apply for

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 92

6/18/12 3:10 PM

sTAking A ClAim

restoration of their voting rights, which state officials can grant or deny on the
most arbitrary of grounds.
Florida may have changed the outcome of the 2000 presidential election
when secretary of state katherine Harris oversaw a purge of suspected felons
that removed an untold number of eligible voters from the rolls. This year, state
officials are conducting a new purge that may be just as flawed. They have
developed a list of 47,000 voters who may be felons, and have asked local
officials to consider purging them. But the Miami Herald found that more than
2,100 of them may have been listed in error, because their voting rights were
restored by the state’s clemency process. last week, the state acknowledged
that 1,600 of those on the list should be allowed to vote.
Election officials are also far too secretive about felon voting issues, which
should be a matter of public record. When ms. Harris used inaccurate standards for purging voters, the public did not find out until it was too late. This
year, the state tried to keep the 47,000 names on its list of possible felons
secret, but fortunately a state court ruled this month that they should be open
to scrutiny.
There is a stunning lack of information and transparency surrounding felon
disenfranchisement across the country. The rules are often highly technical,
and little effort is made to explain them to election officials or to the people
affected. in new york, the Brennan Center for Justice at new york university
law school found that local elections offices often did not understand the law,
and some demanded that felons produce documents that do not exist.
Too often, felon voting is seen as a partisan issue. in state legislatures, it is
usually Democrats who try to restore voting rights, and Republicans who
resist. Recently, Republicans and election officials in missouri and south
Dakota have raised questions about voter registration groups’ employment of
ex-felons, although they have every right to be involved in political activity. in
Florida, the decision about whether a felon’s right to vote will be restored lies
with a panel made up of the governor and members of his cabinet. some voting rights activists believe that gov. Jeb Bush has moved slowly, and reinstated
voting rights for few of the state’s ex-felons, to help President Bush’s re-election
prospects.
The treatment of former felons in the electoral system cries out for reform.
The cleanest and fairest approach would be simply to remove the prohibitions
on felon voting. in his state of the union address in January, President Bush
announced a new national commitment to helping prisoners re-enter society.
Denying them the right to vote belies this commitment.
Restoring the vote to felons is difficult, because it must be done state by
state, and because ex-convicts do not have much of a political lobby. There
have been legislative successes in recent years in some places, including
Alabama and nevada. But other states have been moving in the opposite
direction. The best hope of reform may lie in the courts. The Atlanta-based

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 93

93

5

6/18/12 3:10 PM

94

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

united states Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit and the san Francisco–
based Court of Appeals for the ninth Circuit have ruled recently that disenfranchising felons may violate equal protection or the Voting Rights Act.
until the whole idea of permanently depriving felons of their right to vote is
wiped away, the current rules should be applied more fairly. The quality of
voting roll purges must be improved. Florida should discontinue its current
felon purge until it can prove that the list it is using is accurate.
mechanisms for restoring voting rights to felons must be improved. Even in
states where felons have the right to vote, they are rarely notified of this when
they exit prison. Released prisoners should be given that information during
the discharge process, and helped with the paperwork.
The process for felons to regain their voting rights should be streamlined.
in nevada, early reports are that the restoration of felon voting rights has had
minimal effect, because the paperwork requirements are too burdensome.
Ex-felons who apply to vote should have the same presumption of eligibility as
other voters.
Voting rights should not be a political football. There should be bipartisan
support for efforts to help ex-felons get their voting rights back, by legislators
and by state and local election officials. American democracy is diminished
when officeholders and political parties, for their own political gain, try to
keep people from voting.

10

• EssAY In PRogREss: staking a Claim •
Choosing one of the topics you explored initially (p. 85), write three different claims that could focus an essay. Be sure each is arguable. Comment on
whether your overall argument will likely include more than one type of
claim.

From Claim to Thesis
To develop a claim into a thesis statement, you have to be more specific about
what you intend to argue. In her essay “The C Word in the Hallways,” Anna
Quindlen states her main idea explicitly:
Yet one solution continues to elude us, and that is ending the ignorance about mental
health, and moving it from the margins of care and into the mainstream where it
belongs. As surely as any vaccine, this would save lives.

The “policy” that Quindlen advocates changing is removing the stigma from
mental illness so it can be properly treated. Her second sentence emphasizes her
thesis by drawing an analogy: just as vaccines save lives by preventing disease, a
shift in policy toward mental illness would save lives by preventing violence.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 94

6/18/12 3:10 PM

sTAking A ClAim

95

Sometimes in professional essays the claim may be implicit, but in the formal
essays that you will write for your classes, the claim is traditionally stated explicitly as a one-sentence thesis statement that appears in the introduction of your
argument. To be effective, a thesis statement must preview the essay by encapsulating in clear, unambiguous language the main point or points the writer intends
to make. Let’s consider several different types of thesis statements: a closed thesis,
an open thesis, and a thesis that includes the counterargument.
Closed Thesis Statements
A closed thesis is a statement of the main idea of the argument that also previews
the major points the writer intends to make. It is “closed” because it limits the
number of points the writer will make. For instance, here is a closed thesis on the
appeal of the Harry Potter book series:
The three-dimensional characters, exciting plot, and complex themes of
the Harry Potter series make them not only legendary children’s books but
enduring literary classics.
This thesis asserts that the series constitutes a “literary classic” and specifies three
reasons — characters, plot, and theme — each of which would be discussed in the
argument. A closed thesis often includes (or implies) the word because. This one
might have been written as follows:
The Harry Potter series has become legendary children’s books and enduring literary classics because of its three-dimensional characters, exciting plot,
and complex themes.
Indeed, that statement might be a good working thesis.
A closed thesis is a reliable way to focus a short essay, particularly one written
under time constraints. Explicitly stating the points you’ll make can help you
organize your thoughts when you are working against the clock, and it can be a
way to address specific points that are required by the prompt or argument.
Open Thesis Statements
If, however, you are writing a longer essay with five, six, or even more main points,
then an open thesis is probably more effective. An open thesis is one that does
not list all the points the writer intends to cover in an essay. If you have six or
seven points in an essay, for instance, stringing them all out in the thesis will be
awkward; plus, while a reader can remember two or three main points, it’s confusing to keep track of a whole string of points made way back in an opening
paragraph. For instance, you might argue that the Harry Potter series is far from
an enduring classic because you think the main characters are either all good or
all bad rather than a bit of both, the minor characters devolve into caricatures, the

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 95

6/18/12 3:10 PM

96

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

plot is repetitious and formulaic, the magic does not follow a logical system of
rules, and so on. Imagine trying to line all those ideas up in a sentence or two
having any clarity and grace at all. By making the overall point without actually
stating every subpoint, an open thesis can guide an essay without being cumbersome:
The popularity of the Harry Potter series demonstrates that simplicity trumps
complexity when it comes to the taste of readers, both young and old.
Counterargument Thesis Statements
A variant of the open and closed thesis is the counterargument thesis, in which
a summary of a counterargument usually qualified by although or but precedes
the writer’s opinion. This type of thesis has the advantage of immediately
addressing the counterargument. Doing so may make an argument seem both
stronger and more reasonable. It may also create a seamless transition to a more
thorough concession and refutation of the counterargument later in the argument. Using the Harry Potter example again, let’s look at a counterargument
thesis:
Although the Harry Potter series may have some literary merit, its popularity has less to do with storytelling than with merchandising.
This thesis concedes a counterargument that the series “may have some literary
merit” before refuting that claim by saying that the storytelling itself is less popular than the movies, toys, and other merchandise that the books inspired. The
thesis promises some discussion of literary merit and a critique of its storytelling
(concession and refutation) but will ultimately focus on the role of the merchandising machine in making Harry Potter a household name.
Note that the thesis that considers a counterargument can also lead to a
position that is a modification or qualification rather than an absolute statement of support or rejection. If, for instance, you were asked to discuss whether
the success of the Harry Potter series has resulted in a reading renaissance, this
thesis would let you respond not with a firm “yes” or “no,” but with a qualification of “in some respects.” It would allow you to ease into a critique by first recognizing its strengths before leveling your criticism that the popularity was the
result of media hype rather than quality and thus will not result in a reading
renaissance.

• ACTIVITY •
Develop a thesis statement that could focus an argument in response to each
of the following prompts. Discuss why you think that the structure (open,
closed, counterargument) you chose would be appropriate or effective.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 96

6/18/12 3:10 PM

PREsEnTing EViDEnCE

97

1. Same-sex classrooms have gone in and out of favor in public education.
Write an essay explaining why you would support or oppose same-sex
classrooms for public schools in grades 10 through 12.
2. Write an essay supporting, challenging, or qualifying English author E. M.
Forster’s position in the following quotation: “I hate the idea of causes,
and if I had to choose between betraying my country and betraying my
friend, I hope I should have the guts to betray my country.”
3. Today’s world is full of conflicts and controversies. Choose a local or
global issue, and write an essay that considers multiple viewpoints and
proposes a solution or compromise.
4. Write an essay explaining why you agree or disagree with the following
quotation: “Advertising degrades the people it appeals to; it deprives them
of their will to choose.”
5. Plagiarism is rampant in public high schools and colleges. In fact, some
people argue that the definition of plagiarism has changed with the proliferation of the Internet. Write an essay explaining what you believe the
appropriate response of a teacher should be to a student who turns in a
plagiarized essay or exam.

• EssAY In PRogREss: Developing a Thesis •
Now that you understand the different types of claims and how to develop
them into thesis statements, you can begin drafting an argument. Select one
of the claims you worked with in the activity on page 95. Draft two different
thesis statements that might guide an essay on the subject. Which one do you
think is more promising for a full argumentative essay? Why?

Presenting Evidence
Once a writer has established a claim and developed a thesis statement, the next
step is to support it with effective evidence. What evidence to present, how much
is necessary, and how to present it are all rhetorical choices guided by an understanding of the audience. A person speaking to a group of scientists will more
likely need facts and figures to persuade her audience, while one writing an essay
for a local newspaper might want to use an anecdote to grab the audience’s attention. Amy Domini, knowing that her audience — the generally affluent and liberal
readers of Ode magazine — will include many who are hostile to fast food, presents evidence regarding the positive changes that fast-food companies are making, as well as numerical evidence showing that fast food is a growing phenomenon

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 97

6/18/12 3:10 PM

98

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

that could have either a positive or a negative impact on health and the environment. Keep audience in mind throughout this discussion of evidence, particularly in terms of whether your audience would be persuaded more by formal or
informal sources.

Relevant, Accurate, and Sufficient Evidence
Regardless of the type of evidence a writer chooses to use, it should always be
relevant, accurate, and sufficient. Relevant evidence is evidence that specifically
applies to the argument being made. To argue that a particular car is superior
from a dependability standpoint, bringing in evidence about its maintenance
record would be relevant, but talking about its hand-tooled leather seats would
not. Generally, good writers do not leave the relevance of a piece of evidence to
the reader’s imagination; they explicitly spell out what the relationship is between
an example and the argument at hand.
Presenting accurate information means taking care to quote sources correctly without misrepresenting what the sources are saying or taking the information out of context. One way to ensure that you have accurate evidence is to
get it from a credible source. Think carefully about the bias any source might
have. Is it partisan or backed financially by a company or industry group? Even
statistical data can be inaccurate if it is from a source that has gathered the data
in a way that fits its own agenda. Accuracy can also be a matter of the audience’s
perception. You should choose sources that they will find credible. If you want
accurate dependability information about a car, some reliable sources might be a
reputable mechanic, a magazine reviewer who has compared the car’s performance to other similar cars, or simply someone who has owned the car for a long
time.
Finally, you should include a sufficient amount of evidence to support your
thesis. If you based your entire argument about the car’s dependability on an
interview with a single mechanic, that would not be persuasive. A mechanic only
sees the cars that break down, so perhaps his viewpoint is overly negative.

Logical Fallacies
Before we turn to specific types of evidence, let’s consider logical fallacies: potential vulnerabilities or weaknesses in an argument. Practically speaking, the logical
breakdown in most weak arguments occurs in the use of evidence, since evidence
is what we use to prove arguments. So a more practical definition of a fallacy
might be a failure to make a logical connection between the claim and the evidence used to support that claim. Fallacies may be accidental, but they can also be
used deliberately to manipulate or deceive.
Regardless of whether they are intentional or unintentional, logical fallacies
work against the clear, civil discourse that should be at the heart of argument. By

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 98

6/18/12 3:10 PM

PREsEnTing EViDEnCE

99

checking for logical fallacies in a published argument that you’re analyzing, you
can identify weak points; by checking for fallacies in your own writing, you can
revise to strengthen your argument. It’s more important that you notice these
fallacies and be able to describe what you see than it is to be able to label them by
their technical name. The concepts are more important than the terms.
Fallacies of Relevance
One characteristic of evidence we have just discussed is relevance. Fallacies that
result from using evidence that’s irrelevant to the claim fall under the general heading of red herrings. (The term derives from the dried fish that trainers used to
distract dogs when teaching them to hunt foxes.) A red herring occurs when a
speaker skips to a new and irrelevant topic in order to avoid the topic of discussion. If Politician X says, “We can debate these regulations until the cows come
home, but what the American people want to know is, when are we going to end
this partisan bickering?” she has effectively avoided providing evidence on the
benefits or detriments of the regulations by trying to change the subject to that of
partisanship.
One common type of red herring is an ad hominem fallacy. Ad hominem is
Latin for “against the man”; the phrase refers to the diversionary tactic of switching the argument from the issue at hand to the character of the other speaker. If
you argue that a park in your community should not be renovated because the
person supporting it was arrested during a domestic dispute, then you are guilty
of ad hominem — arguing against the person rather than addressing the issue.
This fallacy is frequently misunderstood to mean that any instance of questioning
someone’s character is ad hominem. Not so. It is absolutely valid to call a person’s
character into question if it is relevant to the topic at hand. For example, if a court
case hinges on the testimony of a single witness and that person happens to be a
con artist, then his character is absolutely relevant in deciding whether he is a
credible witness.
Analogy is the most vulnerable type of evidence because it is always susceptible to the charge that two things are not comparable, resulting in a faulty
analogy. However, some analogies are more vulnerable than others, particularly
those that focus on irrelevant or inconsequential similarities between two things.
Whenever analogy is used, it’s important to gauge whether the dissimilarities
outweigh the similarities. Advertisements sometimes draw faulty analogies to
appeal to pathos; for example, an ad for a very expensive watch might picture a
well-known athlete or a ballet dancer and draw an analogy between the precision
and artistry of (1) the person and (2) the mechanism. When writers use analogy
to add drama to a claim, it’s important to question whether the similarities really
fit and illuminate the point or simply add emotional appeal. For instance, to
argue that “we put animals who are in irreversible pain out of their misery, so we
should do the same for people” asks the reader to ignore significant and profound

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 99

6/18/12 3:10 PM

100

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

differences between animals and people. The analogy may at first glance appeal to
emotions, but it is logically irrelevant.
Fallacies of Accuracy
Using evidence that is either intentionally or unintentionally inaccurate will
result in a fallacy. The most common example of inaccurate evidence resulting in
a fallacy is one called the straw man. A straw man fallacy occurs when a speaker
chooses a deliberately poor or oversimplified example in order to ridicule and
refute an opponent’s viewpoint. For example, consider the following scenario.
Politician X proposes that we put astronauts on Mars in the next four years. Politician Y ridicules this proposal by saying that his opponent is looking for “little
green men in outer space.” Politician Y is committing a straw man fallacy by inaccurately representing Politician X’s proposal, which is about space exploration
and scientific experimentation, not “little green men.”
Another fallacy that results from using inaccurate evidence is the either/or
fallacy, also called a false dilemma. In this fallacy, the speaker presents two
extreme options as the only possible choices. For instance:
Either we agree to higher taxes, or our grandchildren will be mired
in debt.
This statement offers only two ways to view the issue, and both are extreme and
inaccurate.
Fallacies of Insufficiency
Perhaps the most common of fallacies occurs when evidence is insufficient. We
call this a hasty generalization, meaning that there is not enough evidence to
support a particular conclusion. For instance: “Smoking isn’t bad for you; my
great aunt smoked a pack a day and lived to be 90.” It could be that the story of
the speaker’s aunt is true, but this single anecdote does not provide enough evidence to discredit the results of years of medical research.
Another fallacy resulting from insufficient evidence is circular reasoning.
Circular reasoning involves repeating the claim as a way to provide evidence,
resulting in no evidence at all. For instance, a student who asserts, “You can’t
give me a C; I’m an A student” is guilty of circular reasoning; that is, the “evidence” that she should get an A is that she is an A student. The so-called
evidence is insufficient because it is a mere repetition of the claim. You can frequently spot circular reasoning in advertising. For instance: “Buy this shampoo
because it’s the best shampoo!” or “Shop at this store because it’s a shopper’s
paradise.”
We will discuss other common logical fallacies as we examine specific types
of evidence.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 100

6/18/12 3:10 PM

PREsEnTing EViDEnCE

101

First-Hand Evidence
First-hand evidence is something you know, whether it’s from personal experience, anecdotes you’ve heard from others, observations, or your general knowledge of events.
Personal Experience
The most common type of first-hand evidence is personal experience. Bringing
in personal experience adds a human element and can be an effective way to
appeal to pathos. For example, when writing about whether you do or do not
support single-sex classrooms, you might describe your experience as a student,
or you might use your observations about your school or classmates to inform
your argument. Personal experience is a great way to make an abstract issue more
human, and it is an especially effective technique in the introduction and conclusion of an argument. Personal experience can interest readers and draw them in,
but they’ll need more than just your perspective to be persuaded.
Personal experience works best if the writer can speak as an insider. For
instance, you can speak knowledgeably about the issue of single-sex classrooms
because you have inside knowledge about classrooms and how they work. In the
following essay about the environmentalist movement, Jennifer Oladipo argues
that minorities need to become more involved: “The terms environmentalist and
minority conjure two distinct images in most people’s minds — a false dichotomy
that seriously threatens any chance of pulling the planet out of its current ecological tailspin.” As a member of a minority group herself, she uses her personal
experience as both an entrance into the essay and a source of evidence.
Why Can’t Environmentalism Be Colorblind?
Jennifer olADipo

in nearly two years of volunteering and working at an urban nature preserve, i
have never seen another face like mine come through our doors. At least, i’ve not
seen another black woman come for a morning hike or native-wildlife program.
The few i do encounter are teachers and chaperones with school groups, or aides
assisting people with disabilities. When i commute by bus to the preserve, located
in the middle of louisville, kentucky, i disembark with blacks and other minorities.
yet none of them ever seems to make it to the trails.
i might have assumed they simply weren’t interested, but then i saw that none
of the center’s newsletters were mailed to predominantly minority areas of town,
nor did any press releases go to popular minority radio stations or newspapers.
not ever, as far as i could tell. Although the nature center seeks a stronger community presence and feels the same budget pinch as other small nonprofits, it has
missed large swaths of the community with its message.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 101

6/18/12 3:10 PM

102

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

The terms environmentalist and minority conjure two distinct images in most
people’s minds — a false dichotomy that seriously threatens any chance of pulling the planet out of its current ecological tailspin. some people think this country
is on the precipice of a societal shift that will make environmental stewardship an
integral part of our collective moral code. But that is not going to happen as long
as we as a nation continue to think and act as if “green” automatically means
“white.”
Assumptions about who is amenable to conservation values cost the environmental movement numbers and dollars. Religion, capitalism, and even militarism
learned ages ago to reach actively across the racial spectrum. in terms of winning
over minorities, they have left environmentalism in the dust. not until i joined an
environmental-journalism organization was my mailbox flooded with information
about serious environmental issues — even though i have been volunteering in
organic gardens, hiking, and camping for years. i had received solicitations for
credit cards and political parties, fast-food coupons, and a few Books of mormon —
but i had to seek out environmental groups.
minorities make up one-third of the population, and we are growing as an
economic and financial force as our numbers increase. We are a key to maintaining the energy that environmentalism has gained as a result of intense mainstream
attention. That momentum will peter out without more people to act on the present
sense of urgency. imagine the power of 100 million Asians, African Americans,
latinos, and native Americans invested in sustainable living, joining green organizations, voting for politicians and laws that protect the environment.
nobody benefits from the perception that enjoying and caring for the environment is an exclusively white lifestyle. The truth is that brown, yellow, red, and black
people like to go backpacking, too. Those of us with the means are buying organic,
local, and hybrid. if environmentalism continues to appear mostly white and welloff, it will continue to be mostly white and well-off, even as racial and economic
demographics change. The environmental movement will continue to overlook the
nuances, found in diversity of experience, that reveal multiple facets of environmental problems — and their solutions.
sooner or later, even global warming will be pushed off magazine covers,
television screens, and the congressional floor. Before that time, we need to have
in place something even more impressive: a racially diverse, numerically astounding mass of environmentalists ready to pick up the ball and run with it.

5

Oladipo writes most of her essay around her personal experience working
in a Kentucky nature preserve, explaining why she chose the work and pointing
out the lack of “another face like mine” in that setting. She also describes her
experience working for an “environmental-journalism organization” and spending time outdoors. Although she primarily draws on her own experiences in
her essay, she also uses some statistics and a reasonable tone to make a persuasive case.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 102

6/18/12 3:10 PM

PREsEnTing EViDEnCE

103

FALLACy ALERT: Hasty Generalization
As we described previously (p. 100), a hasty generalization is a fallacy in
which there is not enough evidence to support a particular conclusion. When
using personal experience as evidence, it is important to remember that
while it might provide some ethos to speak on a topic and it may be an effective way to appeal to pathos, personal experience is rarely universal proof.
exAmple:

Pulling wisdom teeth is just another unnecessary and painful
medical procedure. I still have all of mine, and they haven’t
given me any problems.

Anecdotes
First-hand evidence also includes anecdotes about other people that you’ve either
observed or been told about. Like personal experience, anecdotes can be a useful
way to appeal to pathos.
In the following excerpt from an op-ed piece, Fabiola Santiago argues against
the policy that children born in the United States to immigrants, including those
who are undocumented, must be treated as nonresidents when it comes to receiving state services. To make the case about the specific unfairness of imposing outof-state tuition on Florida residents who fall into this category, Santiago uses an
anecdote as part of her evidence.
In College, These American Citizens Are Not Created Equal
fAbiolA sAntiAgo

“i lift my lamp beside the golden door!” — lady liberty
On saturday, the day after its 125th anniversary celebration, the statue of liberty
will close its doors for a year-long, $27 million renovation of the monument’s interior. One could only hope that the nation’s soul will undergo some transformation
as well. Emma lazarus, the descendant of sephardic Jews expelled from spain
who wrote in 1883 “The new Colossus,” the moving sonnet at the base of the
statue in new york harbor, would shed mournful tears at the lack of compassion
for immigrants these days. she would weep at the ease with which words of disdain are spoken by some who lead and aspire to lead, and at the underhanded
way in which ill-willed actions are taken against immigrants and their children.
lady liberty’s “golden door” is not only jammed, slammed shut, or slightly ajar
depending on where you come from, but we’ve fallen so low on the scale of our
founding values that in the united states of America of today not all u.s. citizens
are created equal. There are states like Florida, Alabama, and Arizona where
politicians and bureaucrats use the system to discriminate, to create classes of

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 103

6/18/12 3:10 PM

104

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

Americans, to disenfranchise some of the most deserving among us. The latest low
blow was unveiled by a class-action lawsuit and a bill filed in the Florida legislature last week. under rules established by the state’s Department of Education and
the university system’s Board of governors, students like Wendy Ruiz — born and
raised in miami — have to pay out-of-state tuition at rates that are more than three
times what other Florida resident students pay for their education. Ruiz has lived in
the state all her life. she has a Florida birth certificate, a Florida driver’s license,
and is registered to vote in Florida. But while other miami Dade College students
pay about $1,266 per term in tuition, she must pay $4,524 because the state
considers her a dependent of nonresidents. Here’s an institution that is supposed to
defend education punishing a young American for the sins of her parents, who are
undocumented immigrants. But we should all aspire to have neighbors like the
Ruizes, who raised a daughter like Wendy, willing to work three part-time jobs to
pay her tuition while maintaining a 3.7 grade-point average. “i know that i will be
successful because i have never wanted something so bad in my life like i want
this,” Ruiz said of her education. Who knows what more Wendy Ruiz might accomplish, what more she could become if she were able to pay all of her attention to
her education without the unfair financial burden of paying extravagantly unfair
fees.

Santiago could have provided facts and figures about the legislative policy in
question. Instead, she focuses on one person, Wendy Ruiz. Santiago points out
that Ruiz “has lived in the state all her life. She has a Florida birth certificate, a
Florida driver’s license, and is registered to vote in Florida.” Santiago then explains
the difference in tuition for residents vs. nonresidents, noting that Wendy is a
model citizen “willing to work three part-time jobs to pay her tuition.” She even
quotes Wendy’s comments about the premium she places on education. In
this example, Santiago is not writing about herself, but she is telling an anecdote about another person that gives a human face to the argument. She appeals
to pathos by describing the situation of Wendy Ruiz, being careful to point
out that her situation typifies that of others who would suffer from a proposed
policy.
Current Events
Current events are another type of evidence that is accessed first-hand through
observation. Staying abreast of what is happening locally, nationally, and globally
ensures a store of information that can be used as evidence in arguments. Remember that current events can be interpretted in many ways, so seek out multiple
perspectives and be on the lookout for bias. Here is an example from an essay by
the political analyst Fareed Zakaria about the plight of the American education
system. He wrote the article around the time of the death of Steve Jobs, the
founder of Apple, when details of Jobs’s life were in the national news. In “When

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 104

6/18/12 3:10 PM

PREsEnTing EViDEnCE

105

Will We Learn?” Zakaria argues for the improvement of our public education
system, citing Jobs and his partner, Steve Wozniak, as evidence of the impact of a
strong high school education.
For the past month, we have all marveled at the life of steve Jobs, the adopted son
of working-class parents, who dropped out of college and became one of the great
technologists and businessmen of our time. How did he do it? He was, of course,
an extraordinary individual, and that explains much of his success, but his environment might also have played a role. Part of the environment was education.
And it is worth noting that Jobs got a great secondary education. The school he
attended, Homestead High in Cupertino, Calif., was a first-rate public school that
gave him a grounding in both the liberal arts and technology. it did the same for
steve Wozniak, the more technically oriented co-founder of Apple Computer,
whom Jobs met at that same school.
in 1972, the year Jobs graduated, California’s public schools were the envy
of the world. They were generally rated the finest in the country, well funded and
well run, with excellent teachers. These schools were engines of social mobility that
took people like Jobs and Wozniak and gave them an educational grounding that
helped them rise.

Second-Hand Evidence
second-hand evidence is evidence that is accessed through research, reading,
and investigation. It includes factual and historical information, expert opinion,
and quantitative data. Anytime you cite what someone else knows, not what you
know, you are using second-hand evidence. While citing second-hand evidence
may occasionally appeal to pathos and certainly may establish a writer’s ethos, the
central appeal is to logos — reason and logic.
Historical Information
A common type of second-hand evidence is historical information — verifiable
facts that a writer knows from research. This kind of evidence can provide background and context to current debates; it also can help establish the writer’s ethos
because it shows that he or she has taken the time and effort to research the matter and become informed. One possible pitfall is that historical events are complicated. You’ll want to keep your description of the events brief, but be sure not to
misrepresent the events. In the following paragraph from Hate Speech: The History of an American Controversy (1994), author Samuel Walker provides historical
information to establish the “intolerance” of the 1920s era.
The 1920s are remembered as a decade of intolerance. Bigotry was as much a
symbol of the period as Prohibition, flappers, the stock market boom, and Calvin
Coolidge. it was the only time when the ku klux klan paraded en masse through

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 105

6/18/12 3:10 PM

106

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

the nation’s capital. in 1921 Congress restricted immigration for the first time in
American history, drastically reducing the influx of Catholics and Jews from southern and eastern Europe, and the nation’s leading universities adopted admission
quotas to restrict the number of Jewish students. The sacco and Vanzetti case, in
which two italian American anarchists were executed for robbery and murder in a
highly questionable prosecution, has always been one of the symbols of the antiimmigrant tenor of the period.

To support the claim that the 1920s was a period characterized by bigotry, Walker
cites a series of historical examples: the KKK, immigration laws, restriction targeting certain ethnicities, and a high-profile court case.
Historical information is often used to develop a point of comparison or
contrast to a more contemporary situation. In the following paragraph from
Charles Krauthammer’s op-ed “The 9/11 ‘Overreaction’? Nonsense,” the political
commentator does exactly that by comparing the War on Terror to previous military campaigns in U.S. history.
True, in both [the iraq and Afghanistan] wars there was much trial, error and tragic
loss. in Afghanistan, too much emphasis on nation-building. in iraq, the bloody
middle years before we found our general and our strategy. But cannot the same
be said of, for example, the Civil War, the terrible years before lincoln found his
general? Or the Pacific campaign of World War ii, with its myriad miscalculations, its often questionable island-hopping, that cost infinitely more American
lives?

Notice that Krauthammer’s historical evidence is brief but detailed enough to
both show his grasp of the history and explicitly lay out his comparison. Simply
saying, “These wars are no different from the Civil War or World War II” would
have been far too vague and thus ineffective.

FALLACy ALERT: Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc
The name of the post hoc ergo propter hoc fallacy is Latin for “after which
therefore because of which.” What that means is that it is incorrect to always
claim that something is a cause just because it happened earlier. In other
words, correlation does not imply causation.
exAmple:

We elected Johnson as president and look where it got us:
hurricanes, floods, stock market crashes.

That’s a simple example, but in reality causality is very tricky to prove because
few things have only one cause. When using historical evidence, you should
be especially aware of this fallacy. Check your facts. Consider the complexity
of the situation. Proceed with caution.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 106

6/18/12 3:10 PM

PREsEnTing EViDEnCE

107

Expert Opinion
Most everyone is an expert on something! And how often do we bolster our viewpoint by pointing out that so-and-so agrees with us? Expert opinion is a more
formal variation on that common practice. An expert is someone who has published research on a topic or whose job or experience gives him or her specialized
knowledge. Sometimes, you might cite the viewpoint of an individual who is an
“expert” in a local matter but who is not widely recognized. If, for instance, you
are writing about school policy, you might cite the opinion of a teacher or student
government officer. The important point is to make certain that your expert is
seen as credible by your audience so that his or her opinion will add weight to
your argument.
Following is an excerpt from “Just a Little Princess” by Peggy Orenstein in
which she critiques what she calls “the princess culture” that Disney promotes. In
this paragraph, she is commenting on the phenomenon of “Supergirl.” Note the
use of an expert — and how that expert is identified — as evidence.
The princess as superhero is not irrelevant. some scholars i spoke with say that
given its post - 9/11 timing, princess mania is a response to a newly dangerous
world. “Historically, princess worship has emerged during periods of uncertainty
and profound social change,” observes miriam Forman-Brunell, a historian at the
university of missouri–kansas City. Francis Hodgson Burnett’s original Little Princess was published at a time of rapid urbanization, immigration and poverty;
shirley Temple’s film version was a hit during the great Depression. “The original
folk tales themselves,” Forman-Brunell says, “spring from medieval and early modern European culture that faced all kinds of economic and demographic and social
upheaval — famine, war, disease, terror of wolves. girls play savior during times
of economic crisis and instability.” That’s a heavy burden for little shoulders. Perhaps that’s why the magic wand has become an essential part of the princess
get-up. in the original stories — even the Disney versions of them — it’s not the girl
herself who’s magic: it’s the fairy godmother. now if Forman-Brunell is right, we
adults have become the cursed creatures whom girls have the thaumaturgic [miraculous] power to transform.

Orenstein is careful to present credentials (in this case, a university professor) and
to either quote or paraphrase the relevant information as evidence. She quotes
Forman-Brunell and then comments on this expert’s viewpoint. Orenstein may
have held the same opinion about fairy godmothers and their impact on girls’ views
of themselves, but the findings of a researcher add credibility to the argument.
FALLACy ALERT: Appeal to False Authority
Appeal to false authority occurs when someone who has no expertise to
speak on an issue is cited as an authority. A TV star, for instance, is not a

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 107

6/18/12 3:10 PM

108

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

medical expert, even though pharmaceutical advertisements often use celebrity endorsements. When choosing whom to cite as an expert, be sure to
verify the person’s background and qualifications.

Quantitative Evidence
Quantitative evidence includes things that can be represented in numbers: statistics, surveys, polls, census information. This type of evidence can be persuasive
in its appeal to logos. Amy Domini cites numerical evidence in her essay to support her contention that “[f]ast food is a way of life. In America, the average
person eats it more than 150 times a year. In 2007, sales for the 400 largest U.S.based fast-food chains totaled $277 billion, up 7 percent from 2006” (see p. 83).
Quantitative evidence need not be all percentages and dollar figures, however. In the article on American education, Fareed Zakaria compares the education situation of the United States with that of other countries by citing
quantitative information without a lot of numbers and figures.
u.s. schoolchildren spend less time in school than their peers abroad. They have
shorter school days and a shorter school year. Children in south korea will spend
almost two years more in school than Americans by the end of high school. is it
really so strange that they score higher on tests?
if south korea teaches the importance of hard work, Finland teaches another
lesson. Finnish students score near the very top on international tests, yet they do
not follow the Asian model of study, study and more study. instead they start school
a year later than in most countries, emphasize creative work and shun tests for
most of the year. But Finland has great teachers, who are paid well and treated
with the same professional respect that is accorded to doctors and lawyers. They
are found and developed through an extremely competitive and rigorous process.
All teachers are required to have master’s degrees, and only 1 in 10 applicants is
accepted to the country’s teacher-training programs.

Zakaria includes quantitative data — two more years of school for Korean students than their American counterparts, a highly competitive process for teachertraining programs that accept only one of every ten applicants — as part of his
overall discussion. He could have cited dollar amounts as evidence of how well
paid teachers are in Finland, but in the context of this column he makes the point
and moves on; perhaps if he were writing for a more scholarly or skeptical audience, he would have thought it necessary to provide even more information.
FALLACy ALERT: Bandwagon Appeal
Bandwagon appeal (or ad populum fallacy) occurs when evidence boils
down to “everybody’s doing it, so it must be a good thing to do.” Sometimes,

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 108

6/18/12 3:10 PM

PREsEnTing EViDEnCE

109

statistics can be used to prove that “everybody’s doing it” and thus give a
bandwagon appeal the appearance of cold, hard fact.
exAmple:

You should vote to elect Rachel Johnson — she has a strong lead
in the polls!

Polling higher does not necessarily make Senator Johnson the “best” candidate, only the most popular.

• ACTIVITY •
Identify the logical fallacy in each of the following examples.
1. What’s the problem? All my friends have a curfew of midnight!
2. A person who is honest will not steal, so my client, an honest person,
clearly is not guilty of theft.
3. Her economic plan is impressive, but remember: this is a woman who
spent six weeks in the Betty Ford Center getting treatment for alcoholism.
4. Since Mayor Perry has been in office, our city budget has had a balanced
budget; if he were governor, the state budget would finally be balanced.
5. If we outlaw guns, only outlaws will have guns.
6. Smoking is dangerous because it is harmful to your health.
7. He was last year’s MVP, and he drives a Volvo. That must be a great car.
8. A national study of grades 6–8 showed that test scores went down last year
and absenteeism was high; this generation is going to the dogs.

• ACTIVITY •
Annotate the essay below by identifying the different types of first- and secondhand evidence presented to develop the argument. Analyze how each type of
evidence appeals to ethos, logos, pathos, or a combination of those.
Terror’s Purse Strings
DAnA thomAs
luxury fashion designers are busily putting final touches on the handbags they
will present during the spring-summer 2008 women’s wear shows, which
begin next week in new york City’s Bryant Park. To understand the importance of the handbag in fashion today consider this: According to consumer
surveys conducted by Coach, the average American woman was buying two

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 109

6/18/12 3:10 PM

110

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

new handbags a year in 2000; by 2004, it was more than four. And the average luxury bag retails for 10 to 12 times its production cost.
“There is a kind of an obsession with bags,” the designer miuccia Prada
told me. “it’s so easy to make money.”
Counterfeiters agree. As soon as a handbag hits big, counterfeiters around
the globe churn out fake versions by the thousands. And they have no trouble
selling them. shoppers descend on Canal street in new york, santee Alley in
los Angeles and flea markets and purse parties around the country to pick up
knockoffs for one-tenth the legitimate bag’s retail cost, then pass them off as real.
“Judges, prosecutors, defense attorneys shop here,” a private investigator
told me as we toured the counterfeit section of santee Alley. “Affluent people
from newport Beach.” According to a study by the British law firm Davenport
lyons, two-thirds of British consumers are “proud to tell their family and
friends” that they bought fake luxury fashion items.
At least 11 percent of the world’s clothing is fake, according to 2000 figures from the global Anti-Counterfeiting group in Paris. Fashion is easy to
copy: counterfeiters buy the real items, take them apart, scan the pieces to
make patterns and produce almost-perfect fakes.
most people think that buying an imitation handbag or wallet is harmless,
a victimless crime. But the counterfeiting rackets are run by crime syndicates
that also deal in narcotics, weapons, child prostitution, human trafficking and
terrorism. Ronald k. noble, the secretary general of interpol, told the House
of Representatives Committee on international Relations that profits from the
sale of counterfeit goods have gone to groups associated with Hezbollah, the
shiite terrorist group, paramilitary organizations in northern ireland and
FARC, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia.
sales of counterfeit T-shirts may have helped finance the 1993 World
Trade Center bombing, according to the international AntiCounterfeiting
Coalition. “Profits from counterfeiting are one of the three main sources of
income supporting international terrorism,” said magnus Ranstorp, a terrorism
expert at the university of st. Andrews, in scotland.
most fakes today are produced in China, a good many of them by children. Children are sometimes sold or sent off by their families to work in
clandestine factories that produce counterfeit luxury goods. many in the West
consider this an urban myth. But i have seen it myself.
On a warm winter afternoon in guangzhou, i accompanied Chinese
police officers on a factory raid in a decrepit tenement. inside, we found two
dozen children, ages 8 to 13, gluing and sewing together fake luxury-brand
handbags. The police confiscated everything, arrested the owner and sent the
children out. some punched their timecards, hoping to still get paid. (The average Chinese factory worker earns about $120 a month; the counterfeit factory worker earns half that or less.) As we made our way back to the police
vans, the children threw bottles and cans at us. They were now jobless and,

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 110

5

6/18/12 3:10 PM

sHAPing ARgumEnT

111

because the factory owner housed them, homeless. it was Oliver Twist in the
21st century.
What can we do to stop this? much like the war on drugs, the effort to
protect luxury brands must go after the source: the counterfeit manufacturers.
The company that took me on the Chinese raid is one of the only luxury-goods
makers that works directly with Chinese authorities to shut down factories, and
it has one of the lowest rates of counterfeiting.
luxury brands also need to teach consumers that the traffic in fake goods
has many victims. But most companies refuse to speak publicly about counterfeiting — some won’t even authenticate questionable items for concerned customers — believing, like Victorians, that acknowledging despicable actions
tarnishes their sterling reputations.
so it comes down to us. if we stop knowingly buying fakes, the supply
chain will dry up and counterfeiters will go out of business. The crime syndicates will have far less money to finance their illicit activities and their terrorist
plots. And the children? They can go home.

10

• EssAY In PRogREss: Using Evidence •
Choose one of the thesis statements you developed on page 97, and develop
three paragraphs of support, using a different type of evidence in each. You
will probably have to do some research if you want to use historical information, expert testimony, or quantitative data.

Shaping Argument
The shape — that is, the organization or arrangement — of an argument reflects
a host of factors, including audience and purpose, but it usually follows one of
several patterns. We’ll discuss classical oration, induction and deduction, and the
Toulmin model as four common ways to structure an argument. Keep in mind
that writers often modify these structures as needed. The essential point to
remember is that the organization should fit the ideas, rather than forcing ideas
to fit into a prescribed organizational pattern.

The Classical Oration
Classical rhetoricians outlined a five-part structure for an oratory, or speech, that
writers still use today, although perhaps not always consciously:
• The introduction (exordium) introduces the reader to the subject under
discussion. In Latin, exordium means “beginning a web,” which is an apt

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 111

6/18/12 3:10 PM

112

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

description for an introduction. Whether it is a single paragraph or several,
the introduction draws the readers into the text by piquing their interest,
challenging them, or otherwise getting their attention. Often the introduction is where the writer establishes ethos.
• The narration (narratio) provides factual information and background
material on the subject at hand, thus beginning the developmental paragraphs, or establishes why the subject is a problem that needs addressing.
The level of detail a writer uses in this section depends largely on the audience’s knowledge of the subject. Although classical rhetoric describes narration as appealing to logos, in actuality it often appeals to pathos because
the writer attempts to evoke an emotional response about the importance
of the issue being discussed.
• The confirmation (confirmatio), usually the major part of the text, includes the development or the proof needed to make the writer’s case —
the nuts and bolts of the essay, containing the most specific and concrete
detail in the text. The confirmation generally makes the strongest appeal to
logos.
• The refutation (refutatio), which addresses the counterargument, is in
many ways a bridge between the writer’s proof and conclusion. Although
classical rhetoricians recommended placing this section at the end of the
text as a way to anticipate objections to the proof given in the confirmation
section, this is not a hard-and-fast rule. If opposing views are well known
or valued by the audience, a writer will address them before presenting his
or her own argument. The counterargument’s appeal is largely to logos.
• The conclusion (peroratio) — whether it is one paragraph or several —
brings the essay to a satisfying close. Here the writer usually appeals to pathos
and reminds the reader of the ethos established earlier. Rather than simply
repeating what has gone before, the conclusion brings all the writer’s ideas
together and answers the question, so what? Writers should remember the
classical rhetoricians’ advice that the last words and ideas of a text are those
the audience is most likely to remember.
An example of the classical model at work is the piece below written in 2006
by Sandra Day O’Connor, a former Supreme Court justice, and Roy Romer, then
superintendent of the Los Angeles Unified School District.
Not by Math Alone

sAnDrA DAy o’connor AnD roy romer
Fierce global competition prompted President Bush to use the state
of the union address to call for better math and science education, where there’s evidence that many schools are falling short.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 112

Introduction

6/18/12 3:10 PM

sHAPing ARgumEnT

We should be equally troubled by another shortcoming in
American schools: most young people today simply do not have
an adequate understanding of how our government and political
system work, and they are thus not well prepared to participate
as citizens.
This country has long exemplified democratic practice to the
rest of the world. With the attention we are paying to advancing
democracy abroad, we ought not neglect it at home.
Two-thirds of 12th-graders scored below “proficient” on the
last national civics assessment in 1998, and only 9 percent could
list two ways a democracy benefits from citizen participation.
yes, young people remain highly patriotic, and many volunteer in
their communities. But most are largely disconnected from current
events and issues.
A healthy democracy depends on the participation of citizens, and that participation is learned behavior; it doesn’t just
happen. As the 2003 report “The Civic mission of schools”
noted: “individuals do not automatically become free and responsible citizens, but must be educated for citizenship.” That means
civic learning — educating students for democracy — needs to be
on par with other academic subjects.
This is not a new idea. Our first public schools saw education
for citizenship as a core part of their mission. Eighty years ago,
John Dewey said, “Democracy needs to be reborn in every generation and education is its midwife.”
But in recent years, civic learning has been pushed aside.
until the 1960s, three courses in civics and government were
common in American high schools, and two of them (“civics” and
“problems of democracy”) explored the role of citizens and
encouraged students to discuss current issues. Today those courses
are very rare.
What remains is a course on “American government” that
usually spends little time on how people can — and why they
should — participate. The effect of reduced civic learning on civic
life is not theoretical. Research shows that the better people
understand our history and system of government, the more likely
they are to vote and participate in the civic life.
We need more and better classes to impart the knowledge of
government, history, law and current events that students need to
understand and participate in a democratic republic. And we also
know that much effective civic learning takes place beyond the
classroom — in extracurricular activity, service work that is connected to class work, and other ways students experience civic life.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 113

113

Narration

5

Confirmation

6/18/12 3:10 PM

114

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

Preserving our democracy should be reason enough to promote civic learning. But there are other benefits. understanding
society and how we relate to each other fosters the attitudes
essential for success in college, work and communities; it
enhances student learning in other subjects.
Economic and technological competitiveness is essential,
and America’s economy and technology have flourished because
of the rule of law and the “assets” of a free and open society.
Democracy has been good for business and for economic wellbeing. By the same token, failing to hone the civic tools of democracy will have economic consequences.
Bill gates — a top business and technology leader — argues
strongly that schools have to prepare students not only for college
and career but for citizenship as well.
none of this is to diminish the importance of improving math
and science education. This latest push, as well as the earlier
emphasis on literacy, deserves support. it should also be the occasion for a broader commitment, and that means restoring education for democracy to its central place in school.
We need more students proficient in math, science and engineering. We also need them to be prepared for their role as citizens. Only then can self-government work. Only then will we not
only be more competitive but also remain the beacon of liberty in
a tumultuous world.

10

Refutation

Conclusion

Sandra Day O’Connor retired as an associate justice of the
Supreme Court. Roy Romer, a former governor of Colorado, is
superintendent of the Los Angeles Unified School District. They
are co-chairs of the national advisory council of the Campaign for
the Civic Mission of Schools.

Sandra Day O’Connor and Roy Romer follow the classical model very closely.
The opening two paragraphs are an introduction to the main idea the authors
develop. In fact, the last sentence of paragraph 2 is their two-part claim, or thesis: “Most young people today simply do not have an adequate understanding
of how our government and political system work, and they are thus not well
prepared to participate as citizens.” O’Connor’s position as a former Supreme
Court justice establishes her ethos as a reasonable person, an advocate for justice, and a concerned citizen. Romer’s biographical note at the end of the article
suggests similar qualities. The authors use the pronoun “we” in the article to refer
not only to themselves but to all of “us” who are concerned about American society. The opening phrase, “Fierce global competition,” connotes a sense of urgency,

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 114

6/18/12 3:10 PM

sHAPing ARgumEnT

115

and the warning that we are not adequately preparing our young people to
participate as citizens is sure to evoke an emotional response of concern, even
alarm.
In paragraphs 3 to 6 — the narration — the authors provide background
information, including facts that add urgency to their point. They cite statistics,
quote from research reports, even call on the well-known educator John Dewey.
They also include a definition of “civic learning,” a key term in their argument.
Their facts-and-figures appeal is largely to logos, though the language of “a
healthy democracy” certainly engages the emotions.
Paragraphs 7 to 12 present the bulk of the argument — the confirmation —
by offering reasons and examples to support the case that young people lack the
knowledge necessary to be informed citizens. The authors link civic learning to
other subjects as well as to economic development. They quote Bill Gates, chairman of Microsoft, who has spoken about the economic importance of a wellinformed citizenry.
In paragraph 13, O’Connor and Romer briefly address a major objection —
the refutation — that we need to worry more about math and science education
than about civic learning. While they concede the importance of math, science,
and literacy, they point out that it is possible to increase civic education without
undermining the gains made in those other fields.
The final paragraph — the conclusion — emphasizes the importance of a
democracy to a well-versed citizenry, a point that stresses the shared values of
the authors with their audience. The appeal to pathos is primarily through the
vivid language, particularly the final sentence with its emotionally charged
description “beacon of liberty,” a view of their nation that most Americans hold
dear.

Induction and Deduction
Induction and deduction are ways of reasoning, but they are often effective ways
to structure an entire argument as well.
Induction
Induction (from the Latin inducere, “to lead into”) means arranging an argument
so that it leads from particulars to universals, using specific cases to draw a conclusion. For instance:
Regular exercise promotes weight loss.
Exercise lowers stress levels.
Exercise improves mood and outlook.
generAlizAtion:

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 115

Exercise contributes to better health.

6/18/12 3:10 PM

116

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

We use induction in our everyday lives. For example, if your family and
friends have owned several cars made by Subaru that have held up well, then you
are likely to conclude inductively that Subaru makes good cars. Yet induction is
also used in more technical situations. Even the scientific method is founded on
inductive reasoning. Scientists use experiments to determine the effects in certain
cases, and from there they might infer a universal scientific principle. For instance,
if bases neutralize acids in every experiment conducted, then it can reasonably be
inferred that all bases neutralize acids. The process of induction involves collecting evidence and then drawing an inference based on that evidence in order to
reach a conclusion.
When you write a full essay developed entirely by reasons, one after another
supporting the main point, then your entire argument is inductive. For instance,
suppose you are asked to take a position on whether the American Dream is alive
and well today. As you examine the issue, you might think of examples from your
own community that demonstrate that the Dream is not a reality for the average
citizen; you might study current events and think about the way societal expectations have changed; you might use examples from fiction you have read, such as the
novel Tortilla Curtain by T. Corraghessan Boyle or movies such as Boyz N the Hood,
where economic pressures limit the characters’ horizons. All of this evidence
together supports the inference that the American Dream no longer exists for the
average person. To write that argument, you would support your claim with a series
of reasons explained through concrete examples: you would argue inductively.
Arguments developed inductively can never be said to be true or false, right
or wrong. Instead, they can be considered strong or weak, so it’s important to
consider possible vulnerabilities — in particular, the exception to the rule. Let’s consider an example from politics. An argument written in favor of a certain political
candidate might be organized inductively around reasons that she is the best
qualified person for the job because of her views on military spending, financial
aid for college students, and states’ rights. However, the argument is vulnerable to
an objection that her views on, for instance, the death penalty or environmental
issues weaken her qualifications. Essentially, an argument structured inductively
cannot lead to certainty, only probability.
Let’s look at an excerpt from Outliers by Malcolm Gladwell for an example of
how an argument can be structured largely by induction. Gladwell uses various
types of evidence here to support his conclusion that “[w]hen it comes to math . . .
Asians have a built-in advantage.”
from Outliers

mAlcolm glADwell
Take a look at the following list of numbers: 4, 8, 5, 3, 9, 7, 6. Read them out loud.
now look away and spend twenty seconds memorizing that sequence before saying them out loud again.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 116

6/18/12 3:10 PM

sHAPing ARgumEnT

117

if you speak English, you have about a 50 percent chance of remembering
that sequence perfectly. if you’re Chinese, though, you’re almost certain to get it
right every time. Why is that? Because as human beings we store digits in a
memory loop that runs for about two seconds. We most easily memorize whatever
we can say or read within that two-second span. And Chinese speakers get that
list of numbers — 4, 8, 5, 3, 9, 7, 6 — right almost every time because, unlike
English, their language allows them to fit all those seven numbers into two seconds.
That example comes from stanislas Dehaene’s book The Number Sense. As
Dehaene explains:
Chinese number words are remarkably brief. most of them can be uttered in
less than one-quarter of a second (for instance, 4 is “si” and 7 “qi”). Their
English equivalents — “four,” “seven,” — are longer: pronouncing them takes
about one-third of a second. The memory gap between English and Chinese
apparently is entirely due to this difference in length. in languages as diverse
as Welsh, Arabic, Chinese, English and Hebrew, there is a reproducible correlation between the time required to pronounce numbers in a given language
and the memory span of its speakers. in this domain, the prize for efficacy
goes to the Cantonese dialect of Chinese, whose brevity grants residents of
Hong kong a rocketing memory span of about 10 digits.
it turns out that there is also a big difference in how number-naming systems in
Western and Asian languages are constructed. in English, we say fourteen, sixteen,
seventeen, eighteen, and nineteen, so one might expect that we would also say
oneteen, twoteen, threeteen, and fiveteen. But we don’t. We use a different form:
eleven, twelve, thirteen, and fifteen. similarly, we have forty and sixty, which sound
like the words they are related to (four and six). But we also say fifty and thirty and
twenty, which sort of sound like five and three and two, but not really. And, for
that matter, for numbers above twenty, we put the “decade” first and the unit number second (twenty-one, twenty-two), whereas for the teens, we do it the other
way around (fourteen, seventeen, eighteen). The number system in English is highly
irregular. not so in China, Japan, and korea. They have a logical counting system.
Eleven is ten-one. Twelve is ten-two. Twenty-four is two-tens-four and so on.
That difference means that Asian children learn to count much faster than
American children. Four-year-old Chinese children can count, on average, to forty.
American children at that age can count only to fifteen, and most don’t reach forty
until they’re five. By the age of five, in other words, American children are already
a year behind their Asian counterparts in the most fundamental of math skills.
The regularity of their number system also means that Asian children can perform basic functions, such as addition, far more easily. Ask an English-speaking
seven-year-old to add thirty-seven plus twenty-two in her head, and she has to
convert the words to numbers (37 + 22). Only then can she do the math: 2 plus 7
is 9 and 30 and 20 is 50, which makes 59. Ask an Asian child to add three-tens-

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 117

5

6/18/12 3:10 PM

118

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

seven and two-tens-two, and then the necessary equation is right there, embedded
in the sentence. no number translation is necessary: it’s five-tens-nine.
“The Asian system is transparent,” says karen Fuson, a northwestern university psychologist who has closely studied Asian-Western differences. “i think that it
makes the whole attitude toward math different. instead of being a rote learning
thing, there’s a pattern i can figure out. There is an expectation that i can do this.
There is an expectation that it’s sensible. For fractions, we say three-fifths. The
Chinese is literally ‘out of five parts, take three.’ That’s telling you conceptually
what a fraction is. it’s differentiating the denominator and the numerator.”
The much-storied disenchantment with mathematics among Western children
starts in the third and fourth grades, and Fuson argues that perhaps a part of that
disenchantment is due to the fact that math doesn’t seem to make sense; its linguistic structure is clumsy; its basic rules seem arbitrary and complicated.
Asian children, by contrast, don’t feel nearly the same bafflement. They can
hold more numbers in their heads and do calculations faster, and the way fractions
are expressed in their languages corresponds exactly to the way a fraction actually
is — and maybe that makes them a little more likely to enjoy math, and maybe
because they enjoy math a little more, they try a little harder and take more math
classes and are more willing to do their homework, and on and on, in a kind of
virtuous circle.
When it comes to math, in other words, Asians have a built-in advantage.

10

In each paragraph, Gladwell provides reasons backed by evidence. He begins
in the opening two paragraphs by drawing in the reader with an anecdotal example that (he assumes) will demonstrate his point: if you speak English, you won’t
do as well as if you speak Chinese. In paragraph 3, he provides additional support
by citing an expert who has written a book entitled The Number Sense. In the next
two paragraphs, he discusses differences in the systems of Western and Asian languages that explain why Asian children learn certain basic skills that put them
ahead of their Western counterparts at an early age. In paragraphs 6 and 7, he
raises another issue — attitude toward problem solving — and provides evidence
from an expert to explain the superiority of Asian students. By this point, Gladwell
has provided enough specific information — from facts, experts, examples —
to support an inference that is a generalization. In this case, he concludes that
“[w]hen it comes to math . . . Asians have a built-in advantage.” Gladwell’s reasoning and the structure of his argument are inductive.
Deduction
When you argue using deduction, you reach a conclusion by starting with a general principle or universal truth (a major premise) and applying it to a specific
case (a minor premise). Deductive reasoning is often structured as a syllogism, a
logical structure that uses the major premise and minor premise to reach a neces-

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 118

6/18/12 3:10 PM

sHAPing ARgumEnT

119

sary conclusion. Let’s use the same example about exercise that we used to demonstrate induction, but now we’ll develop a syllogism to argue deductively:
mAJor premise:

Exercise contributes to better health.

minor premise:

Yoga is a type of exercise.

conclusion:

Yoga contributes to better health.

The strength of deductive logic is that if the first two premises are true, then
the conclusion is logically valid. Keep in mind, though, that if either premise is
false (or questionable in any way), then the conclusion is subject to challenge.
Consider the following:
mAJor premise:

Celebrities are role models for young people.

minor premise:

Lindsey Lohan is a celebrity.

conclusion:

Lindsey Lohan is a role model for young people.

As you can see in this example, the conclusion is logically valid — but is it true?
You can challenge the conclusion by challenging the veracity of the major premise — that is, whether all celebrities are role models for young people.
Deduction is a good way to combat stereotypes that are based on faulty
premises. Consider this one:
mAJor premise:

Women are poor drivers.

minor premise:

Ellen is a woman.

conclusion:

Ellen is a poor driver.

Breaking this stereotype down into a syllogism clearly shows the faulty logic. Perhaps some women, just as some men, are poor drivers, but to say that women in
general drive poorly is to stereotype by making a hasty generalization. Breaking
an idea down into component parts like this helps expose the basic thinking,
which then can yield a more nuanced argument. This example might be qualified,
for instance, by saying that some women are poor drivers; thus, Ellen might be a
poor driver.

• EssAY In PRogREss: shaping an Argument •
Write an outline that shows how you could structure the argument you are
crafting either inductively or deductively. If you are using induction, cite at
least four specifics that lead to your generalization (claim). If using deduction, break the overall reasoning of the essay into a syllogism with both a
major and a minor premise and a conclusion.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 119

6/18/12 3:10 PM

120

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

Combining Induction and Deduction
While some essays are either completely inductive or completely deductive, it’s
more common for an essay to combine these methods depending on the situation. Induction — a series of examples — may be used to verify a major premise,
then that premise can become the foundation for deductive reasoning. The Declaration of Independence is an example of deductive and inductive logic at work.
Thomas Jefferson and the framers drafted this document to prove that the colonies were justified in their rebellion against King George III.
The Declaration of Independence
thomAs Jefferson

In CONGRESS, July 4, 1776
The unanimous Declaration of the thirteen united States of America
When in the Course of human events it becomes necessary for one people to dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another and to assume
among the powers of the earth, the separate and equal station to which the laws
of nature and of nature’s god entitle them, a decent respect to the opinions of
mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel them to the
separation.
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that
they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among
these are life, liberty and the pursuit of Happiness. — That to secure these rights,
governments are instituted among men, deriving their just powers from the consent
of the governed, — That whenever any Form of government becomes destructive
of these ends, it is the Right of the People to alter or to abolish it, and to institute
new government, laying its foundation on such principles and organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect their safety and Happiness. Prudence, indeed, will dictate that governments long established should not
be changed for light and transient causes; and accordingly all experience hath
shewn that mankind are more disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable than to
right themselves by abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed. But when
a long train of abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same Object
evinces a design to reduce them under absolute Despotism, it is their right, it is their
duty, to throw off such government, and to provide new guards for their future
security. — such has been the patient sufferance of these Colonies; and such is now
the necessity which constrains them to alter their former systems of government.
The history of the present king of great Britain is a history of repeated injuries and
usurpations, all having in direct object the establishment of an absolute Tyranny
over these states. To prove this, let Facts be submitted to a candid world.
He has refused his Assent to laws, the most wholesome and necessary for the
public good.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 120

6/18/12 3:10 PM

sHAPing ARgumEnT

121

He has forbidden his governors to pass laws of immediate and pressing
importance, unless suspended in their operation till his Assent should be obtained;
and when so suspended, he has utterly neglected to attend to them.
He has refused to pass other laws for the accommodation of large districts of
people, unless those people would relinquish the right of Representation in the
legislature, a right inestimable to them and formidable to tyrants only.
He has called together legislative bodies at places unusual, uncomfortable,
and distant from the depository of their Public Records, for the sole purpose of
fatiguing them into compliance with his measures.
He has dissolved Representative Houses repeatedly, for opposing with manly
firmness his invasions on the rights of the people.
He has refused for a long time, after such dissolutions, to cause others to be
elected, whereby the legislative Powers, incapable of Annihilation, have returned
to the People at large for their exercise; the state remaining in the mean time
exposed to all the dangers of invasion from without, and convulsions within.
He has endeavoured to prevent the population of these states; for that purpose obstructing the laws for naturalization of Foreigners; refusing to pass others
to encourage their migrations hither, and raising the conditions of new Appropriations of lands.
He has obstructed the Administration of Justice by refusing his Assent to laws
for establishing Judiciary Powers.
He has made Judges dependent on his Will alone for the tenure of their
offices, and the amount and payment of their salaries.
He has erected a multitude of new Offices, and sent hither swarms of Officers
to harass our people and eat out their substance.
He has kept among us, in times of peace, standing Armies without the Consent of our legislatures.
He has affected to render the military independent of and superior to the Civil
Power.
He has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to our constitution, and unacknowledged by our laws; giving his Assent to their Acts of pretended legislation:
For quartering large bodies of armed troops among us:
For protecting them, by a mock Trial from punishment for any murders which
they should commit on the inhabitants of these states:
For cutting off our Trade with all parts of the world:
For imposing Taxes on us without our Consent:
For depriving us in many cases, of the benefit of Trial by Jury:
For transporting us beyond seas to be tried for pretended offences:
For abolishing the free system of English laws in a neighbouring Province,
establishing therein an Arbitrary government, and enlarging its Boundaries so as
to render it at once an example and fit instrument for introducing the same absolute
rule into these Colonies:

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 121

5

10

15

20

6/18/12 3:10 PM

122

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

For taking away our Charters, abolishing our most valuable laws and altering
fundamentally the Forms of our governments:
For suspending our own legislatures, and declaring themselves invested with
power to legislate for us in all cases whatsoever.
He has abdicated government here, by declaring us out of his Protection and
waging War against us.
He has plundered our seas, ravaged our coasts, burnt our towns, and
destroyed the lives of our people.
He is at this time transporting large Armies of foreign mercenaries to compleat
the works of death, desolation, and tyranny, already begun with circumstances of
Cruelty & Perfidy scarcely paralleled in the most barbarous ages, and totally
unworthy the Head of a civilized nation.
He has constrained our fellow Citizens taken Captive on the high seas to bear
Arms against their Country, to become the executioners of their friends and Brethren, or to fall themselves by their Hands.
He has excited domestic insurrections amongst us, and has endeavoured to
bring on the inhabitants of our frontiers, the merciless indian savages whose
known rule of warfare, is an undistinguished destruction of all ages, sexes and
conditions.
in every stage of these Oppressions We have Petitioned for Redress in the
most humble terms: Our repeated Petitions have been answered only by repeated
injury. A Prince, whose character is thus marked by every act which may define a
Tyrant, is unfit to be the ruler of a free people.
nor have We been wanting in attentions to our British brethren. We have
warned them from time to time of attempts by their legislature to extend an unwarrantable jurisdiction over us. We have reminded them of the circumstances of our
emigration and settlement here. We have appealed to their native justice and
magnanimity, and we have conjured them by the ties of our common kindred to
disavow these usurpations, which would inevitably interrupt our connections and
correspondence. They too have been deaf to the voice of justice and of consanguinity. We must, therefore, acquiesce in the necessity, which denounces our separation, and hold them, as we hold the rest of mankind, Enemies in War, in Peace
Friends.
We, therefore, the Representatives of the united states of America, in general
Congress, Assembled, appealing to the supreme Judge of the world for the rectitude of our intentions, do, in the name, and by Authority of the good People of
these Colonies, solemnly publish and declare, That these united Colonies are, and
of Right ought to be Free and independent states, that they are Absolved from all
Allegiance to the British Crown, and that all political connection between them and
the state of great Britain, is and ought to be totally dissolved; and that as Free and
independent states, they have full Power to levy War, conclude Peace, contract
Alliances, establish Commerce, and to do all other Acts and Things which independent states may of right do. — And for the support of this Declaration, with a firm

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 122

25

30

6/18/12 3:10 PM

sHAPing ARgumEnT

123

reliance on the protection of Divine Providence, we mutually pledge to each other
our lives, our Fortunes, and our sacred Honor.

The argument of the entire document can be distilled into this syllogism:
mAJor premise:

Citizens have a right to rebel against a despot.

minor premise:

King George III is a despot.

conclusion:

Citizens have a right to rebel against King George III.

However, most of the text is inductive evidence — or “facts . . . submitted to a
candid world,” as Jefferson called them. The document lists one example (“fact”)
after another of the king’s behavior that support the generalization that he is a
despot. For instance, “He has made Judges dependent on his Will alone,” “He has
affected to render the Military independent of and superior to the Civil Power,”
“He has plundered our seas,” and “He has excited domestic insurrections amongst
us.” The evidence is overwhelming: the king is a despot; the colonists have every
right to declare their independence.

• ACTIVITY •
Modeled on the Declaration of Independence, the Declaration of Sentiments
by Elizabeth Cady Stanton was presented on July 19, 1848, at the Seneca Falls
Convention. Analyze the use of induction and deduction to support the
claim and develop the argument.
The Declaration of Sentiments
elizAbeth cADy stAnton
When, in the course of human events, it becomes necessary for one portion of
the family of man to assume among the people of the earth a position different
from that which they have hitherto occupied, but one to which the laws of
nature and of nature’s god entitle them, a decent respect to the opinions of
mankind requires that they should declare the causes that impel them to such
a course.
We hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men and women are created
equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights;
that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness; that to secure
these rights governments are instituted, deriving their just powers from the
consent of the governed. Whenever any form of government becomes destructive of these ends, it is the right of those who suffer from it to refuse allegiance
to it, and to insist upon the institution of a new government, laying its foundation on such principles, and organizing its powers in such form as to them
shall seem most likely to effect their safety and happiness. Prudence, indeed,

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 123

6/18/12 3:10 PM

124

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

will dictate that governments long established should not be changed for light
and transient causes; and accordingly, all experience hath shown that mankind are more disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right
themselves by abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed. But when a
long train of abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object,
evinces a design to reduce them under absolute despotism, it is their duty to
throw off such government, and to provide new guards for their future security.
such has been the patient sufferance of the women under this government,
and such is now the necessity which constrains them to demand the equal station to which they are entitled.
The history of mankind is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations on
the part of man toward woman, having in direct object the establishment of
an absolute tyranny over her. To prove this, let facts be submitted to a candid
world.
He has never permitted her to exercise her inalienable right to the elective
franchise.
He has compelled her to submit to laws, in the formation of which she had
no voice.
He has withheld from her rights which are given to the most ignorant and
degraded men — both natives and foreigners.
Having deprived her of this first right of a citizen, the elective franchise,
thereby leaving her without representation in the halls of legislation, he has
oppressed her on all sides.
He has made her, if married, in the eye of the law, civilly dead.
He has taken from her all right in property, even to the wages she earns.
He has made her, morally, an irresponsible being, as she can commit many
crimes with impunity, provided they be done in the presence of her husband.
in the covenant of marriage, she is compelled to promise obedience to her
husband, he becoming, to all intents and purposes, her master — the law giving him power to deprive her of her liberty, and to administer chastisement.
He has so framed the laws of divorce, as to what shall be the proper
causes of divorce; in case of separation, to whom the guardianship of the
children shall be given; as to be wholly regardless of the happiness of
women — the law, in all cases, going upon the false supposition of the supremacy of man, and giving all power into his hands.
After depriving her of all rights as a married woman, if single and the
owner of property, he has taxed her to support a government which recognizes her only when her property can be made profitable to it.
He has monopolized nearly all the profitable employments, and from those
she is permitted to follow, she receives but a scanty remuneration.
He closes against her all the avenues to wealth and distinction, which he
considers most honorable to himself. As a teacher of theology, medicine, or
law, she is not known.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 124

5

10

6/18/12 3:10 PM

sHAPing ARgumEnT

125

He has denied her the facilities for obtaining a thorough education — all
colleges being closed against her.
He allows her in Church as well as state, but a subordinate position, claiming Apostolic authority for her exclusion from the ministry, and, with some
exceptions, from any public participation in the affairs of the Church.
He has created a false public sentiment, by giving to the world a different
code of morals for men and women, by which moral delinquencies which
exclude women from society, are not only tolerated but deemed of little
account in man.
He has usurped the prerogative of Jehovah himself, claiming it as his right
to assign for her a sphere of action, when that belongs to her conscience and
her god.
He has endeavored, in every way that he could to destroy her confidence
in her own powers, to lessen her self-respect, and to make her willing to lead
a dependent and abject life.
now, in view of this entire disfranchisement of one-half the people of this
country, their social and religious degradation, — in view of the unjust laws
above mentioned, and because women do feel themselves aggrieved, oppressed,
and fraudulently deprived of their most sacred rights, we insist that they have
immediate admission to all the rights and privileges which belong to them as
citizens of these united states.
in entering upon the great work before us, we anticipate no small amount
of misconception, misrepresentation, and ridicule; but we shall use every
instrumentality within our power to effect our object. We shall employ agents,
circulate tracts, petition the state and national legislatures, and endeavor to
enlist the pulpit and the press in our behalf. We hope this Convention will be
followed by a series of Conventions, embracing every part of the country.

15

20

Using the Toulmin Model
A useful way of both analyzing and structuring an argument is through the Toulmin
model, an approach to argument created by British philosopher Stephen Toulmin
in his book The Uses of Argument (1958). The Toulmin model is an effective tool
in uncovering the assumptions that underlie arguments. Although at first this
method — particularly its terminology — may seem complicated, it is actually
very practical because it helps with analysis, structuring, qualifying a thesis, and
understanding abstract arguments. Once mastered, it can be a very powerful tool.
The Toulmin model has six elements: claim, support (evidence), warrant
(the assumption), backing, qualifier, and reservation. We have already discussed
claims, which are arguable assertions. Toulmin defined a claim as “a conclusion
whose merits we are seeking to establish.” You have also already learned about
support or evidence. A warrant expresses the assumption necessarily shared by

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 125

6/18/12 3:10 PM

126

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

the speaker and the audience. Similar to the minor premise of a syllogism, the
assumption links the claim to the evidence; in other words, if the speaker and
audience do not share the same assumption regarding the claim, all the evidence
in the world won’t be enough to sway them. Backing consists of further assurances or data without which the assumption lacks authority. The qualifier, when
used (for example, usually, probably, maybe, in most cases, most likely), tempers
the claim a bit, making it less absolute. The reservation explains the terms and
conditions necessitated by the qualifier. In many cases, the argument will contain
a rebuttal that gives voice to objections.
The following diagram illustrates the Toulmin model at work:
Evidence

Claim
Assumption

Qualifier

Reservation

Backing

A Toulmin analysis will follow this form:
Because (evidence as support), therefore (claim), since (assumption), on
account of (backing), unless (reservation).
If there is a qualifier (such as usually or maybe), it will precede the claim.
Here is a simple illustration:
Because it is raining, therefore I should take my umbrella, since it will keep
me dry.
You will immediately recognize the tacit assumption (that an umbrella will keep
you dry) given explicit expression in the warrant. The backing would be “on
account of the fact that the material is waterproof,” and the reservation might be
“unless there is a hole in it.” In this case, the backing and reservation are so obvious that they don’t need to be stated. The diagram below illustrates this argument — a simple one indeed, but one that demonstrates the process:
Evidence

Claim
(I should take my umbrella.)

(It is raining.)
Assumption
(An umbrella will keep me dry.)

Qualifier
(Probably.)

Reservation
(Unless it has a hole in it.)

Backing
(The material is
waterproof.)

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 126

6/18/12 3:10 PM

sHAPing ARgumEnT

127

Fully expressed, this Toulmin argument would read:
Because it is raining, therefore I should probably take my umbrella, since it
will keep me dry on account of its waterproof material, unless, of course,
there is a hole in it.
Analyzing Assumptions
You will note how the Toulmin model gives expression to the usually unspoken
but necessary assumption. The Toulmin model shows us that assumptions are the
link between a claim and the evidence used to support it. And, really, we should
say “assumptions” here, because arguments of any complexity are always based
on multiple assumptions. If your audience shares those assumptions, it is more
likely to agree with the claim, finding the argument to be sound; if your audience
does not, then the assumption becomes yet another claim requiring evidence.
And if you were asked to analyze an argument in order to determine whether you
support or challenge its claim, finding vulnerabilities in the assumptions would
be the place to begin.
Let’s take a look at how assumptions can become arguable claims by revisiting a piece that you read earlier in this chapter, Amy Domini’s article “Why
Investing in Fast Food May Be a Good Thing.” We will see that by using the
Toulmin method you could paraphrase her argument as follows:
Because the fast food industry continues to grow and is not going away,
therefore even those of us who support Slow Food should invest in it, since
investing has the power to persuade businesses to change.
The last part expresses one of the assumptions the audience must agree on in
order for Domini’s argument to be persuasive. Does investing have the power to
persuade business to change?
Two examples from the education article by Fareed Zakaria will further illustrate the method. Paraphrased according to Toulmin, one of Zakaria’s arguments
would run as follows:
Because Chinese and South Korean children spend almost two years more
in school than do Americans, therefore they outperform Americans on
tests, since increased instructional time is responsible for increased test
scores.
Do you agree with the assumption that increased instructional time is responsible for increased test scores? Alternatively, revealing another assumption, one
might say:
Because foreign students spend more time in school and achieve higher test
scores, therefore they receive a better education, since quality of education
and learning is indicated by test scores, on account of their accuracy in
assessing learning.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 127

6/18/12 3:10 PM

128

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

Again, the assumption here might very well be debatable. Is learning indicated by
test scores?
Sometimes, in the development of an argument, claims are presented implicitly early in the piece and more explicitly later. For an example, let’s return to “The
C Word in the Hallways” by Anna Quindlen. In the article, she makes several
claims and supports them with credible evidence. Still, if you are to agree with her
position, it is necessary to agree with the assumptions on which her arguments
rest. Using the Toulmin model can help you to discover what they are, especially
when the claim is implicit, as in the following:
So many have already been lost. This month Kip Kinkel was sentenced to life in
prison in Oregon for the murders of his parents and a shooting rampage at his high
school that killed two students. A psychiatrist who specializes in the care of adolescents testified that Kinkel, now 17, had been hearing voices since he was 12. Sam
Manzie is also 17. He is serving a 70-year sentence for luring an 11-year-old boy
named Eddie Werner into his New Jersey home and strangling him with the cord of
an alarm clock because his Sega Genesis was out of reach. Manzie had his first psychological evaluation in the first grade.

Using the Toulmin model, Quindlen’s implicit argument here might be paraphrased as follows:
Because Kinkel’s and Manzie’s mental illnesses were known for several years
before they committed murder, therefore mental health care could have
saved lives, since psychological intervention would have prevented them
from committing these heinous acts.
As you finish the article, you come to realize that the entire argument rests on that
assumption. Indeed, would psychological intervention have had that result? It
certainly provokes discussion, which means that it is perhaps a point of vulnerability in Quindlen’s argument.

• ACTIVITY •
For each of the following statements, identify the assumption that would link
the claim to its support. Use the following format to discover the assumption: “Because (support), therefore (claim), since (assumption), on account
of (backing), unless (reservation).” Decide whether each of the statements
would require a qualifier.
1. Grades should be abolished because they add stress to the learning
experience.
2. Until you buy me a diamond, I won’t know that you love me!
3. Everyone should read novels because they make us more understanding
of human foibles and frailties.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 128

6/18/12 3:10 PM

sHAPing ARgumEnT

129

4. If we want to decrease gang violence, we should legalize drugs.
5. Don’t get married if you believe that familiarity breeds contempt.
6. WiFi should be available to everyone without cost since the Internet has
become a vital part of our lives.
7. You must obey her because she is your mother.
8. Because improving the educational system in this country is essential to
competing with the other industrialized nations, we need to equip all
classrooms with the latest computer technology.

From Reading to Writing
The Toulmin model can help you not only analyze the arguments that you read
but also to bring logic and order to those that you write. Of course, the Toulmin
language shouldn’t be used directly in your essays because it often sounds stiff
and lacks the nuance of more natural writing. But if you eliminate some of
the artificial constructions and awkward phrasings — because, therefore, since —
it can help you create a strong thesis statement, or at least think through the
logic of your argument fully so that you can compose one that is strong and persuasive.
Let’s walk through the process of refining an argument topic using the Toulmin
model. We’ll begin by responding to an argument about the increased visual
nature of our print media, including textbooks:
One reason education in this country is so bad is that the textbooks are
crammed full of fluff like charts and graphs and pictures.
Let’s restate this argument using the Toulmin model and look at its component
parts.
Because textbook authors are filling their books with charts, graphs, and
pictures, therefore the quality of education is declining in this country, since
less written information equals less learning.
Evidence
(Textbooks contain charts, graphs, pictures.)

Claim
(Education is declining.)

Assumption
(Learning comes from written text.)
Backing
(Traditionally, students have been learning from written text.)

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 129

6/18/12 3:10 PM

130

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

Studying the argument this way, we find that the original argument has a vulnerability in that it assumes students only learn from printed text and not from
visual material.
We can also use Toulmin to craft a response, using a simple template such as
this: “Because __________, therefore __________, since __________, on account
of __________, unless __________.” Just because it’s a template doesn’t mean it
has to tie your hands intellectually. You can put forth any viewpoint you like.
Here is one response, just as an example:
Because charts, graphs, and pictures provide information, therefore they do
not hinder the education system, since that information is a supplement to
written text.
In this case, we did not include a qualifier or a reservation.
Claim
Evidence
(Charts, graphs, pictures provide information.) (Visuals do not hinder education.)
Assumption
(Visual information supplements written text.)
Backing
(Students learn from a variety of media.)

You would then use that statement to develop your position and to write the
thesis for your essay. The following example presents the claim but doesn’t argue
with the data: it acknowledges its validity, as far as it goes (this creates a reasonable tone and appeals to ethos and logos), and then zeros in on the assumption
with a pair of rhetorical questions:
Much of the argument is indisputable; however, some of it can be interpreted
in different ways. Take, for instance, the criticism of textbooks for using too
many visuals, particularly of a map replacing a topographical description. Is
the map really a bad thing? Are any of the charts and graphs bad things?
The essay would then go on to argue the value of visuals not as replacements for but
as supplements to written texts, developing a qualified and reasoned argument.

• ACTIVITY •
Complete each of the following templates, using an argument from this
chapter (e.g., “Crazed Rhetoric” by Tom Toles, “Why Investing in Fast Food

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 130

6/18/12 3:10 PM

AnAlyzing VisuAl TExTs As ARgumEnTs

131

May Be a Good Thing” by Amy Domini, or “Star Wars” by Roger Ebert). Use
at least two different texts.
1. In his/her argument
concludes
and
supports the conclusion with such evidence as
and
. To link this conclusion with the evidence, he/she
makes the assumption that
.
2. Although what
says about
may be
true in some cases, his/her position fails to take
into
account. A closer look at
reveals
.
3. While the position advanced by X may seem reasonable, it assumes
. If that were so, then
. It might be
more reasonable to consider
.
4. One way to look at X would be to say
; but if that
were the case, then
. Of course, another view might
be
. Yet another way to consider X might be
.
5. Position X would be sound only if we chose to ignore
.
When we consider
, then
. In addition,
.
6. Wouldn’t it be wonderful if we could all agree about
?
The trouble is,
. X says
and Y says
. How can we come to a compromise that recognizes
?

Analyzing Visual Texts as Arguments
In this section, we’ll focus on how to analyze visual texts that present arguments.
A visual argument can be an advertisement, a political cartoon, a photograph, a
bumper sticker, a T-shirt, a hat, a Web page, or even a piece of fine art. Yet the
tools to analyze argument — identifying the claims, analyzing the way evidence is
used, thinking critically about the artist’s assumptions, examining how the piece
is structured, considering appeals to ethos, pathos, and logos — are fairly similar
for both visual and written arguments.
Although the tools that artists use to make their arguments are primarily
visual strategies such as the placement of figures and objects and the use of color,
the process of analysis is the same as with any text: look carefully, take note of
every detail, make connections about your observations, and draw conclusions.
Again, as with any written text, it’s important to know what occasioned the visual
image and, if possible, who the artist intended as his or her audience.
Following is a checklist to use with any visual text:

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 131

6/18/12 3:10 PM

132

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

• Where did the visual first appear? Who is the audience? Who is the speaker
or artist? Does this person have political or organizational affiliations that
are important to understanding the text?
• What do you notice first? Where is your eye drawn? What is your overall
first impression?
• What topic does the visual address or raise? Does the visual make a claim
about that topic?
• Does the text tell or suggest a narrative or story? If so, what is the point?
• What emotions does the visual text evoke? How do color or light and
shadow contribute to evoking emotions?
• Are the figures realistic, caricatures, distorted? What is the effect?
• Are any of the images visual allusions that would evoke emotions or memories in viewers?
• What cultural values are viewers likely to bring to the images?
• What claim does the visual make about the issue(s) it addresses?
Let’s use this checklist to analyze a four-frame cartoon entitled Rat Race that
appeared on the United Kingdom Web site polyp.org.uk.
• Where did the visual first appear? Who is the audience? Who is the
speaker? Does this person have political or organizational affiliations
that are important to understanding the text? This cartoon first appeared
in Ethical Consumer magazine, a publication whose mission is to provide
information to consumers about products and brands that are socially and
environmentally responsible. The magazine has an obvious bias against
buying products for the sake of status rather than necessity, and against
companies or organizations motivated primarily by profit. The readers of
Ethical Consumer are likely to be practical or even frugal, to frown upon
materialism, and to be skeptical of big business.
• What do you notice first? Where is your eye drawn? What is your overall
first impression? Although there’s quite a bit going on in these frames, your
eye is probably drawn most immediately to the written text that is in bold:
WORK HARDER / EARN MORE MONEY / BUY MORE THINGS / KEEP
GOING. Since the written text appears in the same place within each frame,
it also might be seen as a way to structure the piece.
• What topic does the visual address or raise? Does the visual make a claim
about that topic? With rats racing all over the place within frames and
from frame to frame, clearly the topic is the rat race — an allusion to the
well-known expression. Even at this early stage of analysis, the artist’s claim
that the rat race is a never-ending cycle of working to earn money to buy
material possessions becomes pretty clear.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 132

6/18/12 3:10 PM

AnAlyzing VisuAl TExTs As ARgumEnTs

133

(see insert for color version.)
source: www.polyp.org.uk.

• Does the text tell or suggest a narrative or story? If so, what is the point?
The frames constitute a story, a narrative: the key “characters” are rats that
seem to be caught in a maze; the idea of a trap is emphasized by the rats’
bodies appearing in pieces, fragmented, with only one example of a whole
body being in the picture. The sign at the top (“Happiness is just around
the corner!”) is repeated in each frame, a slogan that seems to cheer the rats
on and keep them on task.
• What emotions does the visual text evoke? How do color or light and
shadow contribute to evoking emotions? You might feel a range of emotions
being evoked. First of all, it’s hard not to see something comic about the
bug-eyed rats with human expressions who are frantically running either
from or toward something, though it’s not clear which. Red usually evokes
an alarm button in viewers. The background is a little more subtle, but the
closer you look, the world beyond the “maze” goes from lighter to darker
shades, suggesting a workday, the morning-until-night routine. That background does not have any trees or natural shapes but, rather, industriallooking smokestacks and buildings.
• Are the figures realistic, caricatures, distorted? What is the effect? The
rats themselves are caricatures, distortions with huge heads and eyes. They

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 133

6/18/12 3:10 PM

134

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

never interact with one another but are depicted as looking at the signs or
maybe watching one another; there’s no contact between or among them.
• Are any of the images visual allusions that would evoke emotions or
memories in viewers? We’ve already noted the overarching allusion to “the
rat race,” a common expression people use to refer to a situation that
involves ceaseless activity with little meaning. In addition, the signs on the
walls of each frame remind us of advertisements that entice us to buy
things or acquire luxuries. They’re promises of a better physical appearance
or lifestyle.
• What cultural values are viewers likely to bring to the images? Viewers
are likely to be familiar with the cultural values implicit in such advertising
ploys, though maybe more subtle ones, to grab their attention and make
them want to spend money. The artist leads us clearly to the irony of committing to the draining rat race in order to “spoil yourself ” and “escape
from it all.”
• What claim does the visual make about the issue(s) it addresses? Let’s
take stock of what we have observed thus far and connect some of those
observations. We have exaggerated images of rats in a maze working to
make money to buy things that require them to continue working to make
money to pay for those things and the next things that promise happiness.
The red color and the exaggerated characteristics of the mice signal a
fevered urgency that the cartoon’s overall message mocks. The rats live
crowded, frantic lives driven by the pursuit of material goods and fueled by
ads, slogans, and other external stimuli. It’s true that we are making an
inferential leap, but given all these specifics, we can fairly conclude that the
artist’s claim is one of value: “the rat race just isn’t worth it!” Or, to state it
more formally, “the constant striving to make money in order to spend
money can never bring satisfaction, only more striving.”
If we think about this analysis in the terms of argument we have used
throughout this chapter, each of the four frames might be thought of as a paragraph. In each one the artist refutes a counterargument: happiness is just around
the corner if you work harder, if you earn more money, if you buy more things, if
you keep going. These slogans become assertions that the drawings refute as the
rats become increasingly frantic within the confines of the boxes and as day turns
to night. The argument seems to be organized inductively because as each slogan
(assertion) is refuted by the images of the rats who are anything but happy as they
face yet another “corner,” the viewer draws the conclusion that the rat race is
thankless, useless, and never a route to happiness.
Photographs are another type of visual text that can make powerful arguments. How often do we look at the photograph on the front page of a newspaper

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 134

6/18/12 3:10 PM

AnAlyzing VisuAl TExTs As ARgumEnTs

135

or news site before we read the lead story? The photo in that case may greatly
impact how we read the written text by shaping our attitude toward the piece,
or even by leading us to form conclusions before reading so much as a single
word.
In fact, photographic images carry additional power because they seem “real,”
authentic, images of truth frozen in time. No political cartoon has ever claimed
to be “reality.” But it is important to understand that while photographs may be
more “real” than a drawing, they nevertheless are artificial. The photographer
must decide how to light a scene, what to focus on, when to take the picture, what
to put inside the frame and outside of it, and how to compose the shot in order
to convey the desired meaning. Unfortunately, combining the power of the photographic image has at times resulted in the irresistible temptation to pose or
construct an image to make a point. But even if the image is not doctored, a
photograph is constructed to tell a story, evoke emotions, and make a strong
argument.
Let’s examine an iconic photograph called The Steerage, taken in 1907 by
photographer Alfred Stieglitz (see p. 136). We might start with a definition of
steerage, which is the cheapest accommodation on a passenger ship — originally
the compartments containing the steering apparatus. Stieglitz did not take the
photograph for a particular publication because by this point he was already a
highly regarded artist who championed the relatively new medium of photography as an art form. The context is the early twentieth century, when immigration
to the United States was at a high point. The photograph depicts the wealthier
classes aboard ship on the deck above the poorer classes, who are housed in the
steerage. Notice how your eye is immediately drawn to the empty gangway that
separates the two groups. This point of focus raises the issue of separation, even
segregation.
This time, instead of going through the checklist step-by-step as we did with
Rat Race, let’s just think about how the style of this photo might be seen as evidence used to make its claim. In what ways might that gangway be symbolic? Why
would Stieglitz choose the moment when it is empty? What story is this photograph telling? Note the similarities and differences between the two groups
depicted. Stieglitz juxtaposes them. Some differences, such as dress, are stark;
yet what similarities do you see? How does Stieglitz want his audience — his
viewers — to experience the people in this scene? Why do you suppose we see the
group in the top more straight on, face-to-face, while the people in the lower level
in many instances have their backs to us? Think about the time period, and ask
yourself what cultural values the viewers — those who frequent art galleries and
are familiar with artists of the day — bring to this image. Granted, the technology
did not make color photos an option, but notice the many shades of light and
dark, the shadows, the highlighted areas: What mood does this moment frozen in
time suggest? How does the evocation of mood add to the pathos of the scene?
What claim — or claims — is Stieglitz making through this visual image?

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 135

6/18/12 3:10 PM

136

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

Alfred stieglitz, The Steerage. source: Digital image © The museum of modern Art / licensed by
sCAlA / Art Resource, ny.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 136

6/18/12 3:10 PM

AnAlyzing VisuAl TExTs As ARgumEnTs

137

• ACTIVITY •
The Heroes of 2001 stamp depicts a photograph taken at Ground Zero after
the September 11 terrorist attacks on the Twin Towers in New York City.
Analyze the photograph’s argument, and explain why it is or is not an effective choice for a stamp for the U.S. Postal Service.

(see insert for color version.)

• EssAY In PRogREss: Using Visual Evidence •
Find a visual text — a political cartoon, advertisement, photograph, or the
like — that supports or enhances the argument you have been developing. Write
a paragraph or two explaining how the visual text makes its own argument.

• CUlmInATIng ACTIVITY •
The political cartoon and article that follow make similar claims about the
Nobel Peace Prize awarded to President Barack Obama in 2009, but in very
different ways. The Tom Toles cartoon appeared in the Washington Post; the
article appeared in the London Times. Discuss the way each argument is
developed and the likely impact of each on its audience.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 137

6/18/12 3:10 PM

138

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

source: Toles © 2009 The Washington Post. Reprinted with permission of universal uclick. All rights

reserved.

Comment: Absurd Decision on Obama Makes a Mockery of the
Nobel Peace Prize
michAel binyon
The award of this year’s nobel Peace Prize to President Obama will be met
with widespread incredulity, consternation in many capitals and probably
deep embarrassment by the President himself.
Rarely has an award had such an obvious political and partisan intent. it
was clearly seen by the norwegian nobel Committee as a way of expressing
European gratitude for an end to the Bush Administration, approval for the
election of America’s first black president and hope that Washington will honour its promise to re-engage with the world.
instead, the prize risks looking preposterous in its claims, patronising in its
intentions and demeaning in its attempt to build up a man who has barely
begun his period in office, let alone achieved any tangible outcome for peace.
The pretext for the prize was mr. Obama’s decision to “strengthen international diplomacy and co-operation between peoples.” many people will point
out that, while the President has indeed promised to “reset” relations with Rus-

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 138

6/18/12 3:10 PM

AnAlyzing VisuAl TExTs As ARgumEnTs

139

sia and offer a fresh start to relations with the muslim world, there is little so
far to show for his fine words.
East–West relations are little better than they were six months ago, and any
change is probably due largely to the global economic downturn; and America’s vaunted determination to re-engage with the muslim world has failed to
make any concrete progress towards ending the conflict between the israelis
and the Palestinians.
There is a further irony in offering a peace prize to a president whose
principal preoccupation at the moment is when and how to expand the war in
Afghanistan.
The spectacle of mr. Obama mounting the podium in Oslo to accept a
prize that once went to nelson mandela, Aung san suu kyi and mother
Theresa would be all the more absurd if it follows a White House decision to
send up to 40,000 more u.s. troops to Afghanistan. However just such a war
may be deemed in Western eyes, muslims would not be the only group to
complain that peace is hardly compatible with an escalation in hostilities.
The nobel Committee has made controversial awards before. some have
appeared to reward hope rather than achievement: the 1976 prize for the
two peace campaigners in northern ireland, Betty Williams and mairead
Corrigan, was clearly intended to send a signal to the two battling communities in ulster. But the political influence of the two winners turned out, sadly, to
be negligible.
in the middle East, the award to menachem Begin of israel and Anwar
sadat of Egypt in 1978 also looks, in retrospect, as naive as the later award
to yassir Arafat, shimon Peres and yitzhak Rabin — although it could be
argued that both the Camp David and Oslo accords, while not bringing
peace, were at least attempts to break the deadlock.
mr. Obama’s prize is more likely, however, to be compared with the most
contentious prize of all: the 1973 prize to Henry kissinger and le Duc Tho for
their negotiations to end the Vietnam War. Dr. kissinger was branded a warmonger for his support for the bombing campaign in Cambodia; and the
Vietnamese negotiator was subsequently seen as a liar whose government
never intended to honour a peace deal but was waiting for the moment to
attack south Vietnam.
mr. Obama becomes the third sitting u.s. President to receive the prize.
The committee said today that he had “captured the world’s attention.” it is
certainly true that his energy and aspirations have dazzled many of his supporters. sadly, it seems they have so bedazzled the norwegians that they can
no longer separate hopes from achievement. The achievements of all previous
winners have been diminished.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 139

5

10

6/18/12 3:10 PM

140

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

• EssAY In PRogREss: First Draft •
Write a full argument that includes at least three different types of evidence
and a visual text. You have been developing this essay throughout the chapter: use the texts and drafts you’ve developed thus far, as you like, but do not
hesitate to rethink and revise. Suggested length: 500–700 words.

Glossary of Argument Terms and Fallacies
ad hominem Latin for “against the man,” this fallacy refers to the specific diversionary tactic of switching the argument from the issue at hand to the character of the other speaker. If you argue that a park in your community should not
be renovated because the person supporting it was arrested during a domestic
dispute, then you are guilty of ad hominem.
ad populum (bandwagon appeal) This fallacy occurs when evidence boils down
to “everybody’s doing it, so it must be a good thing to do.”
You should vote to elect Rachel Johnson — she has a strong lead in the polls!

Polling higher does not necessarily make Senator Johnson the “best” candidate,
only the most popular.
appeal to false authority This fallacy occurs when someone who has no expertise to speak on an issue is cited as an authority. A TV star, for instance, is not
a medical expert, even though pharmaceutical advertisements often use celebrity endorsements.
argument A process of reasoned inquiry; a persuasive discourse resulting in a
coherent and considered movement from a claim to a conclusion.
assumption See warrant.
backing In the Toulmin model, backing consists of further assurances or data
without which the assumption lacks authority. For an example, see Toulmin
model.
bandwagon appeal See ad populum.
begging the question A fallacy in which a claim is based on evidence or support
that is in doubt. It “begs” a question whether the support itself is sound.
Giving students easy access to a wealth of facts and resources online allows them to
develop critical thinking skills.

circular reasoning A fallacy in which the writer repeats the claim as a way to
provide evidence.
You can’t give me a C; I’m an A student!

claim Also called an assertion or a proposition, a claim states the argument’s
main idea or position. A claim differs from a topic or subject in that a claim has
to be arguable.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 140

6/18/12 3:10 PM

glOssARy OF ARgumEnT TERms AnD FAllACiEs

141

claim of fact A claim of fact asserts that something is true or not true.
The number of suicides and homicides committed by teenagers, most often young men,
has exploded in the last three decades . . .
— Anna Quindlen

claim of policy A claim of policy proposes a change.
Yet one solution continues to elude us, and that is ending the ignorance about mental
health, and moving it from the margins of care and into the mainstream where it
belongs.
— Anna Quindlen

claim of value A claim of value argues that something is good or bad, right or
wrong.
There’s a plague on all our houses, and since it doesn’t announce itself with lumps or
spots or protest marches, it has gone unremarked in the quiet suburbs and busy cities
where it has been laying waste.
— Anna Quindlen

classical oration, the Five-part argument structure used by classical rhetoricians. The five parts are:
introduction (exordium) Introduces the reader to the subject under discussion.
narration (narratio) Provides factual information and background material on the subject at hand or establishes why the subject is a problem that
needs addressing.
confirmation (confirmatio) Usually the major part of the text, the confirmation includes the proof needed to make the writer’s case.
refutation (refutatio) Addresses the counterargument. It is a bridge between the writer’s proof and conclusion.
conclusion (peroratio) Brings the essay to a satisfying close.
closed thesis A closed thesis is a statement of the main idea of the argument
that also previews the major points the writer intends to make.
The three-dimensional characters, exciting plot, and complex themes of the Harry
Potter series make them not only legendary children’s books but also enduring literary
classics.

deduction Deduction is a logical process whereby one reaches a conclusion by
starting with a general principle or universal truth (a major premise) and
applying it to a specific case (a minor premise). The process of deduction is
usually demonstrated in the form of a syllogism:
mAJor premise:

Exercise contributes to better health.

minor premise:

Yoga is a type of exercise.

conclusion:

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 141

Yoga contributes to better health.

6/18/12 3:10 PM

142

CHAPTER 3 • AnAlyzing ARgumEnTs

either/or (false dilemma) A fallacy in which the speaker presents two extreme
options as the only possible choices.
Either we agree to higher taxes, or our grandchildren will be mired in debt.

fallacy

See logical fallacy.

faulty analogy A fallacy that occurs when an analogy compares two things that are
not comparable. For instance, to argue that because we put animals who are in
irreversible pain out of their misery, we should do the same for people, asks the
reader to ignore significant and profound differences between animals and people.
first-hand evidence Evidence based on something the writer knows, whether
it’s from personal experience, observations, or general knowledge of events.
hasty generalization A fallacy in which a faulty conclusion is reached because
of inadequate evidence.
Smoking isn’t bad for you; my great aunt smoked a pack a day and lived to be 90.

induction — From the Latin inducere, “to lead into”; a logical process whereby the
writer reasons from particulars to universals, using specific cases in order to
draw a conclusion, which is also called a generalization.
Regular exercise promotes weight loss.
Exercise lowers stress levels.
Exercise improves mood and outlook.
generAlizAtion:

Exercise contributes to better health.

logical fallacy Logical fallacies are potential vulnerabilities or weaknesses in an
argument. They often arise from a failure to make a logical connection between
the claim and the evidence used to support it.
open thesis An open thesis is one that does not list all the points the writer
intends to cover in an essay.
The popularity of the Harry Potter series demonstrates that simplicity trumps complexity when it comes to the taste of readers, both young and old.

post hoc ergo propter hoc This fallacy is Latin for “after which therefore because
of which,” meaning that it is incorrect to always claim that something is a cause
just because it happened earlier. One may loosely summarize this fallacy by
saying that correlation does not imply causation.
We elected Johnson as president and look where it got us: hurricanes, floods, stock
market crashes.

qualifier In the Toulmin model, the qualifier uses words like usually, probably,
maybe, in most cases, and most likely to temper the claim, making it less absolute. For an example, see Toulmin model.
quantitative evidence Quantitative evidence includes things that can be measured, cited, counted, or otherwise represented in numbers — for instance, statistics, surveys, polls, census information.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 142

6/18/12 3:10 PM

glOssARy OF ARgumEnT TERms AnD FAllACiEs

143

rebuttal In the Toulmin model, a rebuttal gives voice to possible objections. For
an example, see Toulmin model.
reservation In the Toulmin model, a reservation explains the terms and conditions necessitated by the qualifier. For an example, see Toulmin model.
Rogerian arguments Developed by psychiatrist Carl Rogers, Rogerian arguments are based on the assumption that having a full understanding of an
opposing position is essential to responding to it persuasively and refuting it in
a way that is accommodating rather than alienating.
second-hand evidence Evidence that is accessed through research, reading, and
investigation. It includes factual and historical information, expert opinion,
and quantitative data.
straw man A fallacy that occurs when a speaker chooses a deliberately poor or
oversimplified example in order to ridicule and refute an idea.
Politician X proposes that we put astronauts on Mars in the next four years. Politician Y ridicules this proposal by saying that his opponent is looking for “little green
men in outer space.”

syllogism A logical structure that uses the major premise and minor premise to
reach a necessary conclusion.
mAJor premise:

Exercise contributes to better health.

minor premise:

Yoga is a type of exercise.

conclusion:

Yoga contributes to better health.

Toulmin model An approach to analyzing and constructing arguments created
by British philosopher Stephen Toulmin in his book The Uses of Argument
(1958). The Toulmin model can be stated as a template:
Because (evidence as support), therefore (claim), since (warrant or assumption), on
account of (backing), unless (reservation).
Because it is raining, therefore I should probably take my umbrella, since it will keep
me dry on account of its waterproof material, unless, of course, there is a hole in it.

warrant In the Toulmin model, the warrant expresses the assumption necessarily shared by the speaker and the audience.

03_SHE_67650_Ch03_081_144.indd 143

6/18/12 3:10 PM

this page left intentionally blank

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 36

6/18/12 3:09 PM

4
Synthesizing Sources
Entering the Conversation

W

e all draw on the ideas of others as we develop our own positions, regardless of the topic. Whether you are explaining your opinion about an
issue specific to your community (such as whether to allow skateboarding in public parks), or you are developing a position on a national or global issue (such as
whether to change immigration policies), you should know as much as possible
about the topic. Rather than make a quick response that reflects an opinion based
only on what you already know, you must research and read sources — what others have written. Then you can develop your own informed opinion, a measured
response that considers multiple perspectives and possibilities. We call this process synthesis, which involves considering various viewpoints in order to create a
new and more informed viewpoint.
Think of it this way: You show up at a party. There are a dozen different conversations going on. You approach one group of people who are having a heated
debate. You’ll need to listen for a while to understand what the specific topic is,
what has already been said, who is taking what side, and what they’re not saying.
Then, by either expanding on what others are saying, challenging what others are
saying, or filling in a gap in their understanding, you will begin to enter this conversation and make your own contribution. And that’s what synthesis is all about:
entering the conversation that society is having about a topic. You enter the conversation by carefully reading and understanding the perspectives and ideas surrounding an issue, examining your own ideas on the matter, and then synthesizing
these views into a more informed position than the one you began with.
When you’re learning about a subject, look for reliable sources. Be aware of the
bias that a source brings to the topic. Consider the speaker: What does he or she
believe in? How might the speaker’s position provide personal gain? Don’t look
for a pro-and-con debate that represents only polarized views; look for a range of
viewpoints. This might sound like a lot to keep in mind, but don’t worry, you work
with sources all the time. When you decide to buy a new cell phone, you gather
information by exploring different sources. You might consult Consumer Reports
and other technology magazines. You’d compare prices and technical specs. You’d

145

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 145

6/18/12 3:10 PM

146

CHAPTER 4 • SynTHESIzIng SouRCES

ask your friends for their opinions and experiences, and you might go to a computer store and talk with the experts. You might read reviews online or use forums
as a quick source for many opinions. But you might not talk to your grandfather,
who may be new to cell phones himself, nor would you get all of your information
from a salesperson, who likely works on commission. The final result of your inquiry
is a purchase, not an essay, but you just synthesized a range of sources in order to
make the argument to yourself that the phone you chose is the best fit for you.

• ACTIVITY •
Write a brief paragraph about a time that you used multiple sources to help
make a decision. You can choose something as simple as a decision about which
movie to see or which shoes to purchase or as serious as which colleges to
apply to. Discuss how each source contributed to your decision and how you
decided which ones were more or less influential. You may consult written
sources as well as more informal ones such as conversations.

Using Sources to Inform an Argument
As we discussed in Chapter 3, many different types of evidence can serve to support an argument. But it is important to remember that your sources should
enhance, not replace, your argument. You may worry that the ideas of others are
so persuasive that you have nothing new to say. Or you may think that the more
sources you cite, the more impressed your reader (especially your teacher) will be.
But as you develop your skills in writing synthesis essays, you will find that the
sources inform your own ideas and demonstrate your understanding of opposing
views. What you have to say is the main event; your position is central.
In the following example, Laura Hillenbrand, author of Seabiscuit, a Pulitzer
Prize–winning book about a champion racehorse who beat the odds, maintains
her own voice throughout even when she uses the work of experts to help make a
point. (She identifies them in a section at the end of the book.) But whether she
is quoting directly or paraphrasing, she never gets lost in the sources or allows
them to overwhelm her ideas.
from Seabiscuit
Laura HiLLenbrand

To pilot a racehorse is to ride a half-ton catapult. It is without question one of the most
formidable feats in sport. The extraordinary athleticism of the jockey is unparalleled:
A study of the elements of athleticism conducted by Los Angeles exercise physiologists
and physicians found that of all major sports competitors, jockeys may be, pound
for pound, the best overall athletes. They have to be. To begin with, there are the

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 146

6/18/12 3:10 PM

uSIng SouRCES To InfoRm An ARgumEnT

147

demands on balance, coordination, and reflex. A horse’s body is a constantly shifting
topography, with a bobbing head and neck and roiling muscle over the shoulders,
back, and rump. on a running horse, a jockey does not sit in the saddle, he crouches
over it, leaning all of his weight on his toes, which rest on the thin metal bases of
stirrups dangling about a foot from the horse’s topline. When a horse is in full stride,
the only parts of the jockey that are in continuous contact with the animal are the
insides of the feet and ankles — everything else is balanced in midair. In other words,
jockeys squat on the pitching backs of their mounts, a task much like perching on
the grille of a car while it speeds down a twisting, potholed freeway in traffic. The
stance is, in the words of university of north Carolina researchers, “a situation of
dynamic imbalance and ballistic opportunity.” The center of balance is so narrow
that if jockeys shift only slightly rearward, they will flip right off the back. If they tip
more than a few inches forward, a fall is almost inevitable. A thoroughbred’s neck,
while broad from top to bottom, is surprisingly narrow in width, like the body of a
fish. Pitching up and down as the horse runs, it offers little for the jockey to grab to
avoid plunging to the ground and under the horse’s hooves.

Jockey (video), Tel-Air Productions, 1980.
A. E. Waller et al., “Jockey Injuries in the United States,” Journal of the American
Medical Association, 2000; vol. 283, no. 10.

Rather than citing her sources within the text, Hillenbrand includes the information about the sources she cites at the end of her book. The first item is a videotape about the study by Los Angeles exercise physiologists and physicians; the
second is an article in a medical journal. Both acknowledge that she turned to
authorities — sources — to deepen and supplement her own knowledge about the
mechanics and physics of how a racehorse and a jockey move as one entity.

• ACTIVITY •
In the following passage from A Level Playing Field: African American Athletes
and the Republic of Sports, Gerald L. Early discusses the complex character of
Jackie Robinson, the first black athlete to play in major league baseball. What
is the purpose of the sources Early chooses to include? How do they enhance
or detract from his own voice? What is the purpose of each of the notes documenting the sources?
from A Level Playing Field
GeraLd L. earLy
But 1949 was also Robinson’s year of liberation. According to Branch Rickey,
known as the mahatma by sportswriters, the Dodgers executive who signed
Robinson and who pushed for integration: “for three years [that was the

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 147

6/18/12 3:10 PM

148

CHAPTER 4 • SynTHESIzIng SouRCES

agreement] this boy was to turn the other cheek. He did, day after day, until
he had no other to turn. They were both beat off. There were slight slip-ups on
occasion in that first year in montreal.”1
Robinson had agreed to ignore all slights, insults, and abuses that he endured
on the playing field during his first three years as a professional ballplayer in
the white leagues. This generated, naturally, a certain public sympathy, as
Robinson did, indeed, endure much abuse, and he did not have a natural or an
easy camaraderie with most of his white teammates. He became almost a perfect gandhi-like figure of sacrifice and forbearance, and he created the paradigm for how integration was to proceed in the united States in the 1950s and
early 1960s — the noble negro who, through his nobility, a mystical product of
his American heritage of suffering but enduring devotion to the foundational
principles of American life, legitimates white institutions as he integrates them.
As the New York Times put it in 1950, “The going wasn’t easy. Jackie Robinson
met open or covert hostility with the spirit of a gallant gentleman. He kept his
temper, he kept his poise and he played good baseball. now he has won his
battle. no fan threatens to riot, no player threatens to go on strike when Jackie
Robinson, or any one of several negroes, takes the field.”2 This is the Robinson that is always remembered when his career is reexamined today. He is
almost always sentimentalized.
But it must be remembered that Robinson played major league baseball
with the Dodgers for ten years, only two of which were under this agreement.
(The agreement also included the year in montreal.) So for most of his career as
a big league ballplayer, Robinson did not act in any sort of self-sacrificing nonviolent way. He was a tough, almost chip-on-the-shoulder player, a particularly
aggressive athlete who usually took umbrage at the least slight or unfairness
he felt on the field. He understood that high-performance sports were about
intimidation, and he was not about to be intimidated.3
1. Branch Rickey, with Robert Riger, The American Diamond: A Documentary of the
Game of Baseball (new york: Simon & Schuster, 1965), p. 46.
2. “Jackie Robinson’s new Honor,” New York Times, December 8, 1950.
3. “In 1950, and the years to come, Jack battled with umpires over matters not simply
of judgment but of ethics, in his growing belief that the umpires, all white, were abusing their power in order to put him in his place.” See Rampersad, Jackie Robinson,
p. 229; see also Jackie Robinson, “now I Know Why They Boo me!” Look, January 25, 1955, pp. 22–28.

Using Sources to Appeal to an Audience
If you were writing an in-class essay, would you take the time to put together a
bibliography? Of course not. But you would prepare a bibliography for a formal
research paper because that writing has a different purpose and the audience has
different expectations. A writer must analyze the rhetorical situation in order to

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 148

6/18/12 3:10 PM

uSIng SouRCES To APPEAL To An AuDIEnCE

149

determine what is appropriate, even when it comes to sources and documentation. (See the rhetorical triangle, p. 4.)
Now let’s consider a topic and examine how sources were used and identified
for three different audiences. The following excerpts are from three pieces about
indirect speech by the linguist and cognitive scientist Steven Pinker.
The first example is from an article in Time magazine written for a general
audience of readers interested primarily in understanding the basics of Pinker’s
ideas. (The rest of this article appears on pp. 745–8.)
from Words Don’t Mean What They Mean
Why don’t people just say what they mean? The reason is that conversational partners are not modems downloading information into each other’s brains. People are
very, very touchy about their relationships. Whenever you speak to someone, you are
presuming the two of you have a certain degree of familiarity — which your words
might alter. So every sentence has to do two things at once: convey a message and
continue to negotiate that relationship.
The clearest example is ordinary politeness. When you are at a dinner party and
want the salt, you don’t blurt out, “gimme the salt.” Rather, you use what linguists
call a whimperative, as in “Do you think you could pass the salt?” or “If you could
pass the salt, that would be awesome.”
Taken literally, these sentences are inane. The second is an overstatement, and
the answer to the first is obvious. fortunately, the hearer assumes that the speaker is
rational and listens between the lines. yes, your point is to request the salt, but you’re
doing it in such a way that first takes care to establish what linguists call “felicity
conditions,” or the prerequisites to making a sensible request. The underlying rationale
is that the hearer not be given a command but simply be asked or advised about one
of the necessary conditions for passing the salt. your goal is to have your need satisfied without treating the listener as a flunky who can be bossed around at will.

Note that there are no formal sources cited. The technical terms that are introduced —
whimperative and felicity conditions — are more playful than technical, and Pinker
makes no attempt to cite the academic origin of these terms or the other ideas in
this article. He does not go into the research that led to these conclusions. His
goal in this brief article for the general reader is to inform and keep moving.
The audience for Pinker’s book The Stuff of Thought: Language as a Window
into Human Nature is interested in exploring his subject more deeply, and his use
and citation of sources becomes correspondingly more extensive and formal.
from The Stuff of Thought
The double message conveyed with an implicature is nowhere put to greater use
than in the commonest kind of indirect speech of all, politeness. Politeness in linguistics does not refer to social etiquette, like eating your peas without using your knife,

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 149

6/18/12 3:10 PM

150

CHAPTER 4 • SynTHESIzIng SouRCES

but to the countless adjustments that speakers make to avoid the equally countless
ways that their listeners might be put off. People are very, very touchy, and speakers go to great lengths not to step on their toes. In their magisterial work Politeness:
Some Universals in Language Use, the anthropologists Penelope Brown and Stephen
Levinson . . . extended grice’s theory by showing how people all over the world use
politeness to lubricate their social interactions.1
Politeness Theory begins with Erving goffman’s observation that when people
interact they constantly worry about maintaining a nebulous yet vital commodity
called “face” (from the idiom “to save face”).2 goffman defined face as a positive
social value that a person claims for himself. Brown and Levinson divide it into positive face, the desire to be approved (specifically, that other people want for you what
you want for yourself), and negative face, the desire to be unimpeded or autonomous. The terminology, though clumsy, points to a fundamental duality in social life,
which has been discovered in many guises and goes by many names: solidarity
and status, connection and autonomy, communion and agency, intimacy and power,
communal sharing and authority ranking.3
1. Brown & Levinson, 1987b. See also Brown, 1987; Brown & gilman, 1972; fraser, 1990;
green, 1996; Holtgraves, 2002.
2. goffman, 1967.
3. fiske, 1992; fiske, 2004; Haslam, 2004; Holtgraves, 2002.

While this is not a scientific study, it is also not a brief and breezy article in a
magazine with a very wide readership. The audience of a book of this sort has
some interest in this topic — they have chosen to read a whole book on linguistics
and cognition — and because of that, Pinker feels comfortable not just summarizing the latest thinking in the field, but introducing terminology common to
research in linguistics and tracing the origins of concepts back to their academic
origins. He also formally (and fully) cites his sources using extensive endnotes
that appear at the back of the book.
Finally, take a look at this selection from a scholarly article by Pinker in the
academic journal Intercultural Pragmatics.
from The Evolutionary Social Psychology
of Off-Record Indirect Speech Acts
The double message conveyed with an implicature is nowhere put to greater use than
in the commonest kind of indirect speech, politeness. In their seminal work Politeness:
Some Universals in Language Use, Brown and Levinson (1987b) extended grice’s
theory by showing how people in many (perhaps all) cultures use politeness to lubricate their social interactions.
Politeness Theory begins with goffman’s (1967) observation that when people
interact they constantly worry about maintaining a commodity called ‘’face’’ (from
the idiom ‘’to save face’’). goffman defined face as a positive social value that a
person claims for himself. Brown and Levinson divide it into positive face, the desire

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 150

6/18/12 3:10 PM

uSIng SouRCES To APPEAL To An AuDIEnCE

151

to be approved (specifically, that other people want for you what you want for
yourself ), and negative face, the desire to be unimpeded or autonomous. The terminology points to a fundamental duality in social life which goes by many names:
solidarity and status, connection and autonomy, communion and agency, intimacy
and power, communal sharing and authority ranking (fiske 1992, 2004; Haslam
2004; Holtgraves 2002). Later we will see how these wants come from two of the
three major social relations in human life.
Brown and Levinson argue that grice’s Cooperative Principle applies to the
maintenance of face as well as to the communication of data. Conversationalists
work together, each trying to maintain his own face and the face of his partner. The
challenge is that most kinds of speech pose at least some threat to the face of the
hearer. The mere act of initiating a conversation imposes a demand on the hearer’s
time and attention. Issuing an imperative challenges her status and autonomy.
making a request puts her in the position where she might have to refuse, earning
her a reputation as stingy or selfish. Telling something to someone implies that she
was ignorant of the fact in the first place. And then there are criticisms, boasts, interruptions, outbursts, the telling of bad news, and the broaching of divisive topics,
all of which can injure the hearer’s face directly.
At the same time, people have to get on with the business of life, and in doing
so they have to convey requests and news and complaints. The solution is to make
amends with politeness: the speaker sugarcoats his utterances with niceties that
reaffirm his concern for the hearer or that acknowledge her autonomy. Brown and
Levinson call the stratagems positive and negative politeness, though better terms
are sympathy and deference.

References

Brown, Penelope, and Stephen C. Levinson. 1987a. Introduction to the reissue: A review of
recent work. In Politeness: Some universals in language use. new york: Cambridge university Press.
—. 1987b. Politeness: Some universals in language usage. new york: Cambridge university
Press.
fiske, Alan P. 1992. The four elementary forms of sociality: framework for a unified theory
of social relations. Psychological Review, 99: 689–723.
—. 2004. four modes of constituting relationships: Consubstantial assimilation; space, magnitude, time, and force; Concrete procedures; Abstract symbolism. In n. Haslam (ed.),
Relational models theory: A contemporary overview. mahwah: Erlbaum Associates.
goffman, Erving. 1959. The presentation of self in everyday life. new york: Doubleday.
—. 1967. on face-work: An analysis of ritual elements in social interaction. In Interaction
ritual: Essays on face-to-face behavior. new york: Random House.
grice, Herbert P. 1975. Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J. L. morgan (eds.), Syntax &
Semantics Vol. 3: Speech acts. new york: Academic Press.
Haslam, nick. (ed.). 2004. Relational models theory: A contemporary overview. mahwah:
Erlbaum Associates.
Holtgraves, Tom m. 2002. Language as social action. mahwah: Erlbaum Associates.

Notice that for this academic audience of researchers and scholars who bring a good
deal of prior knowledge to the text, Pinker chooses other scholarly works as his

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 151

6/18/12 3:10 PM

152

CHAPTER 4 • SynTHESIzIng SouRCES

sources and documents them thoroughly in a style that gives those sources more
emphasis. Rather than just putting the citations at the back of the book, he embeds
the source names throughout for direct reference and then includes a detailed Works
Cited list at the end of the article. Many readers, likely familiar with these sources,
will find Pinker’s text more authoritative because he has included them.
As you can see, the type of evidence and the way it is documented depends
on audience and situation. But what does all of this have to do with the writing
you will be doing? The texts we have examined in this chapter were written by
journalists, professors, and scholars; the sources they use and the ways they document them are appropriate for their audiences. In school, you have probably written essays for which you were required to use outside sources, sources that were
assigned to you, or sources that were part of your classroom readings. Keep in mind
that your goal in a synthesis essay is the same as that of professional writers: to use
sources to support and illustrate your own ideas and to establish your credibility
as a reasonable and informed writer. Whether your teacher wants you to make
informal in-text citations or use formal in-text parenthetical documentation and
an end-of-paper Works Cited list, as prescribed by the Modern Language Association (MLA), you must document sources to give credit where credit is due.

• ACTIVITY •
To set themselves apart, columnists for print and online publications establish a viewpoint and style. The types of sources they use and the way they use
them are part of that style. Using three columns by one writer, analyze the columnist’s audience by examining the type of sources he or she uses. You might
consider a political commentator, a sportswriter, a movie or music reviewer,
or a columnist in a local publication.

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 152

6/18/12 3:10 PM

Conversation
Mandatory Community Service
In this section, we will walk you through the process of writing a synthesis essay:
understanding the task, analyzing a series of readings, and writing an argument
using them.
Here is your prompt:
Using the following documents on community service requirements in high schools,
write an essay explaining whether you believe that high schools in general — or your
specific school or district — should make community service mandatory. Incorporate
references to or quotations from a minimum of three of these sources in your essay.

Before reading the texts, think about how the sources will help you complete
the assignment. As we’ve discussed, sources can illustrate or support your own
ideas. If you think that community service requirements are worthwhile, then
you can look to your sources to help you make that point. But it’s important not
to reject texts that disagree with your position or are not directly relevant to it. In
fact, you might use a text that presents an opinion in opposition to yours as a
counterargument, and then concede and refute it. Most important, keep an open
mind while you read the sources so your thesis shows that you understand the
complexity of the subject of community service.

Sources
1. Neil Howe and William Strauss, from Millennials Rising
2. The Dalton School, Community Service Mission Statement
3. Detroit News, Volunteering Opens Teen’s Eyes to Nursing
4. Dennis Chaptman, Study: “Resume Padding” Prevalent in College-Bound
Students Who Volunteer
5. Arthur Stukas, Mark Snyder, and E. Gil Clary, from The Effects of “Mandatory
Volunteerism” on Intentions to Volunteer
6. Mark Hugo Lopez, from Youth Attitudes toward Civic Education and
Community Service Requirements

1. from Millennials Rising
Neil Howe and William Strauss
The following excerpt from a 2000 book by two social historians tries to define
the characteristics of Americans who are coming of age in a new millennium.

153

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 153

6/18/12 3:10 PM

154

CHAPTER 4 • SynTHESIzIng SouRCES

The definition of “community service” has morphed from one generation to the
next, dating back to World War II. For the Silent Generation [the generation that
came of age in the 1940s], community deed-doing was channeled by the Selective
Service law, which pushed young males toward socially acceptable deferments such
as teaching, science, or even marriage. For leading-edge Boomers, the term “community service” often meant cleaning hospital bedpans to avoid Vietnam — or
for the more radically minded, spurring oppressed neighborhoods to vent their
grievances against the “establishment.” When the draft ended, in 1973, first-wave
Boomers had eliminated mandatory civic duty for their later cohorts and the
generation to follow. Growing up in the era of the Volunteer Army, Gen Xers developed their own ethic of volunteerism, de-emphasizing great crusades in favor of
simple acts of charity to help needy people. For teenagers, “community service”
came to mean punishment for drunk drivers and Breakfast Club miscreants.
By the Millennial era [people born between 1982 and 2002], the notion of volunteering gave way to a more compulsory “service learning,” which is now often
required for graduation from middle or high school. Bolstered by Acts of Congress in 1990 and 1993, which created the Learn and Serve America program, the
integration of community service with academic study has spread to schools everywhere. From 1984 to 1999, the share of high schools offering any kind of community service program grew from 17 to 83 percent, and the share with “service
learning” grew from 9 to 46 percent. Two-thirds of all public schools at all grade
levels now have students engaged in community work, often . . . as part of the
curriculum.
A new Millennial service ethic is emerging, built around notions of collegial
(rather than individual) action, support for (rather than resistance against) civic
institutions, and the tangible doing of good deeds. Surveys show that five of
every six Millennials believe their generation has the greatest duty to improve the
environment — and that, far more than older people, Millennials would impose
extra civic duties on themselves, including taxes to achieve results.

2. Community Service Mission Statement
The Dalton School
The following mission statement is from a small private school in manhattan.

Community Service is something that needs to be done. Community Service situates our moral center; it teaches us through experience — about the relationship
between empathy and responsibility, about what it takes to be part of a community, in essence, about being human. Inherent in the notion of Community Service are the feelings of optimism and empowerment: we are optimistic that the
world can change for the better and when empowered to effect that change, we as

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 154

6/18/12 3:10 PM

ConVERSATIon

155

individuals can make a difference. There are no more important lessons that we
can learn and teach.

For Survival
We are members of many communities: family, school, neighborhood, city, country, religion, and ethnic group. It is from these communities that we gain our
sustenance. We must each play a role in contributing to our communities so that
these communities can continue to survive and prosper. Benevolent action is essential to the survival and prosperity of any community. We must engage in Community Service because it needs to be done and because we need our communities
to survive.

For a Moral Center
Community Service is vital to the healthy community. A community that takes
without giving back, that is indifferent to the needs of its fellow members, that is
only concerned with individual measures of success, is a weak, unsound community. The strength of a community can be found in its moral center; the ability to
articulate and act upon a defined moral center will fortify a community. The moral
center of a community, that place where we can find the values of empathy, compassion, and caring, is the basis for civic responsibility and the success of that
community.

For Personal Enrichment
Doing Community Service is empowering. When an individual goes out in the
world and interacts with other people in the spirit of bettering, that individual
makes a contribution and will feel a sense of accomplishment.
We are reminded all too often of the cynicism, indifference, and isolation that
exists in our society. Community Service, the taking of physical action, reminds
us of our connection and ability to connect. It is important to study the great
actions of others, but participating in Community Service enables the individual
to learn for himself and to teach herself.

5

For the Institutional Community
Our school is a place of learning; we need to integrate the ideals of Community
Service into our academic curriculum. Because Community Service embodies experiential learning, locating a moral center, community health, because it is about
empowerment and making the world a better place, because these issues are at the
core of being, we need to do it. The desire to act comes from a pride, caring, and
respect for a community. Community Service must be harnessed to foster a sense
of community in a school, a neighborhood, and beyond.

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 155

6/18/12 3:10 PM

156

CHAPTER 4 • SynTHESIzIng SouRCES

3. Volunteering Opens Teen’s Eyes to Nursing
The following human interest story appeared in the Detroit News in 2008.

If you asked 13-year-olds to make a list of their favorite after-school activities, visiting with the elderly probably wouldn’t be a top choice. But it would be for John
Prueter, son of Keith and Barbara Prueter of Essexville, who says he’d spend time
with older generations every day if he could.
“All the older people are nice people,” he said. “They like to see young people
come visit in these homes.” Prueter, a seventh-grader at Cramer Junior High School,
spends much of his after-school time at the Alterra Sterling House, an assistedliving home in Hampton Township.
Prueter got into volunteering with the elderly almost two years ago when his
great-grandmother, Mable Post, suffered a stroke. Always close to her, Prueter
visited her regularly when she was in the hospital. After 100 days, she was transferred to Alterra, where she still lives. Now, instead of coming just to visit a relative,
he comes to volunteer and visit with everyone. He is the youngest of Alterra’s regular volunteers and one of the most frequent visitors.
Prueter spends his time there helping with activities such as cooking and
gardening, playing games with residents and just chatting with them. He speaks
to the residents on a level that makes them feel good, said Pam O’Laughlin, executive director for Alterra’s Bay City campus. “He has a unique ability to communicate with these folks,” she said. “He’s not timid. They look forward to him coming.”
Prueter sometimes takes the residents small gifts, such as cake on a birthday, and
often calls them when he cannot come in.
He’s willing to help Alterra’s staff with any activities, O’Laughlin said. For
example, he helped residents make cheesecakes for Easter. He helps with gardening and crafts, and calls the bingo games each Sunday. He also helps with mail delivery, assists nurses and helps residents get ready for special trips or concerts.
Virginia Ball, an 85-year-old resident, says Prueter visits with her regularly
when he stops in. He runs and answers her phone when he hears it ringing down
the hall and helps out with other tasks. “He’ll offer to fold laundry,” she said. But
if there is nothing to do to help, Prueter will just sit in her room and chat. “He
seems to enjoy talking to older people,” Ball said.
His service at Alterra earned him an outstanding youth volunteer award from
Veterans of Foreign Wars Post 6950. Prueter wants to be in the marching band
when he moves up to Garber High School. But he says he doesn’t plan on letting
practice get in the way of his visits to Alterra. Even after high school, Prueter hopes
to continue working with the elderly by studying nursing. He says he became
interested in the field because of his volunteer work.
His dream job, he says, is working where he volunteers now.

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 156

5

6/18/12 3:10 PM

ConVERSATIon

157

4. Study: “Resume Padding” Prevalent in
College-Bound Students Who Volunteer
Dennis Chaptman
The following article appeared in 2006 in the University of Wisconsin–Madison
News, a newsletter published by the university’s communication office.

Although the rates of volunteerism among high schoolers appear to be healthy, a
study by a UW–Madison researcher suggests that “resume-padding” — not simple
altruism — may be the driving force.
Lewis Friedland, a professor of journalism and mass communication, says his
research in Madison-area high schools “calls into question some of the vibrancy
apparent in the high rate of youth volunteerism.”
“The near universality of this college resume padding really surprised me,”
Friedland says.
The high schoolers Friedland, along with sociology doctoral candidate Shauna
Morimoto and other students, interviewed held an overwhelming belief that volunteering would be a key to college admission.
“Resume padding is a symptom of the extraordinary pressure put on young
people to achieve a college education, and the very explicit understanding that a
college education is a means to a decent life in the middle class,” the study found.
Many young people said that their motive in becoming involved was to make
a stronger case to please college admissions officers — regardless of whether they
were applying to an Ivy League school, a state university or a technical college.
But Friedland notes that, despite the widespread beliefs of college-bound students, service criteria usually only come into play in truly selective schools, those
with an admissions rate of 50 percent or less.
Friedland says that civic activities are part of the expectation of high-achievers
in high school, while others recognize their more precarious position. They see that
college is within reach, but only if they perform enough of the “right” activities
outside of the classroom.
“Young people have a lot of different motivations, some altruistic, some genuinely religious, some genuinely civic. But they rarely appeared in a pure form,”
Friedland says. . . .
One implication of the study, which has yet to be proven, is that when civic
engagement and volunteerism are used to achieve a short-term goal, the long-term
effect of that activity may decline, Friedland says.
“We are faced with a generation of young people coming up in a different
world,” he says. “Their attachments are more fleeting and there is a lack of attachment that seems to pervade.”

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 157

5

10

6/18/12 3:10 PM

158

CHAPTER 4 • SynTHESIzIng SouRCES

5. from The Effects of “Mandatory Volunteerism”
on Intentions to Volunteer
Arthur Stukas, Mark Snyder, and E. Gil Clary
The following is from an article that appeared in 1999 in the professional journal Psychological Science.

Two studies suggest that community service requirements can have negative effects
on students’ intentions to volunteer freely in the future but only when students
feel that they aren’t ready to volunteer or that the requirement is too controlling.
Students who are ready to volunteer should be less influenced by requirements to
serve.
Students who were not “ready” to volunteer were less affected by the free choice
condition — that is, researchers were able to persuade them to volunteer while
making sure that they still felt that it was their free choice and they were more
likely to want to volunteer in the future than “not ready” students who had been
required. Students were just as likely to want to continue volunteering after being
required as after having a free choice to volunteer. To avoid the negative effects of
mandatory volunteer programs on students’ motivation, institutions should design
these programs to contain an element of free choice and to offer programs that
allow students to choose the type of volunteer activity they will engage in or allow
them to combine personal interests and skills with their service requirements.
Researchers found that students who initially did not want to volunteer found that
they actually enjoyed helping others if requirements were applied gently and with
their input and involvement in the process.

6. from Youth Attitudes toward Civic Education
and Community Service Requirements
Mark Hugo Lopez
The following graphs are from an academic study conducted in 2002 by the
the Center for Information and Research on Civic Learning and Engagement.

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 158

6/18/12 3:10 PM

ConVERSATIon

159

100%
90%
80%
66%

70%
60%

53%

50%
40%

45%

48% 49%

49% 48%

age 18–20

age 21–22

age 23–25

32%

30%
20%
10%
0%

age 15–17

favorable

unfavorable

Graph 1 Attitudes toward Requiring Community Service for a High School Diploma,
by Age. source: CIRCLE/Council for Excellence in government youth Survey, 2002.
100%
90%
80%
70%

70%

57%

60%

52%
46%

50%
40%

40%
30%

29%

20%
10%
0%

Educationally
Unsuccessful

Educationally Less
Successful
favorable

Educationally
Successful

unfavorable

Graph 2 Attitudes toward Requiring Community Service for a High School Diploma,
by Level of Educational Success. source: CIRCLE/Council for Excellence in government youth
Survey, 2002.

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 159

6/18/12 3:10 PM

160

CHAPTER 4 • SynTHESIzIng SouRCES

Writing a Synthesis Essay
Now that you have read the sources in this chapter’s Conversation on mandatory
community service, let’s walk through the process of synthesizing the sources and
then writing a synthesis essay. As you move from reading and analyzing the sources
to integrating them into your own writing, you will engage in a process of selection. This is often a complex step in which, ideally, you explore the individual texts
and start to see connections among them. Essential to this process is your willingness to understand each text on its own terms, even if you disagree with the ideas
or position; in fact, texts that present viewpoints different from those you initially
hold are often the ones that become most important to the development of your
argument.

Identifying the Issues: Recognizing Complexity
The fact is, you can rarely change a reader’s mind, at least not radically or immediately. Instead, what you want to aim for is a compelling argument that leaves
the reader thinking, questioning, considering, and reconsidering. To do this, you
have to acknowledge that the issue at hand is a complex one with no easy solutions
and a variety of valid perspectives on the matter. You want to present a reasonable
idea in a voice that is logical, sincere, and informed. To write a qualified argument,
you must anticipate objections to your position and recognize and respect the
complexities of your topic. A reasonable voice recognizes that there are more than
two sides to an issue — more than pro–con, which is the written equivalent of a
shouting match.
Careful reading has already revealed some of the complexities surrounding the
issue of mandatory community service in schools. Let’s explore a few.
• Source 1, the excerpt from Millennials Rising, describes what community service has meant for various generations, ranging from Selective Service in the
early twentieth century to service learning today.
• Source 2, the mission statement from the Dalton School, offers an argument
for community service based on morality and a sense of responsibility to a
community. However, the statement is from a small private school. Might
this limit its wider application?
• Source 3, “Volunteering Opens Teen’s Eyes to Nursing,” is quite positive and
possibly persuasive if you are writing in support of community service. However, it focuses on the experience of a seventh-grader, which might not be
relevant to high schools.
• Source 4, on resume padding, is a good counterexample to Source 3. It
reports on the cynical attitude of students who perform community service
specifically to bolster their college applications. Would nationwide manda-

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 160

6/18/12 3:10 PM

Writing a Synthesis Essay

161

tory community service eliminate this issue? Would it make it more difficult
for truly altruistic students to distinguish themselves?
• Source 5, on mandatory volunteerism, reports that requiring community
service may discourage future involvement, making it less likely that volunteering will become a lifelong habit. Does this finding ring true for you?
• Source 6, the graphs from Mark Hugo Lopez’s study, raise further questions
about required community service. Graph 1 shows that support for requiring such service is weakest among those currently in school and is evenly
split among those over the age of twenty-one. Does this finding suggest that
community service is “good medicine” for high school students, who will
eventually appreciate the experience? Graph 2 shows that young people with
greater levels of education (“Educationally Successful,” signifying completion
of a BA or some college work, as opposed to only a high school education)
are more likely to support a community service requirement in high schools.

Formulating Your Position
Before you formulate your position, it might be helpful to take stock of the issues.
In analyzing the texts on community service, the following issues emerge:
• Does requiring community service devalue it?
• Does requiring it discourage future participation?
• Does the positive experience that most volunteers have offset their initial
reluctance to participate?
• How does the structure of the community service program affect its perceived value? Is it part of academic study? Are there choices?
• How would making community service mandatory affect the fact that many
students volunteer for selfish reasons, namely, padding their resumes for
college?
• What values about community and education underlie a service requirement?
• Does requiring volunteer work go beyond the jurisdiction of schools? If it’s
not done during school hours, are the requirements violating students’
rights? After all, mandatory community service is a punishment for minor
criminals.
• What influence does socioeconomic status play in such a requirement? For
example, if students need to earn money in their free time, can required
community service programs be designed to accommodate them?
• How does a school system determine how many hours of service to require?
These questions — and others you might have — illustrate the complexity of the
issue and ensure that you do not develop an argument that is one-sided or polarized

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 161

6/20/12 10:13 AM

162

CHAPTER 4 • SynTHESIzIng SouRCES

between yes and no. Instead, you are now prepared to write a documented essay
that reflects the complexities surrounding the topic.
With these questions and issues in mind, you can begin to formulate a thesis,
or claim, that captures your position on the topic. Consider the following working thesis statements:
• Community service can be extremely valuable in the development of both
character and academics, but the negative effects of forcing students to
participate by making it a graduation requirement more than offset the
benefits.
• Though students may not recognize the value of community service until
later in life, high schools should require community service to instill a sense
of civic responsibility and encourage a lifelong habit of helping others.
• High schools should encourage students to participate in community service
and reward those who do so without making participation mandatory for
graduation.
• Required community service programs are beneficial to both the individuals
who participate and the communities being served, as long as students have
some choice in the type of service they engage in.
Although you might want to tailor one of these working thesis statements to use in
your essay, each one suggests a clear focus while acknowledging the complexities
of the issue.

• ACTIVITY •
Of the thesis statements above, select one you disagree with. Then, using the
readings in the Conversation on mandatory community service, find three
pieces of evidence supporting that thesis.

Framing Quotations
When writing with sources, it’s important not to simply summarize or paraphrase
the sources. You need to use the sources to strengthen your own argument. One easy
way to make sure the sources are working for you is to include a sentence or two
of explanation or commentary with each quote. You might use a lead-in sentence,
so your readers know what to look for, as is demonstrated below:
Even without a service learning requirement, today’s youth have shown that they are
enthusiastic about serving the community. Howe and Strauss indicate that five out of
six Millennials “believe their generation has the greatest duty to improve the environment” and would accept additional “civic duties” to bring about needed change.

Alternatively, you might follow a quote with a sentence or two of commentary to
remind readers of your point and how the quote reinforces it, as you see here:

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 162

6/18/12 3:10 PM

ConVERSATIon

163

The Dalton School, a small private high school, phrases it hopefully in the mission
statement, which speaks of “empowering” students and “situating our moral center.”
It continues on to argue (rather ominously) that “we must engage in community service because . . . we need our communities to survive.” The strong goals stated in this
argument are certainly attractive, but their loftiness seems far removed from what a
student might practically aim to achieve. In this regard, the Dalton School’s teaching
goals are admirable but impractical because they seem to forget the individual student.

And, of course, be careful not to represent ideas or words as your own if they
are not: give credit where it is due!

Integrating Quotations
When using multiple sources in your writing, it becomes even more important to
incorporate the quotations in a way that is both clear and interesting. You want
the transition from your own voice to others’ words and ideas to be smooth and
natural sounding. The most effective way to accomplish this is to integrate the
quotations into your own sentences. This may be a bit challenging, but the benefit is seamless prose. When you integrate quotations in this way, the reader can
follow your ideas and see the sources in the context of your argument. Be sure that
the result is a grammatically correct and syntactically fluent sentence, like this one:
Howe and Strauss indicate that five out of six Millennials “believe their generation
has the greatest duty to improve the environment” and would accept additional “civic
duties” to bring about needed change.

• ACTIVITY •
Below you will find a paragraph written using the mission statement from
the Dalton School as a source. Read the paragraph, and then revise it in order
to make more effective use of the source.
Proponents of mandatory service learning programs often argue that whether a
student chooses for himself or not, the spirit of service is important for students
to learn and for schools to teach. The Dalton School, a small private high
school, opens its mission statement by asserting, “Community Service is something that needs to be done.” The argument is that this experience “teaches us
through experience — about the relationship between empathy and responsibility, about what it takes to be part of a community, in essence, about being
human.” The strong goals of the Dalton School’s program are attractive because
they emphasize the importance of having each individual “play a role in contributing to our communities so that these communities can continue to survive
and prosper.” The contribution this experience makes to academic growth is not
the only emphasis, though it is important: “our school is a place of learning; we

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 163

6/18/12 3:10 PM

164

CHAPTER 4 • SynTHESIzIng SouRCES

need to integrate the ideals of Community Service into our academic curriculum.” The heart of the Dalton School’s program is, however, what they term the
“moral center” that “will fortify a community.” This is more than merely service;
it is “that place where we can find the values of empathy, compassion, and caring” and “is the basis for civic responsibility and the success of that community.”

Citing Sources
Since you will be quoting from several works, you have to keep track of your
sources for your reader. In timed situations, you’ll probably include only the
source number or the author’s name in parentheses after the quote or paraphrase,
like this:
Modern Americans will recognize the term “service learning,” a phrase made familiar
by the two-thirds of public schools that have integrated community service into the
educational curriculum (Howe and Strauss).

You need to cite paraphrases as well, not just direct quotes. Anytime you are using
someone else’s ideas, you must give them credit.
Another, more elegant, option is to mention the author and title of the work
in the sentence introducing or including the quote:
Howe and Strauss indicate that five out of six Millennials “believe their generation
has the greatest duty to improve the environment” and would accept additional “civic
duties” to bring about needed change.

If you are writing a more formal research paper, you will likely need to follow
MLA documentation procedures, including a Works Cited page. Ask your teacher
if you are unclear about what is required for an assignment. Guidelines for MLA
documentation appear in the back of this book.
As you go through the readings and other texts in the following chapters, you
will join conversations on a range of topics, reflecting on and integrating the ideas
of others from different times and places into your own thinking and writing.
Each chapter includes a Conversation in which you will practice this skill with a
series of texts (including visuals) related to the chapter’s theme. You should also
be aware of the conversations going on around you all the time. How do people
call on sources to reinforce their positions? And how do people enter an ongoing
conversation and move it forward?

A Sample Synthesis Essay
Following is a brief synthesis essay about community service that incorporates the
sources we have discussed. Note how the viewpoint expressed in the thesis statement remains central, with sources supplementing and supporting that view.

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 164

6/18/12 3:10 PM

ConVERSATIon

Discussion of the
evolution of the
terms — from
“service learning”
to “volunteering” —
leads up to
the thesis.

Topic Sentence #1
focuses on the
author’s first point
and makes an
assertion that will
be supported by
sources.

A second source
brings up another
dimension to the
assertion in Topic
Sentence #1.

The writer provides
several sentences of
discussion of the
source being cited.

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 165

165

Americans today will recognize the term “service learning,”
a phrase made familiar by the two-thirds of public schools that
have integrated community service into the educational curriculum
(Howe and Strauss). However, according to Neil Howe and William
Strauss’s book Millennials Rising, the term only came into our
vocabulary with the newest, or “Millennial,” generation of Americans.
In the past, people simply “volunteered.” Creating a new policy to
enforce an age-old practice seems superfluous, and studies show
that it actually discourages high school students from performing
Thesis statement
public service. Because mandating public service is unnecessary
indicates the main
and can have a negative effect on students’ attitudes, schools
argument about
should encourage students to participate in community service
making public
service mandatory.
without making it mandatory for graduation.
Even without a service learning requirement, today’s youth
have shown that they are enthusiastic about serving the community. Quotation from
Howe and Strauss indicate that five out of six Millennials “believe one source
supports the point
their generation has the greatest duty to improve the environment” made in the topic
and would accept additional “civic duties” to bring about needed
sentence.
change. Indeed, students are investing themselves in service
activities for reasons other than to fulfill a school requirement.
A Detroit News article introduces us to thirteen-year-old John
Prueter, for example, who began volunteering at an assisted-living
home when his great-grandmother became a resident there. Prueter
had “always [been] close to” his great-grandmother, and this
genuine, personal investment in his work, the article tells us, was
what made the experience meaningful for him. Prueter’s example
demonstrates that the most beneficial service experiences — for
the individual and the community — are those that students can and Topic Sentence #2
raises a second
do choose for themselves.
point — that is,
It has also been shown that making public service compulsory the negative
consequences of
can extinguish the natural spirit of volunteerism. According to
“making public
two studies published in the journal Psychological Science, harsh
service
requirements mandating community service “can have negative effects compulsory.”
on students’ intentions to volunteer freely in the future.” The
same studies also found that students were more likely to volunteer
in the future if they began volunteering out of “free choice.”
Furthermore, the sense that service learning is “required” not only
to graduate high school but to get into a good college has driven
many students to volunteer out of self-interest rather than altruism.
“Many young people said that their motive in becoming involved
was to make a stronger case to please college admissions officers,”

6/18/12 3:10 PM

166

CHAPTER 4 • SynTHESIzIng SouRCES

Second source
reported an article in the University of Wisconsin–Madison News.
High schools should not support this distorted mind-set by explicitly supporting the
topic sentence. The
requiring public service; rather, they should allow authentic enthusiasm writer integrates
and encourage service projects of the students’ own choosing.
quotations into her
own sentences.
Proponents
of
mandatory
service
learning
programs
may
Topic Sentence #3
raises a argue that whether a student chooses it for himself or not, the spirit
counterargument. of service is important to learn and to teach. The Dalton School, a
small private high school, phrases it hopefully in the mission
statement, which speaks of “empowering” students and “situating
our moral center.” It continues on to argue (rather ominously) that
“we must engage in community service because . . . we need our
communities to survive.” The strong goals stated in this argument The opening clause is
a concession to the
are certainly attractive, but their loftiness seems far removed from counterargument.
what a student might practically aim to achieve. In this regard,
The last two the Dalton School’s teaching goals are admirable but impractical
sentences
because they seem to forget the individual student. And as Prueter’s
refute the
counterargument. case demonstrates, individual interest and personal investment are
essential for service experiences to truly last.
On both sides of the debate, we should agree that the
The conclusion
ultimate goal of “service learning” is precisely that — teaching an opens with
common ground.
experience that will last. Even the Dalton School admits to the
reality of school as a stop along the way to what happens when
The concluding
The writer returns to “an individual goes out in the world.” The issue thus concerns not paragraph answers
two of her sources just how to get students started volunteering, but how to maintain the “so what?”
to emphasize the that desire to serve. At thirteen, John Prueter already knows that question. The writer
importance of
“his dream job . . . is working where he volunteers now.” His story, goes beyond simple
choice in
repetition of the
community service along with the data supporting “free choice” in service projects,
thesis. Note that
activities. proves that the surest way to have students volunteer in the future the writer returns to
the terminology —
is to allow them experiences that are personally valuable. Those
experiences will come not from any heavy-handed school requirement, “service learning” —
from the opening
but from support and, most important, the freedom of choice.
paragraph.

Culminating Conversation
The Dumbest Generation?
Students today live and learn in a world with vastly more complex technology than
that of previous generations. Many people see this new technology as a way to
expand and distribute knowledge. They call it the information age. Others lament

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 166

6/18/12 3:10 PM

CuLmInATIng ConVERSATIon

167

the constant distractions that accompany this onslaught of information. But, of
course, there is a long tradition of critics bemoaning the harmful effects of technological change on younger generations. In his best-selling book The Dumbest
Generation, social critic and professor Mark Bauerlein claims that — as his book’s
title suggests — those under age thirty constitute the “dumbest” generation in modern history. In his explanation of why he wrote the book, Bauerlein says, “I’ve
noticed in the last ten years that students are no less intelligent, no less ambitious,
but there are two big differences: Reading habits have slipped, along with general
knowledge. You can quote me on this: You guys don’t know anything.”
Carefully read the following eight sources, including the introductory information for each source. Then synthesize information from at least three of the
sources, and incorporate it into a coherent, well-developed essay that evaluates
the claim that those under age thirty are “the dumbest generation.”
Make sure that your own argument is central; use the sources to illustrate
and support your reasoning. Avoid merely summarizing the sources. Indicate
clearly which sources you are drawing from, whether through direct quotation,
paraphrase, or summary. You may cite the sources as Source 1, Source 2, and so
on, or by putting the author’s name in parentheses.

Sources
1. Mark Bauerlein, The Dumbest Generation
2. Sharon Begley, The Dumbest Generation? Don’t Be Dumb
3. Mizuko Ito et al., Living and Learning with New Media: Summary of Findings
from the Digital Youth Project
4. Nicholas Carr, Is Google Making Us Stupid?
5. R. Smith Simpson, Are We Getting Our Share of the Best?
6. Steven Johnson, Your Brain on Video Games
7. Clive Thompson, The New Literacy
8. Roz Chast, Shelved (cartoon)

1. The Dumbest Generation
Mark Bauerlein
The following is excerpted from a 2008 book about the effects of digital media
on young people by mark Bauerlein, an English professor and researcher at
Emory university.

This is the paradox of the Dumbest Generation. For the young American, life has
never been so yielding, goods so plentiful, schooling so accessible, diversion so easy,
and liberties so copious. The material gains are clear, and each year the traits of
worldliness and autonomy seem to trickle down into ever-younger age groups.
But it’s a shallow advent. As the survey research shows, knowledge and skills haven’t

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 167

6/18/12 3:10 PM

168

CHAPTER 4 • SynTHESIzIng SouRCES

kept pace, and the intellectual habits that complement them are slipping. The advantages of twenty-first century teen life keep expanding, the eighties and nineties
economy and the digital revolution providing miraculously quick and effortless
contact with information, wares, amusements, and friends. The mind should profit
alongside the youthful ego, the thirst for knowledge satisfied as much as the craving for fun and status. But the enlightenment hasn’t happened. Young Americans
have much more access and education than their parents did, but in the 2007 Pew
survey on “What Americans Know: 1989–2007,” 56 percent of 18- to 29-year-olds
possessed low knowledge levels, while only 22 percent of 50- to 64-year-olds did.
In other words, the advantages don’t show up in intellectual outcomes. The mental
equipment of the young falls short of their media, money, e-gadgets, and career
plans. The 18-year-old may have a Visa card, cell phone, MySpace page, part-time
job, PlayStation 2, and an admissions letter from State U., but ask this wired and
on-the-go high school senior a few intellectual questions and the façade of in-theknow-ness crumbles.

2. The Dumbest Generation? Don’t Be Dumb
Sharon Begley
The following is excerpted from an article by science columnist Sharon Begley
that appeared in Newsweek in may 2010.

A more fundamental problem is what Bauerlein has in mind by “dumbest.” If it
means “holding the least knowledge,” then he has a case. Gen Y cares less about
knowing information than knowing where to find information. . . . And it is a
travesty that employers are spending $1.3 billion a year to teach basic writing
skills, as a 2003 survey of managers found. But if dumb means lacking such fundamental cognitive capacities as the ability to think critically and logically, to analyze an argument, to learn and remember, to see analogies, to distinguish fact from
opinion . . . well, here Bauerlein is on shakier ground.
First, IQ scores in every country that measures them, including the United
States, have been rising since the 1930s. Since the tests measure not knowledge
but pure thinking capacity — what cognitive scientists call fluid intelligence, in
that it can be applied to problems in any domain — then Gen Y’s ignorance of
facts (or of facts that older people think are important) reflects not dumbness but
choice. And who’s to say they are dumb because fewer of them than of their grandparents’ generation care who wrote the oratorio “Messiah” (which 35 percent of
college seniors knew in 2002, compared with 56 percent in 1955)? Similarly, we
suspect that the decline in the percentage of college freshmen who say it’s important to keep up with political affairs, from 60 percent in 1966 to 36 percent in
2005, reflects at least in part the fact that in 1966 politics determined whether you

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 168

6/18/12 3:10 PM

CuLmInATIng ConVERSATIon

169

were going to get drafted and shipped to Vietnam. The apathy of 2005 is more a
reflection of the world outside Gen-Yers’ heads than inside, and one that we bet
has changed tack with the historic candidacy of Barack Obama. Alienation is not
dumbness.
Bauerlein is not the first scholar to pin the blame for a younger generation’s
intellectual shortcomings on new technology (television, anyone?), in this case
indicting “the digital age.” But there is no empirical evidence that being immersed
in instant messaging, texting, iPods, videogames and all things online impairs thinking ability. “The jury is still out on whether these technologies are positive or
negative” for cognition, says Ken Kosik of the University of California, Santa Barbara, codirector of the Neuroscience Research Institute there. “But they’re definitely changing how people’s brains process information.” In fact, basic principles
of neuroscience offer reasons to be optimistic. “We are gradually changing from a
nation of callused hands to a nation of agile brains,” says cognitive scientist Marcel
Just of Carnegie Mellon University. “Insofar as new information technology exercises our minds and provides more information, it has to be improving thinking
ability.”

3. Living and Learning with New Media: Summary
of Findings from the Digital Youth Project
Mizuko Ito et al.
The following is excerpted from a 2008 study of the effects of digital media on
young people.

In both friendship-driven and interest-driven online activity, youth create and navigate new forms of expression and rules for social behavior. In the process, young
people acquire various forms of technical and media literacy by exploring new interests, tinkering, and “messing around” with new forms of media. They may start
with a Google search or “lurk” in chat rooms to learn more about their burgeoning
interest. Through trial and error, youth add new media skills to their repertoire,
such as how to create a video or customize games or their MySpace page. Teens
then share their creations and receive feedback from others online. By its immediacy and breadth of information, the digital world lowers barriers to self-directed
learning.
Others “geek out” and dive into a topic or talent. Contrary to popular images,
geeking out is highly social and engaged, although usually not driven primarily
by local friendships. Youth turn instead to specialized knowledge groups of both
teens and adults from around the country or world, with the goal of improving
their craft and gaining reputation among expert peers. What makes these groups
unique is that while adults participate, they are not automatically the resident experts

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 169

6/18/12 3:10 PM

170

CHAPTER 4 • SynTHESIzIng SouRCES

by virtue of their age. Geeking out in many respects erases the traditional markers
of status and authority.
New media allow for a degree of freedom and autonomy for youth that is less
apparent in a classroom setting. Youth respect one another’s authority online, and
they are often more motivated to learn from peers than from adults. Their efforts
are also largely self-directed, and the outcome emerges through exploration, in contrast to classroom learning that is oriented toward set, predefined goals.

4. Is Google Making Us Stupid?
Nicholas Carr
The following is from an article in the summer 2008 issue of the Atlantic, a
national magazine.

Over the past few years I’ve had an uncomfortable sense that someone, or something, has been tinkering with my brain, remapping the neural circuitry, reprogramming the memory. My mind isn’t going — so far as I can tell — but it’s changing.
I’m not thinking the way I used to think. I can feel it most strongly when I’m
reading. Immersing myself in a book or a lengthy article used to be easy. My mind
would get caught up in the narrative or the turns of the argument, and I’d spend
hours strolling through long stretches of prose. That’s rarely the case anymore. Now
my concentration often starts to drift after two or three pages. I get fidgety, lose
the thread, begin looking for something else to do. I feel as if I’m always dragging
my wayward brain back to the text. The deep reading that used to come naturally
has become a struggle.
I think I know what’s going on. For more than a decade now, I’ve been spending a lot of time online, searching and surfing and sometimes adding to the great
databases of the Internet. The Web has been a godsend to me as a writer. Research
that once required days in the stacks or periodical rooms of libraries can now be
done in minutes. A few Google searches, some quick clicks on hyperlinks, and I’ve
got the telltale fact or pithy quote I was after. Even when I’m not working, I’m as
likely as not to be foraging in the Web’s info-thickets reading and writing e-mails,
scanning headlines and blog posts, watching videos and listening to podcasts, or
just tripping from link to link to link. (Unlike footnotes, to which they’re sometimes likened, hyperlinks don’t merely point to related works; they propel you
toward them.)
For me, as for others, the Net is becoming a universal medium, the conduit for
most of the information that flows through my eyes and ears and into my mind.
The advantages of having immediate access to such an incredibly rich store of
information are many, and they’ve been widely described and duly applauded.
“The perfect recall of silicon memory,” Wired’s Clive Thompson has written, “can
be an enormous boon to thinking.” But that boon comes at a price. As the media

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 170

6/18/12 3:10 PM

CuLmInATIng ConVERSATIon

171

theorist Marshall McLuhan pointed out in the 1960s, media are not just passive
channels of information. They supply the stuff of thought, but they also shape the
process of thought. And what the Net seems to be doing is chipping away my
capacity for concentration and contemplation. My mind now expects to take in
information the way the Net distributes it: in a swiftly moving stream of particles.
Once I was a scuba diver in the sea of words. Now I zip along the surface like a guy
on a Jet Ski.

5. Are We Getting Our Share of the Best?
R. Smith Simpson
The following is excerpted from a 1962 article in the u.S. government’s Foreign
Service Journal.

My initial surprise was to find among the candidates an abysmal ignorance of so
elementary a subject as the geography of the United States. Few could even place
accurately the principal rivers: one with so descriptive a name as the Ohio was
not infrequently identified as being “somewhere west of the Mississippi.” Few
could name the principal seaports, and, of course, any requirement demanding
such detailed familiarity with this country as identifying the states comprising
the “wheat belt” or the “corn belt” was completely beyond the average candidate’s
depth.
As to elementary economics and social data, most could only guess at the
population, labor force, and gross national product of their country. Many did
not know what constituted “gross national product.” They had no clear idea as to
the principal products of their country, nor as to its exports and imports. They
could name a few of each, but had no notion of their relative importance and had
given no thought to the role of imports in the American economy.
As with elementary geographic and economic aspects of the United States, so
with historical, sociological, and cultural. Americans abroad are asked a great many
questions about their country. How did the United States acquire the Panama
Canal? What is its status now? Who started our war with Spain (or Mexico) and
what came out of it? When did our labor movement start and where does it stand
now? How does a Jimmy Hoffa get control of a powerful union? What were some
of the reform movements in American history? What became of them?
A good half of our candidates could answer such questions with only the thinnest recital of facts; many could not discuss them at all. Some could not recall ever
having heard of the Populist movement; few knew its connection with Woodrow
Wilson’s “New Freedom.” Asked if he knew anything about the Progressive movement, one candidate replied, “Oh, yes, that was LaFollette’s movement.” To the
question, “Where did LaFollette come from?” he could only reply vaguely, “Somewhere out West.”

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 171

6/18/12 3:10 PM

172

CHAPTER 4 • SynTHESIzIng SouRCES

6. Your Brain on Video Games
Steven Johnson
The following is excerpted from an article in the July 2005 issue of Discover,
a popular science magazine.

To understand why games might be good for the mind, begin by shedding the
cliché that they are about improving hand-eye coordination and firing virtual
weapons. The majority of video games on the best-seller list contain no more
bloodshed than a game of Risk. The most popular games are not simply difficult
in the sense of challenging manual dexterity; they challenge mental dexterity as
well. The best-selling game of all time, The Sims, involves almost no hand-eye coordination or quick reflexes. One manages a household of characters, each endowed
with distinct drives and personality traits, each cycling through an endless series
of short-term needs (companionship, say, or food), each enmeshed in a network
of relationships with other characters. Playing the game is a nonstop balancing
act: sending one character off to work, cleaning the kitchen with another, searching through the classifieds for work with another. Even a violent game like Grand
Theft Auto involves networks of characters that the player must navigate and
master, picking up clues and detecting patterns. The text walk-through for Grand
Theft Auto III — a document that describes all the variables involved in playing
the game through to the finish — is 53,000 words long, the length of a short novel.
But despite the complexity of these environments, most gamers eschew reading
manuals or walk-throughs altogether, preferring to feel their way through the
game space. . . .
Among all popular media today, video games are unique in their reliance on
the regime of competence principle. Movies or television shows don’t start out
with simple dialogue or narrative structures and steadily build in complexity
depending on the aptitude of individual viewers. Books don’t pause midchapter
to confirm that their readers’ vocabularies have progressed enough to move on to
more complicated words. By contrast, the training structure of video games dates
back to the very origins of the medium; even Pong got more challenging as a
player’s skills improved. Moreover, only a fraction of today’s games involve
explicit violence, and sexual content is a rarity. But the regime of competence is
everywhere.

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 172

6/18/12 3:10 PM

CuLmInATIng ConVERSATIon

173

7. The New Literacy
Clive Thompson
The following is excerpted from the August 2009 issue of Wired, a popular technology magazine.

As the school year begins, be ready to hear pundits fretting once again about how
kids today can’t write — and technology is to blame. Facebook encourages narcissistic blabbering, video and PowerPoint have replaced carefully crafted essays, and
texting has dehydrated language into “bleak, bald, sad shorthand” (as University
College of London English professor John Sutherland has moaned). An age of illiteracy is at hand, right?
Andrea Lunsford isn’t so sure. Lunsford is a professor of writing and rhetoric
at Stanford University, where she has organized a mammoth project called the
Stanford Study of Writing to scrutinize college students’ prose. From 2001 to 2006,
she collected 14,672 student writing samples — everything from in-class assignments, formal essays, and journal entries to emails, blog posts, and chat sessions.
Her conclusions are stirring.
“I think we’re in the midst of a literacy revolution the likes of which we
haven’t seen since Greek civilization,” she says. For Lunsford, technology isn’t killing our ability to write. It’s reviving it — and pushing our literacy in bold new
directions.
The first thing she found is that young people today write far more than any
generation before them. That’s because so much socializing takes place online,
and it almost always involves text. Of all the writing that the Stanford students
did, a stunning 38 percent of it took place out of the classroom — life writing, as
Lunsford calls it. Those Twitter updates and lists of 25 things about yourself add up.
It’s almost hard to remember how big a paradigm shift this is. Before the
Internet came along, most Americans never wrote anything, ever, that wasn’t a
school assignment. Unless they got a job that required producing text (like in law,
advertising, or media), they’d leave school and virtually never construct a paragraph again.
But is this explosion of prose good, on a technical level? Yes. Lunsford’s team
found that the students were remarkably adept at what rhetoricians call kairos —
assessing their audience and adapting their tone and technique to best get their
point across. The modern world of online writing, particularly in chat and on
discussion threads, is conversational and public, which makes it closer to the
Greek tradition of argument than the asynchronous letter and essay writing of
50 years ago.

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 173

6/18/12 3:10 PM

174

CHAPTER 4 • SynTHESIzIng SouRCES

8. Shelved
Roz Chast
The following cartoon appeared on the cover of the New Yorker in october
2010.

(See insert for color version.)

04_SHE_67650_Ch04_145_174.indd 174

6/18/12 3:10 PM

5
Education
To what extent do our schools serve the goals
of a true education?

E

ducation is a concept as difficult to define as it is essential to our identity.
What makes a person educated? Is a skilled artisan with no formal schooling educated? Is a wise grandmother with eighty years of life experience but only
a third-grade education educated? Is Bill Gates, who dropped out of Harvard as a
junior to found Microsoft, more or less educated than his classmates who stayed
in school? When we are seeking education, are we looking for knowledge, wisdom,
skills, or all three?
Describing the purpose of education raises even more questions. Is it to prepare
citizens to participate in a democracy? Is it to teach practical skills for the workforce? Or is it to make us more knowledgeable about ourselves and our culture —
to know, in the words of the British poet Matthew Arnold, “the best that is known
and thought in the world”?
Even Arnold’s focus begs several questions: What is “best”? How do we balance
what the American educator John Dewey called “mechanical efficiency” with a
deep understanding of “democratic ideals”? Should schools impart values as well
as knowledge? Do mainstream ideas take precedence over the concerns of individual groups?
Such philosophical questions are often lost in the practical realities of schooling. Advocates of accountability are prescribing more standardized testing, while
critics are sounding alarms about the negative effects. We are far from agreement
about the best way to teach and learn, tasks made even more challenging by the
demands of the international marketplace. What information and skills do students
need to compete in a global economy?
The selections in this chapter explore many of these issues. They ask how
choices of required reading affect students and whether the humdrum routine of
drill contributes to an education. The writers give us an insider’s view of what it
means to feel excluded from mainstream education by attitude, textbooks, economics, or choice. They discuss how schools in the United States compare with
those in other countries. And they ask whether the American high school is obsolete. Together, they lead us to reflect on what education means and whether — and
how — our schools embody that vision.

175

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 175

6/18/12 3:11 PM

I Know Why the Caged Bird Cannot Read
How American High School Students
Learn to Loathe Literature

Francine Prose
Francine Prose, who was born in the late 1940s, is a reporter, essayist,
critic, and editor. She has also written more than twenty books, including poetry, fiction, and children’s literature. Her novel Blue Angel (2000)
was a finalist for the National Book Award, and her nonfiction works
The Lives of the Muses: Nine Women and the Artists They Inspired
(2002) and Reading Like a Writer: A Guide for People Who Love Books
and Those Who Want to Write Them (2006) were both national best
sellers. She has received numerous grants and awards, including
Guggenheim and Fulbright fellowships. She is most recently the author of the satiric
novel My New American Life (2011). Prose is currently a book reviewer for a number of magazines and periodicals, including the New York Times Book Review and
O. The following essay, published in Harper’s in September 1999, is a critique of the
quality of required reading in American high schools.

Books discussed in this essay include:
I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings by Maya Angelou. Bantam Books, 1983.
To Kill a Mockingbird by Harper Lee. Warner Books, 1988.
Teaching Values through Teaching Literature by Margaret Dodson.
Eric/Edinfo Press, 1993.
Teaching the Novel by Becky Alano. Eric/Edinfo Press, 1989.
Teaching Literature by Women Authors by Carolyn Smith McGowen.
Eric/Edinfo Press, 1993.

L

ike most parents who have, against all odds, preserved a lively and still evolving passion for good books, I find myself, each September, increasingly
appalled by the dismal lists of texts that my sons are doomed to waste a school
year reading. What I get as compensation is a measure of insight into why our
society has come to admire Montel Williams and Ricki Lake so much more than
Dante and Homer. Given the dreariness with which literature is taught in many
American classrooms, it seems miraculous that any sentient teenager would view
reading as a source of pleasure. Traditionally, the love of reading has been born
and nurtured in high school English class — the last time many students will find
themselves in a roomful of people who have all read the same text and are, in
theory, prepared to discuss it. High school — even more than college — is where
literary tastes and allegiances are formed: what we read in adolescence is imprinted
on our brains as the dreary notions of childhood crystallize into hard data.

176

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 176

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ProSe • i kNow wHy THe cAGed Bird cANNoT reAd

177

The intense loyalty adults harbor for books first encountered in youth is one
probable reason for the otherwise baffling longevity of vintage mediocre novels,
books that teachers may themselves have read in adolescence; it is also the most
plausible explanation for the peculiar [1998] Modern Library list of the “100 Best
Novels of the 20th Century,” a roster dominated by robust survivors from the tenthgrade syllabus. Darkness at Noon, Lord of the Flies, Brave New World, and The
Studs Lonigan Trilogy all speak, in various ways, to the vestigial teenage psyches of
men of a certain age. The parallel list drawn up by students (younger, more of
them female) in the Radcliffe Publishing Course reflects the equally romantic and
tacky tastes (Gone with the Wind, The Fountainhead) of a later generation of adolescent girls.
Given the fact that these early encounters with literature leave such indelible
impressions, it would seem doubly important to make sure that high school students are actually reading literature. Yet every opportunity to instill adolescents
with a lifelong affinity for narrative, for the ways in which the vision of an artist
can percolate through an idiosyncratic use of language, and for the supple gymnastics of a mind that exercises the mind of the reader is being squandered on
regimens of trash and semi-trash, taught for reasons that have nothing to do with
how well a book is written. In fact, less and less attention is being paid to what
has been written, let alone how; it’s become a rarity for a teacher to suggest that
a book might be a work of art composed of words and sentences, or that the
choice of these words and sentences can inform and delight us. We hear that more
books are being bought and sold than ever before, yet no one, as far as I know, is
arguing that we are producing and becoming a nation of avid readers of serious
literature.
Much has been made of the lemminglike fervor with which our universities
have rushed to sacrifice complexity for diversity; for decades now, critics have
decried our plummeting scholastic standards and mourned the death of cultural
literacy without having done one appreciable thing to raise the educational bar or
revive our moribund culture. Meanwhile, scant notice has been paid, except by exasperated parents, to the missed opportunities and misinformation that form the
true curriculum of so many high school English classes.
My own two sons, now twenty-one and seventeen, have read (in public and private schools) Shakespeare, Hawthorne, and Melville. But they’ve also slogged repeatedly through the manipulative melodramas of Alice Walker and Maya Angelou,
through sentimental, middlebrow favorites (To Kill a Mockingbird and A Separate
Peace), the weaker novels of John Steinbeck, the fantasies of Ray Bradbury. My older
son spent the first several weeks of sophomore English discussing the class’s summer assignment, Ordinary People, a weeper and former bestseller by Judith Guest
about a “dysfunctional” family recovering from a teenage son’s suicide attempt.
Neither has heard a teacher suggest that he read Kafka, though one might
suppose that teenagers might enjoy the transformative science-fiction aspects of

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 177

5

6/18/12 3:11 PM

178

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

The Metamorphosis, a story about a young man so alienated from his “dysfunctional” family that he turns — embarrassingly for them — into a giant beetle. No
instructor has ever asked my sons to read Alice Munro, who writes so lucidly and
beautifully about the hypersensitivity that makes adolescence a hell.
In the hope of finding out that my children and my friends’ children were exceptionally unfortunate, I recently collected eighty or so reading lists from high
schools throughout the country. Because of how overworked teachers are, how
hard to reach during the school day, as well as the odd, paranoid defensiveness that
pervades so many schools, obtaining these documents seemed to require more
time and dogged perseverance than obtaining one’s FBI surveillance files — and
what I came away with may not be a scientifically accurate survey. Such surveys
have been done by the National Council of Teachers of English (published in the
1993 NCTE research report, Literature in the Secondary Schools), with results that
both underline and fail to reflect what I found.
What emerges from these photocopied pages distributed in public, private,
and Catholic schools as well as in military academies, in Manhattan and Denver, in
rural Oregon and urban Missouri, is a numbing sameness, unaffected by geography,
region, or community size. Nearly every list contains at least one of Shakespeare’s
plays. Indeed, in the NCTE report, Shakespeare (followed closely by John Steinbeck)
tops the rosters of “Ten Most Frequently Required Authors of Book-Length Works,
Grades 9–12.”
Yet in other genres — fiction and memoir — the news is far more upsetting. On
the lists sampled, Harper Lee’s To Kill a Mockingbird and Maya Angelou’s I Know
Why the Caged Bird Sings are among the titles that appear most often, a grisly fact
that in itself should inspire us to examine the works that dominate our children’s
literary education.
First published in 1970, I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings is what we have since
learned to recognize as a “survivor” memoir, a first-person narrative of victimization and recovery. Angelou transports us to her childhood in segregated Arkansas,
where she was raised by her grandmother and was mostly content, despite the
unpleasantness of her white neighbors, until, after a move to St. Louis, eight-yearold Maya was raped by her mother’s boyfriend.
One can see why this memoir might appeal to the lazy or uninspired teacher,
who can conduct the class as if the students were the studio audience for Angelou’s
guest appearance on Oprah. The author’s frequently vented distrust of white society might rouse even the most sluggish or understandably disaffected ninth-graders
to join a discussion of racism; her victory over poverty and abuse can be used to
address what one fan, in a customer book review on Amazon.com, celebrated as
“transcending that pain, drawing from it deeper levels of meaning about being
truly human and truly alive.” Many chapters end with sententious epigrams virtually begging to serve as texts for sophomoric rumination on such questions as:
What does Angelou mean when she writes, “If growing up is painful for the South-

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 178

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ProSe • i kNow wHy THe cAGed Bird cANNoT reAd

179

ern Black girl, being aware of her displacement is rust on the razor that threatens
the throat”?
But much more terrifying than the prospect of Angelou’s pieties being dissected for their deeper meaning is the notion of her language being used as a
model of “poetic” prose style. Many of the terrible mysteries that confront teachers of college freshman composition can be solved simply by looking at Angelou’s
writing. Who told students to combine a dozen mixed metaphors in one paragraph? Consider a typical passage from Angelou’s opaque prose: “Weekdays revolved
on a sameness wheel. They turned into themselves so steadily and inevitably that
each seemed to be the original of yesterday’s rough draft. Saturdays, however, always
broke the mold and dared to be different.” Where do students learn to write stale,
inaccurate similes? “The man’s dead words fell like bricks around the auditorium
and too many settled in my belly.” Who seriously believes that murky, turgid, convoluted language of this sort constitutes good writing? “Youth and social approval
allied themselves with me and we trammeled memories of slights and insults. The
wind of our swift passage remodeled my features. Lost tears were pounded to mud
and then to dust. Years of withdrawal were brushed aside and left behind, as hanging ropes of parasitic moss.”
To hold up this book as a paradigm of memoir, of thought — of literature —
is akin to inviting doctors convicted of malpractice to instruct our medical students.
If we want to use Angelou’s work to educate our kids, let’s invite them to parse her
language, sentence by sentence; ask them precisely what it means and ask why one
would bother obscuring ideas that could be expressed so much more simply and
felicitously.
Narrated affably enough by a nine-year-old girl named Scout, To Kill a Mockingbird is the perennially beloved and treacly account of growing up in a small
Southern town during the Depression. Its hero is Scout’s father, the saintly Atticus
Finch, a lawyer who represents everything we cherish about justice and democracy and the American Way, and who defends a black man falsely accused of rape
by a poor white woman. The novel has a shadow hero, too, the descriptively named
Boo Radley, a gooney recluse who becomes the occasion for yet another lesson in
tolerance and compassion.
Such summary reduces the book, but not by all that much. To read the novel
is, for most, an exercise in wish-fulfillment and self-congratulation, a chance to
consider thorny issues of race and prejudice from a safe distance and with the
comfortable certainty that the reader would never harbor the racist attitudes
espoused by the lowlifes in the novel. We (the readers) are Scout, her childhood is
our childhood, and Atticus Finch is our brave, infinitely patient American Daddy.
And that creepy big guy living alone in the scary house turns out to have been
watching over us with protective benevolent attention.
Maya Angelou and Harper Lee are not the only authors on the lists. The other
most popular books are The Great Gatsby, The Scarlet Letter, The Adventures of
Huckleberry Finn, and The Catcher in the Rye. John Steinbeck (The Pearl, Of Mice

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 179

15

6/18/12 3:11 PM

180

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

and Men, The Red Pony, The Grapes of Wrath) and Toni Morrison (Song of Solomon,
Sula, The Bluest Eye, Beloved) are the writers — after Shakespeare — represented
by the largest number of titles. Also widely studied are the novels of more dubious
literary merit: John Knowles’s A Separate Peace, William Golding’s Lord of the Flies,
Elie Wiesel’s Night, and Ray Bradbury’s Fahrenheit 451, Dandelion Wine, The October Country, and Something Wicked This Way Comes. Trailing behind these favorites, Orwell (Nineteen Eighty-Four and Animal Farm) is still being read, as are the
Brontës (Wuthering Heights and Jane Eyre).
How astonishing then that students exposed to such a wide array of masterpieces and competent middlebrow entertainments are not mobbing their libraries and bookstores, demanding heady diets of serious or semi-serious fiction! And
how puzzling that I should so often find myself teaching bright, eager college undergraduate and graduate students, would-be writers handicapped not merely by
how little literature they have read but by their utter inability to read it; many are
nearly incapable of doing the close line-by-line reading necessary to disclose the
most basic information in a story by Henry James or a seemingly more straightforward one by Katherine Mansfield or Paul Bowles.
The explanation, it turns out, lies in how these books, even the best of them,
are being presented in the classroom. My dogged search for reading lists flushed
out, in addition to the lists themselves, course descriptions, teaching guides, and
anecdotes that reveal how English literature is being taught to high school students.
Only rarely do teachers propose that writing might be worth reading closely.
Instead, students are informed that literature is principally a vehicle for the soporific moral blather they suffer daily from their parents. The present vogue for
teaching “values” through literature uses the novel as a springboard for the sort of
discussion formerly conducted in civics or ethics classes — areas of study that, in
theory, have been phased out of the curriculum but that, in fact, have been
retained and cleverly substituted for what we used to call English. English — and
everything about it that is inventive, imaginative, or pleasurable — is beside the
point in classrooms, as is everything that constitutes style and that distinguishes
writers, one from another, as precisely as fingerprints or DNA mapping.
The question is no longer what the writer has written but rather who the
writer is — specifically, what ethnic group or gender identity an author represents.
A motion passed by the San Francisco Board of Education in March 1998 mandates that “works of literature read in class in grades nine to eleven by each high
school student must include works by writers of color which reflect the diversity
of culture, race, and class of the students of the San Francisco Unified School
District. . . . The writers who are known to be lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender, shall be appropriately identified in the curriculum.” Meanwhile, aesthetic
beauty — felicitous or accurate language, images, rhythm, wit, the satisfaction of
recognizing something in fiction that seems fresh and true — is simply too frivolous, suspect, and elitist even to mention.
Thus the fragile To Kill a Mockingbird is freighted with tons of sociopolitical
ballast. A “Collaborative Program Planning Record of Learning Experience,” which

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 180

20

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ProSe • i kNow wHy THe cAGed Bird cANNoT reAd

181

I obtained from the Internet, outlines the “overall goal” of teaching the book (“To
understand problems relating to discrimination and prejudice that exist in our
present-day society. To understand and apply these principles to our own lives”)
and suggests topics for student discussion: “What type of people make up your
community? Is there any group of people . . . a person (NO NAMES PLEASE) or
type of person in your community that you feel uncomfortable around?”
A description of “The Family in Literature,” an elective offered by the Princeton Day School — a course including works by Sophocles and Eugene O’Neill —
begins: “Bruce Springsteen once tried to make us believe that ‘No one can break
the ties that bind / You can’t for say-yay-yay-yay-yay-yay-yake the ties that bind.’ He
has since divorced his wife and married his back-up singer. So what are these ties
and just how strong are they, after all?” With its chilling echoes of New Age psychobabble, Margaret Dodson’s Teaching Values through Teaching Literature, a sourcebook for high school English teachers, informs us that the point of Steinbeck’s Of
Mice and Men is “to show how progress has been made in the treatment of the
mentally disadvantaged, and that more and better roles in society are being devised
for them [and to] establish that mentally retarded people are human beings with
the same needs and feelings that everyone else experiences.”
An eighth-grader studying Elie Wiesel’s overwrought Night in a class taught
by a passionate gay-rights advocate came home with the following notes: “Many
Jews killed during the Holocaust, but many many homosexuals murdered by Nazis.
Pink triangle — Silence equals death.”
It’s cheering that so many lists include The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn —
but not when we discover that this moving, funny novel is being taught not as a
work of art but as a piece of damning evidence against that bigot, Mark Twain. A
friend’s daughter’s English teacher informed a group of parents that the only reason to study Huckleberry Finn was to decide whether it was a racist text. Instructors consulting Teaching Values through Teaching Literature will have resolved this
debate long before they walk into the classroom to supervise “a close reading of
Huckleberry Finn that will reveal the various ways in which Twain undercuts Jim’s
humanity: in the minstrel routines with Huck as the ‘straight man’; in generalities
about Blacks as unreliable, primitive and slow-witted. . . .”
Luckily for the teacher and students required to confront this fictional equivalent of a minstrel show, Mark Twain can be rehabilitated — that is to say, revised.
In classes that sound like test screenings used to position unreleased Hollywood
films, focus groups in which viewers are invited to choose among variant endings,
students are polled for possible alternatives to Huck’s and Tom Sawyer’s actions —
should Tom have carried out his plan to “free” Jim? — and asked to speculate on
what the fictional characters might have or should have done to become better
people and atone for the sins of their creators.
In the most unintentionally hilarious of these lesson plans, a chapter entitled
“Ethan Frome: An Avoidable Tragedy,” Dodson warns teachers to expect resistance to their efforts to reform Wharton’s characters and thus improve her novel’s
outcome: “Students intensely dislike the mere suggestion that Ethan should have

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 181

25

6/18/12 3:11 PM

182

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

honored his commitment to Zeena and encouraged Mattie to date Dennie Eady,
yet this would surely have demonstrated greater love than the suicide attempt.”
Thus another puzzle confronting college and even graduate school instructors —
Why do students so despise dead writers? — is partly explained by the adversarial
stance that these sourcebooks adopt toward authors of classic texts. Teachers are
counseled “to help students rise above Emerson’s style of stating an idea bluntly,
announcing reservations, and sometimes even negating the original idea” and to
present “a method of contrasting the drab, utilitarian prose of Nineteen Eighty-four
with a lyric poem ‘To a Darkling Thrush,’ by Thomas Hardy.” Why not mention
that such works have been read for years — for a reason! — and urge students to figure out what that reason is? Doesn’t it seem less valuable to read Emily Dickinson’s
work as the brain-damaged mumblings of a demented agoraphobic than to approach
the subject of Dickinson, as Richard Sewell suggests in his biography of her, on
our knees? No one’s suggesting that canonical writers should be immune to criticism. Dickens’s anti-Semitism, Tolstoy’s overly romantic ideas about the peasantry, Kipling’s racism, are all problematic, and merit discussion. But to treat the
geniuses of the past as naughty children, amenable to reeducation by the children
of the present, evokes the educational theory of the Chinese Revolution.
No wonder students are rarely asked to consider what was actually written by
these hopeless racists and sociopaths. Instead, they’re told to write around the
books, or, better yet, write their own books. Becky Alano’s depressing Teaching the
Novel advises readers of Sylvia Plath’s The Bell Jar to construct a therapeutic evaluation of its suicidal heroine (“Do you think she is ready to go home? What is your
prognosis for her future?”) and lists documents to be written as supplements to
Macbeth (a script of the TV evening news announcing the murders; a psychiatrist’s report on Lady Macbeth, or her suicide note to her husband; Macbeth’s
entry in Who’s Who, or his obituary).
How should prospective readers of Anne Frank’s The Diary of a Young Girl
prepare? Carolyn Smith McGowen’s Teaching Literature by Women Authors suggests: “Give each student a paper grocery bag. Explain that to avoid being sent to
a concentration camp, many people went into hiding. Often they could take with
them only what they could carry. . . . Ask your students to choose the items they
would take into hiding. These items must fit into the grocery bag.” A class attempting to interpret an Emily Dickinson poem can be divided into three groups, each
group interpreting the poem based on one of Freud’s levels of consciousness;
thus the little ids, egos, and superegos can respond to the Dickinson poem according to the category of awareness to which their group has been assigned.
Those who might have supposed that one purpose of fiction was to deploy
the powers of language to connect us, directly and intimately, with the hearts and
souls of others, will be disappointed to learn that the whole point is to make us
examine ourselves. According to Alano, The Catcher in the Rye will doubtless suggest an incident “in which you felt yourself to be an ‘outsider’ like Holden. Why
did you feel outside? What finally changed your situation?” Stephen Crane’s The Red

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 182

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ProSe • i kNow wHy THe cAGed Bird cANNoT reAd

183

Badge of Courage should make us compare our anxieties (“Describe an event that
you anticipated with fear. . . . Was the actual event worth the dread?”) with those
of its Civil War hero. And what does The Great Gatsby lead us to consider? “Did
you ever pursue a goal with single-minded devotion? . . . Would you have gained
your end in any other way?” Are we to believe that the average eleventh-grader
has had an experience comparable to that of Jay Gatsby — or F. Scott Fitzgerald?
And is it any wonder that teenagers should complete these exercises with little but
contempt for the writer who so pointlessly complicated and obfuscated a personal
true story that sixteen-year-olds could have told so much more interestingly
themselves?
I remember when it dawned on me that I might, someday, grow old. I was in the
eleventh grade. Our marvelous and unusual English teacher had assigned us to
read King Lear — that is, to read every line of King Lear. (As I recall, we were asked
to circle every word or metaphor having to do with eyes and vision, a tedious process we grumbled about but that succeeded in focusing our attention.) Although
I knew I would never ever resemble the decrepit adults around me, Shakespeare’s
genius, his poetry, his profound, encyclopedic understanding of personality, managed to persuade me that I could be that mythical king — an imaginative identification very different from whatever result I might have obtained by persuading
myself that my own experience was the same as Lear’s. I recall the hallucinatory
sense of having left my warm bedroom, of finding myself — old, enraged, alone,
despised — on that heath, in that dangerous storm. And I remember realizing,
after the storm subsided, that language, that mere words on the page, had raised
that howling tempest.
Lear is still the Shakespeare play I like best. I reread it periodically, increasingly moved now that age is no longer a theoretical possibility, and now that its
portrayal of Lear’s behavior so often seems like reportage. A friend whose elderly
boss is ruining his company with irrational tests of fealty and refusals to cede
power needs only six words to describe the situation at work: King Lear, Act One,
Scene One.
Another high school favorite was the King James Version of the Book of Revelation. I don’t think I’d ever heard of Armageddon, nor did I believe that when the
seals of a book were opened horses would fly out. What delighted me was the language, the cadences and the rhythms, and the power of the images: the four horsemen, the beast, the woman clothed with the sun.
But rather than exposing students to works of literature that expand their
capacities and vocabularies, sharpen their comprehension, and deepen the level
at which they think and feel, we either offer them “easy” (Steinbeck, Knowles,
Angelou, Lee) books that “anyone” can understand, or we serve up the tougher
works predigested. We no longer believe that books were written one word at a
time, and deserve to be read that way. We’ve forgotten the difference between a
student who has never read a nineteenth-century novel and an idiot incapable of

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 183

30

6/18/12 3:11 PM

184

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

reading one. When my son was assigned Wuthering Heights in tenth-grade English, the complex sentences, archaisms, multiple narrators, and interwoven stories seemed, at first, like a foreign language. But soon enough, he caught on and
reported being moved almost to tears by the cruelty of Heathcliff ’s treatment of
Isabella.
In fact, it’s not difficult to find fiction that combines clear, beautiful, accessible,
idiosyncratic language with a narrative that conveys a complex worldview. But to
use such literature might require teachers and school boards to make fresh choices,
selections uncontaminated by trends, clichés, and received ideas. If educators
continue to assume that teenagers are interested exclusively in books about teenagers, there is engaging, truthful fiction about childhood and adolescence, written in ways that remind us why someone might like to read. There is, for example,
Charles Baxter’s precise and evocative “Gryphon.” And there are the carefully chosen details, the complex sentences, and the down-to-earth diction in Stuart
Dybek’s great Chicago story, “Hot Ice.”
If English class is the only forum in which students can talk about racism and
ethnic identity, why not teach Hilton Als’s The Women, Flannery O’Connor’s
“Everything That Rises Must Converge,” or any of the stories in James Alan
McPherson’s Hue and Cry, all of which eloquently and directly address the subtle,
powerful ways in which race affects every tiny decision and gesture? Why not introduce our kids to the clarity and power of James Baldwin’s great story “Sonny’s
Blues”?
My suspicion is that the reason such texts are not used as often as I Know Why
the Caged Bird Sings is precisely the reason why they should be taught — that is,
because they’re complicated. Baldwin, Als, and McPherson reject obvious “lessons” and familiar arcs of abuse, self-realization, and recovery; they actively refute
simplistic prescriptions about how to live.
Great novels can help us master the all-too-rare skill of tolerating — of being
able to hold in mind — ambiguity and contradiction. Jay Gatsby has a shady past,
but he’s also sympathetic. Huck Finn is a liar, but we come to love him. A friend’s
student once wrote that Alice Munro’s characters weren’t people he’d choose to
hang out with but that reading her work always made him feel “a little less petty
and judgmental.” Such benefits are denied to the young reader exposed only to
books with banal, simple-minded moral equations as well as to the student encouraged to come up with reductive, wrong-headed readings of multilayered texts.
The narrator of Caged Bird is good, her rapist is bad; Scout and Atticus Finch
are good, their bigoted neighbors are bad. But the characters in James Alan
McPherson’s “Gold Coast” are a good deal more lifelike. The cantankerous, bigoted, elderly white janitor and the young African American student, his temporary
assistant, who puts up with the janitor’s bullshit and is simultaneously cheered
and saddened by the knowledge that he’s headed for greater success than the janitor will ever achieve, both embody mixtures of admirable and more dubious
qualities. In other words, they’re more like humans. It’s hard to imagine the les-

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 184

35

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ProSe • i kNow wHy THe cAGed Bird cANNoT reAd

185

son plans telling students exactly how to feel about these two complex plausible
characters.
No one’s suggesting that every existing syllabus be shredded; many books on the
current lists are great works of art. But why not tell the students that, instead of
suggesting that Mark Twain be posthumously reprimanded? Why not point out
how convincingly he captured the workings of Huck’s mind, the inner voice of a
kid trying desperately to sew a crazy quilt of self together from the ragged scraps
around him? Why not celebrate the accuracy and vigor with which he translated
the rhythms of American speech into written language?
In simplifying what a book is allowed to tell us — Twain’s novel is wholly
about racism and not at all about what it’s like to be Huck Finn — teachers pretend to spark discussion but actually prevent it. They claim to relate the world of
the book to the world of experience, but by concentrating on the student’s own
history they narrow the world of experience down to the personal and deny students other sorts of experience — the experience of what’s in the book, for starters. One reason we read writers from other times or cultures is to confront
alternatives — of feeling and sensibility, of history and psyche, of information
and ideas. To experience the heartbreaking matter-of-factness with which Anne
Frank described her situation seems more useful than packing a paper bag with
Game Boys, cigarettes, and CDs so that we can go into hiding and avoid being
sent to the camps.
The pleasure of surrender to the world of a book is only one of the pleasures
that this new way of reading — and teaching — denies. In blurring the line between
reality and fiction (What happened to you that was exactly like what happened to
Hester Prynne?), it reduces our respect for imagination, beauty, art, thought, and
for the way that the human spirit expresses itself in words.
Writers have no choice but to believe that literature will survive, that it’s
worth some effort to preserve the most beautiful, meaningful lyrics or narratives,
the record of who we were, and are. And if we want our children to begin an
extended love affair with reading and with what great writing can do, we want
them to get an early start — or any start, at all. Teaching students to value literary
masterpieces is our best hope of awakening them to the infinite capacities and
complexities of human experience, of helping them acknowledge and accept complexity and ambiguity, and of making them love and respect the language that
allows us to smuggle out, and send one another, our urgent, eloquent dispatches
from the prison of the self.
That may be what writers — and readers — desire. But if it’s not occurring,
perhaps that’s because our culture wants it less urgently than we do. Education,
after all, is a process intended to produce a product. So we have to ask ourselves:
What sort of product is being produced by the current system? How does it
change when certain factors are added to, or removed from, our literature curriculum? And is it really in the best interests of our consumer economy to create

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 185

40

6/18/12 3:11 PM

186

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

a well-educated, smart, highly literate society of fervent readers? Doesn’t our epidemic dumbing-down have undeniable advantages for those institutions (the
media, the advertising industry, the government) whose interests are better served
by a population not trained to read too closely or ask too many questions?
On the most obvious level, it’s worth noting that books are among the few
remaining forms of entertainment not sustained by, and meant to further, the
interests of advertising. Television, newspapers, and magazines are busily instilling
us with new desires and previously unsuspected needs, while books sell only themselves. Moreover, the time we spend reading is time spent away from media that
have a greater chance of alchemically transmuting attention into money.
But of course what’s happening is more complex and subtle than that, more
closely connected to how we conceive of the relation between intellect and spirit.
The new-model English-class graduate — the one who has been force-fed the gross
oversimplifications proffered by these lesson plans and teaching manuals — values
empathy and imagination less than the ability to make quick and irreversible judgments, to entertain and maintain simplistic immovable opinions about guilt and
innocence, about the possibilities and limitations of human nature. Less comfortable with the gray areas than with sharply delineated black and white, he or
she can work in groups and operate by consensus, and has a resultant, residual distrust for the eccentric, the idiosyncratic, the annoyingly . . . individual.
What I’ve described is a salable product, tailored to the needs of the economic
and political moment. What results from these educational methods is a mode of
thinking (or, more accurately, of not thinking) that equips our kids for the future:
Future McDonald’s employees. Future corporate board members. Future special
prosecutors. Future makers of 100-best-books lists who fondly recall what they
first read in high school — and who may not have read anything since. And so the
roster of literary masterpieces we pass along to future generations will continue
its downward shift, and those lightweight, mediocre high school favorites will continue to rise, unburdened by gravity, to the top of the list.

45

Questions for Discussion
1. Francine Prose states, “Traditionally, the love of reading has been born and nurtured in high school English class” (para. 1). Do you think this is generally the
case? Describe your experience on this subject.
2. What does Prose mean when she writes, “[B]y concentrating on the student’s
own history they [teachers] narrow the world of experience down to the personal
and deny students other sorts of experience — the experience of what’s in the
book, for starters” (para. 40)? Do you agree with Prose’s statement? Why or
why not?
3. What is Prose implying in the following statement about what she calls the
“new-model English-class graduate”: “But of course what’s happening is more
complex and subtle than that [seeing books as unconnected to advertising], more

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 186

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ProSe • i kNow wHy THe cAGed Bird cANNoT reAd

187

closely connected to how we conceive of the relation between intellect and spirit”
(para. 45)?
4. Whom does Prose blame for this state of affairs? Does assigning blame affect the
cogency of her argument?
5. This essay was written in 1999. Do you think Prose would or could make the
same argument today? Why or why not?

Questions on Rhetoric and Style
1. Discuss three appeals to ethos in this essay. What different roles, or personae,
does Prose use to establish her ethos?
2. Prose’s opening paragraph includes such words as appalled, dismal, and dreariness —
all with negative connotations. Why does she start out with such strong language?
Does she risk putting off readers who do not share her views? Why or why not?
What other examples of strongly emotional language do you find in the essay?
3. Prose makes several key assumptions about the role and impact of reading literary
works in high school. What are they?
4. What appeals does she make to logos?
5. Prose cites many different novels and plays. Does she assume her audience is
familiar with some of them? All of them? Explain why it matters whether the audience knows the works.
6. According to Prose, “To hold up [I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings] as a paradigm
of memoir, of thought — of literature — is akin to inviting doctors convicted of
malpractice to instruct our medical students” (para. 13). Do you agree with this
analogy? Explain your answer. What other examples of figurative language can you
find in this essay?
7. Toward the end of the essay (paras. 35, 39, and 43), Prose uses a series of rhetorical
questions. What is her purpose in piling one rhetorical question on top of another?
8. Would Prose have strengthened her argument by including interviews with a few
high school students or teachers? Why or why not?
9. According to Prose, why are American high school students learning to loathe
literature? Try to find at least four or five reasons.
10. Does she propose a solution or recommendations to change this situation? If she
does not offer a solution, is her argument weakened? Explain your answer.

Suggestions for Writing
1. Prose is highly critical of the quality of both I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings and
To Kill a Mockingbird. If you have read either, write an evaluation of her criticism
of the book. Pay particular attention to the quotations she selects; is she setting
up a straw man — that is, an argument that can be easily refuted?
2. Prose is skeptical of the practice of using literary works to teach values. Write an
essay in which you support or challenge her position. Be specific in your references to novels, plays, or poems.

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 187

6/18/12 3:11 PM

188

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

3. Prose writes, “Great novels can help us master the all-too-rare skill of tolerating —
of being able to hold in mind — ambiguity and contradiction” (para. 37). Select
a novel you know well, and explain the “ambiguity and contradiction” at its heart.
4. Collect the required reading lists from several schools (or classes) in different geographical regions, and compare and contrast them. Are there differences in quality
as well as quantity? Are any of the books Prose discusses included on them? Do
the books appeal to boys as well as girls? Is there opportunity for choice? Write an
essay analyzing these lists from Prose’s point of view.

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 188

6/18/12 3:11 PM

from Education
Ralph Waldo Emerson
ralph waldo emerson (1803–1882), perhaps best known for his essay
“Self-reliance” (1841), was one of America’s most influential thinkers
and writers. After graduating from Harvard divinity School, he followed
nine generations of his family into the ministry but practiced for only a
few years. in 1836, he and other like-minded intellectuals, including
Henry david Thoreau, founded the Transcendental club, and that same
year he published his influential essay “Nature” (1836). known as a
great orator, emerson made his living as a popular lecturer on a wide
range of topics. From 1821 to 1826, he taught in city and country schools and later
served on a number of school boards, including the concord School committee and
the Board of overseers of Harvard college. emerson’s essay “education,” from which
the following excerpt is taken, was put together posthumously from his writings published in the American Scholar and from his commencement addresses.

I

believe that our own experience instructs us that the secret of Education
lies in respecting the pupil. It is not for you to choose what he shall know,
what he shall do. It is chosen and foreordained, and he only holds the key to his
own secret. By your tampering and thwarting and too much governing he may be
hindered from his end and kept out of his own. Respect the child. Wait and see
the new product of Nature. Nature loves analogies, but not repetitions. Respect
the child. Be not too much his parent. Trespass not on his solitude.
But I hear the outcry which replies to this suggestion — Would you verily throw
up the reins of public and private discipline; would you leave the young child to
the mad career of his own passions and whimsies, and call this anarchy a respect
for the child’s nature? I answer — Respect the child, respect him to the end, but
also respect yourself. Be the companion of his thought, the friend of his friendship, the lover of his virtue — but no kinsman of his sin. Let him find you so true
to yourself that you are the irreconcilable hater of his vice and the imperturbable
slighter of his trifling.
The two points in a boy’s training are, to keep his naturel and train off all but
that — to keep his naturel, but stop off his uproar, fooling, and horseplay — keep
his nature and arm it with knowledge in the very direction to which it points.
Here are the two capital facts, Genius and Drill. This first is the inspiration in the
well-born healthy child, the new perception he has of nature. Somewhat he sees
in forms or hears in music or apprehends in mathematics, or believes practicable
in mechanics or possible in political society, which no one else sees or hears or
believes. This is the perpetual romance of new life, the invasion of God into the old
dead world, when he sends into quiet houses a young soul with a thought which

189

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 189

6/18/12 3:11 PM

190

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

is not met, looking for something which is not there, but which ought to be there:
the thought is dim but it is sure, and he casts about restless for means and masters
to verify it; he makes wild attempts to explain himself and invoke the aid and consent of the by-standers. Baffled for want of language and methods to convey his
meaning, not yet clear to himself, he conceives that thought not in this house or
town, yet in some other house or town is the wise master who can put him in
possession of the rules and instruments to execute his will. Happy this child with
a bias, with a thought which entrances him, leads him, now into deserts now into
cities, the fool of an idea. Let him follow it in good and in evil report, in good or
bad company; it will justify itself; it will lead him at last into the illustrious society
of the lovers of truth.
In London, in a private company, I became acquainted with a gentleman, Sir
Charles Fellowes, who, being at Xanthos, in the Aegean Sea, had seen a Turk point
with his staff to some carved work on the corner of a stone almost buried in the
soil. Fellowes scraped away the dirt, was struck with the beauty of the sculptured
ornaments, and, looking about him, observed more blocks and fragments like
this. He returned to the spot, procured laborers and uncovered many blocks. He
went back to England, bought a Greek grammar and learned the language; he
read history and studied ancient art to explain his stones; he interested Gibson
the sculptor; he invoked the assistance of the English Government; he called in
the succor of Sir Humphry Davy to analyze the pigments; of experts in coins,
of scholars and connoisseurs; and at last in his third visit brought home to
England such statues and marble reliefs and such careful plans that he was able
to reconstruct, in the British Museum where it now stands, the perfect model of
the Ionic trophy-monument, fifty years older than the Parthenon of Athens,
and which had been destroyed by earthquakes, then by iconoclast Christians,
then by savage Turks. But mark that in the task he had achieved an excellent education, and become associated with distinguished scholars whom he had interested in his pursuit; in short, had formed a college for himself; the enthusiast had
found the master, the masters, whom he sought. Always genius seeks genius,
desires nothing so much as to be a pupil and to find those who can lend it aid to
perfect itself.
Nor are the two elements, enthusiasm and drill, incompatible. Accuracy is
essential to beauty. The very definition of the intellect is Aristotle’s: “that by which
we know terms or boundaries.” Give a boy accurate perceptions. Teach him the
difference between the similar and the same. Make him call things by their right
names. Pardon in him no blunder. Then he will give you solid satisfaction as long
as he lives. It is better to teach the child arithmetic and Latin grammar than rhetoric or moral philosophy, because they require exactitude of performance; it is
made certain that the lesson is mastered, and that power of performance is worth
more than the knowledge. He can learn anything which is important to him now
that the power to learn is secured: as mechanics say, when one has learned the use
of tools, it is easy to work at a new craft.

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 190

5

6/18/12 3:11 PM

emerSoN • educATioN

191

Letter by letter, syllable by syllable, the child learns to read, and in good time
can convey to all the domestic circle the sense of Shakespeare. By many steps each
just as short, the stammering boy and the hesitating collegian, in the school debates,
in college clubs, in mock court, comes at last to full, secure, triumphant unfolding
of his thought in the popular assembly, with a fullness of power that makes all the
steps forgotten.
But this function of opening and feeding the human mind is not to be fulfilled by any mechanical or military method; is not to be trusted to any skill less
large than Nature itself. You must not neglect the form, but you must secure the
essentials. It is curious how perverse and intermeddling we are, and what vast
pains and cost we incur to do wrong. Whilst we all know in our own experience
and apply natural methods in our own business — in education our common sense
fails us, and we are continually trying costly machinery against nature, in patent
schools and academies and in great colleges and universities.
The natural method forever confutes our experiments, and we must still come
back to it. The whole theory of the school is on the nurse’s or mother’s knee. The
child is as hot to learn as the mother is to impart. There is mutual delight. The joy
of our childhood in hearing beautiful stories from some skillful aunt who loves to
tell them, must be repeated in youth. The boy wishes to learn to skate, to coast, to
catch a fish in the brook, to hit a mark with a snowball or a stone; and a boy a
little older is just as well pleased to teach him these sciences. Not less delightful is
the mutual pleasure of teaching and learning the secret of algebra, or of chemistry, or of good reading and good recitation of poetry or of prose, or of chosen
facts in history or in biography.
Nature provided for the communication of thought by planting with it in the
receiving mind a fury to impart it. ’Tis so in every art, in every science. One burns
to tell the new fact, the other burns to hear it. See how far a young doctor will ride
or walk to witness a new surgical operation. I have seen a carriage-maker’s shop
emptied of all its workmen into the street, to scrutinize a new pattern from New
York. So in literature, the young man who has taste for poetry, for fine images, for
noble thoughts, is insatiable for this nourishment, and forgets all the world for
the more learned friend — who finds equal joy in dealing out his treasures.
Happy the natural college thus self-instituted around every natural teacher;
the young men of Athens around Socrates; of Alexander around Plotinus; of Paris
around Abelard; of Germany around Fichte, or Niebuhr, or Goethe: in short the
natural sphere of every leading mind. But the moment this is organized, difficulties
begin. The college was to be the nurse and home of genius; but, though every young
man is born with some determination in his nature, and is a potential genius; is
at last to be one; it is, in the most, obstructed and delayed, and, whatever they may
hereafter be, their senses are now opened in advance of their minds. They are
more sensual than intellectual. Appetite and indolence they have, but no enthusiasm. These come in numbers to the college: few geniuses: and the teaching comes
to be arranged for these many, and not for those few. Hence the instruction seems

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 191

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

192

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

to require skillful tutors, of accurate and systematic mind, rather than ardent and
inventive masters. Besides, the youth of genius are eccentric, won’t drill, are irritable, uncertain, explosive, solitary, not men of the world, not good for every-day
association. You have to work for large classes instead of individuals; you must
lower your flag and reef your sails to wait for the dull sailors; you grow departmental, routinary, military almost with your discipline and college police. But what
doth such a school to form a great and heroic character? What abiding Hope can it
inspire? What Reformer will it nurse? What poet will it breed to sing to the human
race? What discoverer of Nature’s laws will it prompt to enrich us by disclosing in
the mind the statute which all matter must obey? What fiery soul will it send out
to warm a nation with his charity? What tranquil mind will it have fortified to walk
with meekness in private and obscure duties, to wait and to suffer? Is it not manifest that our academic institutions should have a wider scope; that they should not
be timid and keep the ruts of the last generation, but that wise men thinking for
themselves and heartily seeking the good of mankind, and counting the cost of
innovation, should dare to arouse the young to a just and heroic life; that the
moral nature should be addressed in the school-room, and children should be
treated as the high-born candidates of truth and virtue?
So to regard the young child, the young man, requires, no doubt, rare patience:
a patience that nothing but faith in the remedial forces of the soul can give. You see
his sensualism; you see his want of those tastes and perceptions which make the
power and safety of your character. Very likely. But he has something else. If he has
his own vice, he has its correlative virtue. Every mind should be allowed to make
its own statement in action, and its balance will appear. In these judgments one
needs that foresight which was attributed to an eminent reformer, of whom it was
said “his patience could see in the bud of the aloe the blossom at the end of a hundred years.” Alas for the cripple Practice when it seeks to come up with the bird
Theory, which flies before it. Try your design on the best school. The scholars are
of all ages and temperaments and capacities. It is difficult to class them, some are
too young, some are slow, some perverse. Each requires so much consideration,
that the morning hope of the teacher, of a day of love and progress, is often closed
at evening by despair. Each single case, the more it is considered, shows more to be
done; and the strict conditions of the hours, on one side, and the number of tasks,
on the other. Whatever becomes of our method, the conditions stand fast — six
hours, and thirty, fifty, or a hundred and fifty pupils. Something must be done, and
done speedily, and in this distress the wisest are tempted to adopt violent means,
to proclaim martial law, corporal punishment, mechanical arrangement, bribes,
spies, wrath, main strength and ignorance, in lieu of that wise genial providential
influence they had hoped, and yet hope at some future day to adopt. Of course the
devotion to details reacts injuriously on the teacher. He cannot indulge his genius,
he cannot delight in personal relations with young friends, when his eye is always
on the clock, and twenty classes are to be dealt with before the day is done. Besides,
how can he please himself with genius, and foster modest virtue? A sure propor-

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 192

6/18/12 3:11 PM

emerSoN • educATioN

193

tion of rogue and dunce finds its way into every school and requires a cruel share of
time, and the gentle teacher, who wished to be a Providence to youth, is grown a
martinet,1 sore with suspicions; knows as much vice as the judge of a police court,
and his love of learning is lost in the routine of grammars and books of elements.
A rule is so easy that it does not need a man to apply it; an automaton, a
machine, can be made to keep a school so. It facilitates labor and thought so much
that there is always the temptation in large schools to omit the endless task of
meeting the wants of each single mind, and to govern by steam. But it is at frightful cost. Our modes of Education aim to expedite, to save labor; to do for masses
what cannot be done for masses, what must be done reverently, one by one: say
rather, the whole world is needed for the tuition of each pupil. The advantages of
this system of emulation and display are so prompt and obvious, it is such a timesaver, it is so energetic on slow and on bad natures, and is of so easy application,
needing no sage or poet, but any tutor or schoolmaster in his first term can apply
it — that it is not strange that this calomel2 of culture should be a popular medicine. On the other hand, total abstinence from this drug, and the adoption of
simple discipline and the following of nature involves at once immense claims on
the time, the thoughts, on the Life of the teacher. It requires time, use, insight,
event, all the great lessons and assistances of God; and only to think of using it
implies character and profoundness; to enter on this course of discipline is to be
good and great. It is precisely analogous to the difference between the use of corporal punishment and the methods of love. It is so easy to bestow on a bad boy a
blow, overpower him, and get obedience without words, that in this world of
hurry and distraction, who can wait for the returns of reason and the conquest of
self; in the uncertainty too whether that will ever come? And yet the familiar observation of the universal compensations might suggest the fear that so summary a
stop of a bad humor was more jeopardous than its continuance.
Now the correction of this quack practice is to import into Education the
wisdom of life. Leave this military hurry and adopt the pace of Nature. Her secret
is patience. Do you know how the naturalist learns all the secrets of the forest, of
plants, of birds, of beasts, of reptiles, of fishes, of the rivers and the sea? When he
goes into the woods the birds fly before him and he finds none; when he goes to
the river bank, the fish and the reptile swim away and leave him alone. His secret
is patience; he sits down, and sits still; he is a statue; he is a log. These creatures
have no value for their time, and he must put as low a rate on his. By dint of obstinate sitting still, reptile, fish, bird and beast, which all wish to return to their
haunts, begin to return. He sits still; if they approach, he remains passive as the
stone he sits upon. They lose their fear. They have curiosity too about him. By and
by the curiosity masters the fear, and they come swimming, creeping and flying
towards him; and as he is still immovable, they not only resume their haunts and
1A strict disciplinarian. Originally a type of whip. — Eds.
2A mercury compound once used as a laxative, purgative, or disinfectant. — Eds.

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 193

6/18/12 3:11 PM

194

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

their ordinary labors and manners, show themselves to him in their work-day
trim, but also volunteer some degree of advances towards fellowship and good
understanding with a biped who behaves so civilly and well. Can you not baffle
the impatience and passion of the child by your tranquility? Can you not wait for
him, as Nature and Providence do? Can you not keep for his mind and ways, for
his secret, the same curiosity you give to the squirrel, snake, rabbit, and the sheldrake3 and the deer? He has a secret; wonderful methods in him; he is — every
child — a new style of man; give him time and opportunity. Talk of Columbus
and Newton! I tell you the child just born in yonder hovel is the beginning of a
revolution as great as theirs. But you must have the believing and prophetic eye.
Have the self-command you wish to inspire. Your teaching and discipline must
have the reserve and taciturnity of Nature. Teach them to hold their tongues by
holding your own. Say little; do not snarl; do not chide; but govern by the eye. See
what they need, and that the right thing is done.
I confess myself utterly at a loss in suggesting particular reforms in our ways
of teaching. No discretion that can be lodged with a school-committee, with the
overseers or visitors of an academy, of a college, can at all avail to reach these difficulties and perplexities, but they solve themselves when we leave institutions
and address individuals. The will, the male power, organizes, imposes its own
thought and wish on others, and makes that military eye which controls boys as
it controls men; admirable in its results, a fortune to him who has it, and only
dangerous when it leads the workman to overvalue and overuse it and precludes
him from finer means. Sympathy, the female force — which they must use who
have not the first — deficient in instant control and the breaking down of resistance, is more subtle and lasting and creative. I advise teachers to cherish motherwit. I assume that you will keep the grammar, reading, writing and arithmetic in
order; ’tis easy and of course you will. But smuggle in a little contraband wit,
fancy, imagination, thought. If you have a taste which you have suppressed
because it is not shared by those about you, tell them that. Set this law up, whatever becomes of the rules of the school: they must not whisper, much less talk;
but if one of the young people says a wise thing, greet it, and let all the children
clap their hands. They shall have no book but school-books in the room; but if
one has brought in a Plutarch or Shakespeare or Don Quixote or Goldsmith or
any other good book, and understands what he reads, put him at once at the head
of the class. Nobody shall be disorderly, or leave his desk without permission, but
if a boy runs from his bench, or a girl, because the fire falls, or to check some
injury that a little dastard is indicting behind his desk on some helpless sufferer,
take away the medal from the head of the class and give it on the instant to the
brave rescuer. If a child happens to show that he knows any fact about astronomy,
or plants, or birds, or rocks, or history, that interests him and you, hush all the

3

A type of duck. — Eds.

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 194

6/18/12 3:11 PM

emerSoN • educATioN

195

classes and encourage him to tell it so that all may hear. Then you have made your
school-room like the world. Of course you will insist on modesty in the children,
and respect to their teachers, but if the boy stops you in your speech, cries out that
you are wrong and sets you right, hug him!
To whatsoever upright mind, to whatsoever beating heart I speak, to you it is
committed to educate men. By simple living, by an illimitable soul, you inspire,
you correct, you instruct, you raise, you embellish all. By your own act you teach
the beholder how to do the practicable. According to the depth from which you
draw your life, such is the depth not only of your strenuous effort, but of your
manners and presence. The beautiful nature of the world has here blended your
happiness with your power. Work straight on in absolute duty, and you lend an
arm and an encouragement to all the youth of the universe. Consent yourself to
be an organ of your highest thought, and lo! suddenly you put all men in your
debt, and are the fountain of an energy that goes pulsing on with waves of benefit
to the borders of society, to the circumference of things.

15

Questions for Discussion
1. In this essay, Ralph Waldo Emerson describes his view of an ideal education. What
are its defining characteristics?
2. In what ways is Emerson’s advice appropriate to a child’s first teacher — his or her
parents?
3. Why does Emerson believe “[i]t is better to teach the child arithmetic and Latin
grammar than rhetoric or moral philosophy” (para. 5)?
4. In what ways does this essay point out the education system’s effect on teachers as
well as students?
5. What exactly is the “natural method” to which Emerson refers (para. 8)?
6. Why does Emerson criticize schools as bureaucratic institutions (para. 10)?
7. Emerson refers to educating “a boy” and “a man” and uses masculine pronouns when
referring to students. As a reader, does this gender bias affect how receptive you are
to Emerson’s ideas? Are his ideas equally applicable to women? If you do not think
so, then how would they need to be changed to be applicable to both men and
women, boys and girls?
8. Describe the adult that Emerson imagines would emerge from an education based
on the principles he supports.

Questions on Rhetoric and Style
1. What does Emerson mean when he says, “Nature loves analogies, but not repetitions” (para. 1)?
2. Why is the relationship between “Genius and Drill,” as Emerson explains it, paradoxical (para. 3)?

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 195

6/18/12 3:11 PM

196

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

3. Paragraph 4 is taken up almost entirely by an extended example. What is Emerson’s
purpose in developing this long explanation?
4. Identify at least three examples of figurative language that Emerson uses to advance
his argument, and explain their effect. In responding, consider the following line
from paragraph 11: “Alas for the cripple Practice when it seeks to come up with
the bird Theory, which flies before it.”
5. Identify examples of the following rhetorical strategies in paragraph 13, and explain
their effect: rhetorical questions, sentence variety and pacing, analogy, allusion,
and imperative sentences.
6. Examine Emerson’s appeals to pathos through highly emotional and evocative
diction.
7. Rephrase the following sentence in contemporary language: “And yet the familiar
observation of the universal compensations might suggest the fear that so summary
a stop of a bad humor was more jeopardous than its continuance” (para. 12).
8. Explain why you do or do not interpret the opening line of paragraph 14 as ironic:
“I confess myself utterly at a loss in suggesting particular reforms in our ways of
teaching.”
9. Why does Emerson believe that the “will, the male power” (para. 14) will be of less
benefit to the child than “[s]ympathy, the female force”?
10. What is Emerson’s purpose in shifting among the pronouns I, we, and you?
11. How would you describe Emerson’s tone in this essay?

Suggestions for Writing
1. In paragraph 12, Emerson makes the following assertion about education in his
time: “Our modes of Education aim to expedite, to save labor; to do for masses
what cannot be done for masses, what must be done reverently, one by one: say
rather, the whole world is needed for the tuition of each pupil.” What does he
mean? (You might have to look up the meaning of tuition in this context.) Do
you think that public education today still resembles Emerson’s description?
Explain.
2. If you were responsible for the education of a child, which of Emerson’s assertions about education would you choose as your guiding principle? Write an
essay explaining why you would choose that principle over another of Emerson’s
beliefs.
3. Explain why you agree or disagree with Emerson’s assertion that “every young
man [and woman] is born with some determination in his [or her] nature, and is
a potential genius” (para. 10).
4. Write a response to Emerson in the voice of Francine Prose, explaining why you
agree or disagree with the issues he raises and the positions he takes.
5. Evaluate your own schooling according to the criteria presented in paragraph 10.

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 196

6/18/12 3:11 PM

A Talk to Teachers
James Baldwin
James Baldwin (1924–1987) was one of the most influential figures in American
literature during the latter half of the twentieth century. His novels include Go Tell It
on the Mountain (1953), Giovanni’s Room (1956), If Beale Street Could Talk (1974),
and Just Above My Head (1979). A sharp social critic of race relations and sexual
identity, Baldwin wrote numerous essays that were collected in Notes of a Native
Son (1955), The Fire Next Time (1963), and The Devil Finds Work (1976). He also
wrote poetry and plays. By the late 1940s, Baldwin had moved to europe. He lived
in France and Turkey for most of the rest of his life, but he returned at times to the
united States to lecture and participate in the civil rights movement. He delivered
the following speech to a group of New york city schoolteachers in 1963, the height
of the movement for equality for African Americans.

L

et’s begin by saying that we are living through a very dangerous time.
Everyone in this room is in one way or another aware of that. We are in a
revolutionary situation, no matter how unpopular that word has become in this
country. The society in which we live is desperately menaced, not by [Nikita]
Khrushchev,1 but from within. So any citizen of this country who figures himself
as responsible — and particularly those of you who deal with the minds and hearts
of young people — must be prepared to “go for broke.” Or to put it another way,
you must understand that in the attempt to correct so many generations of bad
faith and cruelty, when it is operating not only in the classroom but in society,
you will meet the most fantastic, the most brutal, and the most determined resistance. There is no point in pretending that this won’t happen.
Since I am talking to schoolteachers and I am not a teacher myself, and in
some ways am fairly easily intimidated, I beg you to let me leave that and go back
to what I think to be the entire purpose of education in the first place. It would
seem to me that when a child is born, if I’m the child’s parent, it is my obligation
and my high duty to civilize that child. Man is a social animal. He cannot exist without a society. A society, in turn, depends on certain things which everyone within
that society takes for granted. Now, the crucial paradox which confronts us here
is that the whole process of education occurs within a social framework and is
designed to perpetuate the aims of society. Thus, for example, the boys and girls
who were born during the era of the Third Reich, when educated to the purposes
of the Third Reich, became barbarians. The paradox of education is precisely
this — that as one begins to become conscious one begins to examine the society
in which he is being educated. The purpose of education, finally, is to create in a
1Premier of the Soviet Union, 1958–1964. — Eds.

197

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 197

6/18/12 3:11 PM

198

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

person the ability to look at the world for himself, to make his own decisions, to
say to himself this is black or this is white, to decide for himself whether there is
a God in heaven or not. To ask questions of the universe, and then learn to live with
those questions, is the way he achieves his own identity. But no society is really
anxious to have that kind of person around. What societies really, ideally, want is
a citizenry which will simply obey the rules of society. If a society succeeds in this,
that society is about to perish. The obligation of anyone who thinks of himself as
responsible is to examine society and try to change it and to fight it — at no matter
what risk. This is the only hope society has. This is the only way societies change.
Now, if what I have tried to sketch has any validity, it becomes thoroughly
clear, at least to me, that any Negro who is born in this country and undergoes the
American educational system runs the risk of becoming schizophrenic. On the
one hand he is born in the shadow of the stars and stripes and he is assured it
represents a nation which has never lost a war. He pledges allegiance to that flag
which guarantees “liberty and justice for all.” He is part of a country in which anyone can become president, and so forth. But on the other hand he is also assured
by his country and his countrymen that he has never contributed anything to
civilization — that his past is nothing more than a record of humiliations gladly
endured. He is assumed by the republic that he, his father, his mother, and his
ancestors were happy, shiftless, watermelon-eating darkies who loved Mr. Charlie
and Miss Ann,2 that the value he has as a black man is proven by one thing only —
his devotion to white people. If you think I am exaggerating, examine the myths
which proliferate in this country about Negroes.
All this enters the child’s consciousness much sooner than we as adults would
like to think it does. As adults, we are easily fooled because we are so anxious to be
fooled. But children are very different. Children, not yet aware that it is dangerous
to look too deeply at anything, look at everything, look at each other, and draw
their own conclusions. They don’t have the vocabulary to express what they see, and
we, their elders, know how to intimidate them very easily and very soon. But a
black child, looking at the world around him, though he cannot know quite what
to make of it, is aware that there is a reason why his mother works so hard, why
his father is always on edge. He is aware that there is some reason why, if he sits
down in the front of the bus, his father or mother slaps him and drags him to the
back of the bus. He is aware that there is some terrible weight on his parents’
shoulders which menaces him. And it isn’t long — in fact it begins when he is in
school — before he discovers the shape of his oppression.
Let us say that the child is seven years old and I am his father, and I decide to
take him to the zoo, or to Madison Square Garden, or to the U.N. Building, or to
any of the tremendous monuments we find all over New York. We get into a bus
and we go from where I live on 131st Street and Seventh Avenue downtown through

5

2Figurative characters invented by African slaves to represent male and female slave masters,
respectively. — Eds.

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 198

6/18/12 3:11 PM

BAldwiN • A TAlk To TeAcHerS

199

the park and we get into New York City, which is not Harlem. Now, where the boy
lives — even if it is a housing project — is in an undesirable neighborhood. If he
lives in one of those housing projects of which everyone in New York is so proud,
he has at the front door, if not closer, the pimps, the whores, the junkies — in a
word, the danger of life in the ghetto. And the child knows this, though he doesn’t
know why.
I still remember my first sight of New York. It was really another city when I
was born — where I was born. We looked down over the Park Avenue streetcar
tracks. It was Park Avenue, but I didn’t know what Park Avenue meant downtown.
The Park Avenue I grew up on, which is still standing, is dark and dirty. No one
would dream of opening a Tiffany’s on that Park Avenue, and when you go downtown you discover that you are literally in the white world. It is rich — or at least
it looks rich. It is clean — because they collect garbage downtown. There are
doormen. People walk about as though they owned where they are — and indeed
they do. And it’s a great shock. It’s very hard to relate yourself to this. You don’t
know what it means. You know — you know instinctively — that none of this is
for you. You know this before you are told. And who is it for and who is paying
for it? And why isn’t it for you?
Later on when you become a grocery boy or messenger and you try to enter
one of those buildings a man says, “Go to the back door.” Still later, if you happen
by some odd chance to have a friend in one of those buildings, the man says,
“Where’s your package?” Now this by no means is the core of the matter. What
I’m trying to get at is that by this time the Negro child has had, effectively, almost
all the doors of opportunity slammed in his face, and there are very few things he
can do about it. He can more or less accept it with an absolutely inarticulate and
dangerous rage inside — all the more dangerous because it is never expressed. It
is precisely those silent people whom white people see every day of their lives — I
mean your porter and your maid, who never say anything more than “Yes, Sir”
and “No, Ma’am.” They will tell you it’s raining if that is what you want to hear,
and they will tell you the sun is shining if that is what you want to hear. They
really hate you — really hate you because in their eyes (and they’re right) you
stand between them and life. I want to come back to that in a moment. It is the
most sinister of the facts, I think, which we now face.
There is something else the Negro child can do, too. Every street boy — and I was
a street boy, so I know — looking at the society which has produced him, looking
at the standards of that society which are not honored by anybody, looking at
your churches and the government and the politicians, understands that this structure is operated for someone else’s benefit — not for his. And there’s no reason in
it for him. If he is really cunning, really ruthless, really strong — and many of us
are — he becomes a kind of criminal. He becomes a kind of criminal because
that’s the only way he can live. Harlem and every ghetto in this city — every ghetto
in this country — is full of people who live outside the law. They wouldn’t dream

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 199

6/18/12 3:11 PM

200

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

of calling a policeman. They wouldn’t, for a moment, listen to any of those professions of which we are so proud on the Fourth of July. They have turned away
from this country forever and totally. They live by their wits and really long to see
the day when the entire structure comes down.
The point of all this is that black men were brought here as a source of cheap
labor. They were indispensable to the economy. In order to justify the fact that
men were treated as though they were animals, the white republic had to brainwash
itself into believing that they were, indeed, animals and deserved to be treated like
animals. Therefore it is almost impossible for any Negro child to discover anything about his actual history. The reason is that this “animal,” once he suspects his
own worth, once he starts believing that he is a man, has begun to attack the entire
power structure. This is why America has spent such a long time keeping the
Negro in his place. What I am trying to suggest to you is that it was not an accident, it was not an act of God, it was not done by well-meaning people muddling
into something which they didn’t understand. It was a deliberate policy hammered
into place in order to make money from black flesh. And now, in 1963, because
we have never faced this fact, we are in intolerable trouble.
The Reconstruction, as I read the evidence, was a bargain between the North
and South to this effect: “We’ve liberated them from the land — and delivered
them to the bosses.” When we left Mississippi to come North we did not come to
freedom. We came to the bottom of the labor market, and we are still there. Even
the Depression of the 1930s failed to make a dent in Negroes’ relationship to
white workers in the labor unions. Even today, so brainwashed is this republic that
people seriously ask in what they suppose to be good faith, “What does the Negro
want?” I’ve heard a great many asinine questions in my life, but that is perhaps the
most asinine and perhaps the most insulting. But the point here is that people
who ask that question, thinking that they ask it in good faith, are really the victims
of this conspiracy to make Negroes believe they are less than human.
In order for me to live, I decided very early that some mistake had been made
somewhere. I was not a “nigger” even though you called me one. But if I was a
“nigger” in your eyes, there was something about you — there was something you
needed. I had to realize when I was very young that I was none of those things I
was told I was. I was not, for example, happy. I never touched a watermelon for all
kinds of reasons that had been invented by white people, and I knew enough
about life by this time to understand that whatever you invent, whatever you
project, is you! So where we are now is that a whole country of people believe I’m
a “nigger,” and I don’t, and the battle’s on! Because if I am not what I’ve been told
I am, then it means that you’re not what you thought you were either! And that is
the crisis.
It is not really a “Negro revolution” that is upsetting the country. What is
upsetting the country is a sense of its own identity. If, for example, one managed
to change the curriculum in all the schools so that Negroes learned more about
themselves and their real contributions to this culture, you would be liberating
not only Negroes, you’d be liberating white people who know nothing about their

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 200

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

BAldwiN • A TAlk To TeAcHerS

201

own history. And the reason is that if you are compelled to lie about one aspect of
anybody’s history, you must lie about it all. If you have to lie about my real role
here, if you have to pretend that I hoed all that cotton just because I loved you,
then you have done something to yourself. You are mad.
Now let’s go back a minute. I talked earlier about those silent people — the
porter and the maid — who, as I said, don’t look up at the sky if you ask them if it
is raining, but look into your face. My ancestors and I were very well trained. We
understood very early that this was not a Christian nation. It didn’t matter what
you said or how often you went to church. My father and my mother and my
grandfather and my grandmother knew that Christians didn’t act this way. It was
as simple as that. And if that was so there was no point in dealing with white
people in terms of their own moral professions, for they were not going to honor
them. What one did was to turn away, smiling all the time, and tell white people
what they wanted to hear. But people always accuse you of reckless talk when you
say this.
All this means that there are in this country tremendous reservoirs of bitterness which have never been able to find an outlet, but may find an outlet soon. It
means that well-meaning white liberals place themselves in great danger when
they try to deal with Negroes as though they were missionaries. It means, in brief,
that a great price is demanded to liberate all those silent people so that they can
breathe for the first time and tell you what they think of you. And a price is
demanded to liberate all those white children — some of them near forty — who
have never grown up, and who never will grow up, because they have no sense of
their identity.
What passes for identity in America is a series of myths about one’s heroic ancestors. It’s astounding to me, for example, that so many people really appear to
believe that the country was founded by a band of heroes who wanted to be free.
That happens not to be true. What happened was that some people left Europe
because they couldn’t stay there any longer and had to go someplace else to make
it. That’s all. They were hungry, they were poor, they were convicts. Those who
were making it in England, for example, did not get on the Mayflower. That’s how
the country was settled. Not by Gary Cooper. Yet we have a whole race of people,
a whole republic, who believe the myths to the point where even today they select
political representatives, as far as I can tell, by how closely they resemble Gary
Cooper. Now this is dangerously infantile, and it shows in every level of national
life. When I was living in Europe, for example, one of the worst revelations to me
was the way Americans walked around Europe buying this and buying that and
insulting everybody — not even out of malice, just because they didn’t know any
better. Well, that is the way they have always treated me. They weren’t cruel, they
just didn’t know you were alive. They didn’t know you had any feelings.
What I am trying to suggest here is that in the doing of all this for 100 years
or more, it is the American white man who has long since lost his grip on reality.
In some peculiar way, having created this myth about Negroes, and the myth

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 201

15

6/18/12 3:11 PM

202

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

about his own history, he created myths about the world so that, for example, he
was astounded that some people could prefer [Fidel] Castro, astounded that there
are people in the world who don’t go into hiding when they hear the word “Communism,” astounded that Communism is one of the realities of the twentieth
century which we will not overcome by pretending that it does not exist. The
political level in this country now, on the part of people who should know better,
is abysmal.
The Bible says somewhere that where there is no vision the people perish. I don’t
think anyone can doubt that in this country today we are menaced — intolerably
menaced — by a lack of vision.
It is inconceivable that a sovereign people should continue, as we do so
abjectly, to say, “I can’t do anything about it. It’s the government.” The government is the creation of the people. It is responsible to the people. And the people
are responsible for it. No American has the right to allow the present government
to say, when Negro children are being bombed and hosed and shot and beaten
all over the Deep South, that there is nothing we can do about it. There must
have been a day in this country’s life when the bombing of the children in Sunday
School would have created a public uproar and endangered the life of a Governor
[George] Wallace. It happened here and there was no public uproar.
I began by saying that one of the paradoxes of education was that precisely at
the point when you begin to develop a conscience, you must find yourself at war
with your society. It is your responsibility to change society if you think of yourself as an educated person. And on the basis of the evidence — the moral and
political evidence — one is compelled to say that this is a backward society. Now
if I were a teacher in this school, or any Negro school, and I was dealing with
Negro children, who were in my care only a few hours of every day and would
then return to their homes and to the streets, children who have an apprehension
of their future which with every hour grows grimmer and darker, I would try to
teach them — I would try to make them know — that those streets, those houses,
those dangers, those agonies by which they are surrounded, are criminal. I would
try to make each child know that these things are the result of a criminal conspiracy to destroy him. I would teach him that if he intends to get to be a man, he
must at once decide that he is stronger than this conspiracy and that he must
never make his peace with it. And that one of his weapons for refusing to make
his peace with it and for destroying it depends on what he decides he is worth. I
would teach him that there are currently very few standards in this country which
are worth a man’s respect. That it is up to him to begin to change these standards
for the sake of the life and the health of the country. I would suggest to him that
the popular culture — as represented, for example, on television and in comic books
and in movies — is based on fantasies created by very ill people, and he must be
aware that these are fantasies that have nothing to do with reality. I would teach
him that the press he reads is not as free as it says it is — and that he can do something about that, too. I would try to make him know that just as American history

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 202

6/18/12 3:11 PM

BAldwiN • A TAlk To TeAcHerS

203

is longer, larger, more various, more beautiful, and more terrible than anything
anyone has ever said about it, so is the world larger, more daring, more beautiful
and more terrible, but principally larger — and that it belongs to him. I would teach
him that he doesn’t have to be bound by the expediencies of any given administration, any given policy, any given morality; that he has the right and the necessity to examine everything. I would try to show him that one has not learned
anything about Castro when one says, “He is a Communist.” This is a way of his
learning something about Castro, something about Cuba, something, in time, about
the world. I would suggest to him that he is living, at the moment, in an enormous
province. America is not the world and if America is going to become a nation,
she must find a way — and this child must help her to find a way to use the tremendous potential and tremendous energy which this child represents. If this
country does not find a way to use that energy, it will be destroyed by that energy.

Exploring the Text
1. What relationship does James Baldwin establish with his audience in the opening
two paragraphs? How does he establish his ethos?
2. What is the “crucial paradox which confronts us here” (para. 2)?
3. Identify four appeals to pathos in paragraphs 3–5.
4. What is the effect of Baldwin’s emphasizing his personal experience when he
begins paragraph 6 with “I still remember my first sight of New York”?
5. Analyze Baldwin’s use of pronouns in paragraphs 8 and 9. What is his purpose in
alternating between first, second, and third person?
6. How would you describe Baldwin’s perspective on history? What is the effect of
using historical events to support his argument?
7. Why, in paragraph 11, does Baldwin use the term nigger? What effect would have
been lost — or gained — had he used a less provocative term?
8. What does Baldwin mean when he writes, “What passes for identity in America is
a series of myths about one’s heroic ancestors” (para. 15)?
9. What is the effect of the short two-sentence paragraph 17?
10. Identify examples of parallelism and repetition in the final, long paragraph. Discuss how Baldwin uses these strategies to achieve his purpose.
11. Where in this speech does Baldwin appeal to logos?
12. How would you describe Baldwin’s overall tone? Cite specific passages to support
your description.

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 203

6/18/12 3:11 PM

204

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

School
Kyoko Mori
kyoko mori, who was born in kobe, Japan, in 1957, earned both an mA and a Phd
from the university of wisconsin. She was a Briggs-copeland lecturer at Harvard
university for several years; she joined the creative writing faculty at George mason
university in Virginia in 2005. She is the author of three nonfiction books, several
novels, and numerous essays, many of which have appeared in the annual Best
American Essays. in her memoir, Polite Lies: On Being a Woman Caught between
Cultures (1999), she reflects on the differences between Japan and America. The following selection is a chapter from that book focusing on differences in education.

D

uring our senior year at college, some of my classmates said they could
hardly wait to graduate, to join “the real world.” They couldn’t concentrate on classes, knowing that they would soon be out of school forever. I didn’t
feel the same way at all. School seemed as “real” to me as “the outside world” — only
more interesting.
I still don’t trust the distinction often made between school and “the real world,”
which implies that there is something insubstantial or artificial about school. The
business meetings I attended in Milwaukee as an interpreter confirmed my suspicion that arcane and “academic” discussions don’t happen only at colleges. The
directors of two small companies, one Japanese and the other American, once had
a twenty-minute debate about whether the plastic cover of a particular camera lens
should be “pumpkin yellow” or “the yellow of raincoats.” What each man meant
by these terms was unclear to the other and had to be redefined many times over.
This is the conversation I recall now when I attend academic conferences and cannot understand what is being said about a book I have read more than once.
School and “the real world” both have their absurd moments, but school is
where people go when they are not satisfied with their “real world” lives and want
a change. Many Americans in their thirties and forties go back to college to get
trained for a different line of work or to pursue a lifelong interest they couldn’t
afford to study earlier. Until they are in need of such second chances, most Americans take colleges for granted because they are always there — almost any adult can
get into some college at any age.
Being able to go back to school is a particularly American opportunity. My
Japanese friends will never be able to do the same. In Japan, school does not give
anyone a second chance. Many of my Japanese friends are married women with
money who already have college degrees. But none of them can go back to college
to earn a second degree in art, education, or social work, as their American counterparts may do.
Recently, a few Japanese colleges have started accepting applications from adults
who have been out of school for years, but these colleges are exceptions. The only

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 204

5

6/18/12 3:11 PM

mori • ScHool

205

way most people can get into a college in Japan is to take and pass the entrance
examination for that particular college immediately after graduating from high
school. The number of exams a student can sit for in a given year is limited since
many schools give their exams on the same day.
A student who does not get into any college will have to wait a year, attending
a cram school. There is a word for a student in this situation — ronin (floating person). In feudal times, the word referred to samurai whose clan had been dissolved.
Feudal ronin had to roam around until they could find a new master to serve. To
be a modern ronin is scarcely better: while their friends move on to colleges or jobs,
ronin must float around for a year without any allegiance. In Japan, anyone who
doesn’t belong to the right group at the right time feels like a failure. If a ronin
can’t get into a college after a year at a cram school, he or she usually gives up and
settles for a low-paying job rather than spending another year floating around.
In the States, young people who don’t feel ready for college can work for a few
years and then apply when they feel more motivated or mature. Young Japanese
people don’t have the same chance. For older adults to go back to school to have
a second chance — at a job or an artistic career or personal fulfillment — is practically impossible.
The very accessibility of schools in America adds to the perception that they are not
real or substantial enough. Many Americans who criticize their own school system
for being “too easy” idealize the Japanese school system because they are drawn to
its rough image. The details Americans cite as the merits of the Japanese system
actually reflect their ideal of the mythical “real world” where people must work
hard — long hours, the emphasis on discipline and basic skills, the tough competition among peers. These people admire the Japanese school system because they
see it as a samurai version of their own fantasies about the American work ethic.
My education at a traditional Japanese grade school was nothing so glorious.
Day-to-day life at a Japanese public school was harsh but also boring. Until I
transferred to a private school in seventh grade, I didn’t learn anything that I
couldn’t have learned at home by reading and memorizing the same books with
my mother’s help.
Recently when I was in Japan, I was asked why I did not write my novels in
Japanese, why I did not at least translate my own work. The question surprised
me at first. The people who asked knew that for twelve years I have lived in a small
Wisconsin town where I have few opportunities to speak Japanese. No one can
write novels in a language she has not spoken every day for more than a decade.
But there is another reason I could not possibly have written my novels or poems
in Japanese: I was never taught to write in what was my native language. My public education in Japan prepared me to make the correct letters to spell out the
correct sounds, but that is not the same as teaching me how to write.

10

When I started the first grade at six, I had not been taught to read at home —
at least not in a formal way. Because my mother read to me all the time, I had

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 205

6/18/12 3:11 PM

206

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

memorized my favorite books and could read along with her. Sometimes, when
my mother and I were standing on the street corner waiting for a taxi, I noticed
that I could read the license plates of the cars passing by. I would read the plates
and she would nod and smile because I was right, but no big fuss was made about
my being able to read. Most of the other kids starting school with me were the
same way: we sort of knew how to read because of our mothers, but we hadn’t
been formally trained.
In first grade, we were taught the fifty phonetic signs that make up the Japanese alphabet, a dozen simple pictorial characters, and the basic numbers. By the
end of the year, everyone in our class could read our textbooks and write simple
messages to our family and friends in our sprawling, uneven handwriting. People
who admire the Japanese education system are partially right. Japanese schools are
very good at teaching skills like basic writing — which can only be learned through
memorization and repeated practice.
Once we learned the alphabet and some pictorial characters, my classmates
and I wrote compositions about our families, our vacations, our friends. Occasionally, our teachers had us write stories and poems as well. In summer, we were
given notebooks in which we had to keep “picture diaries”: on the upper, blank,
half we drew pictures, and on the lower, lined, half we wrote sentences about what
we did every day. These assignments gave us a lot of practice at writing.
When we got to the upper grades, though, our assignments changed. We no
longer wrote stories or poems; our compositions weren’t about our personal experiences or feelings. Almost every writing assignment was a book report or a summary of our reading. We had to follow a very strict formula, organizing our thoughts
under predetermined headings like “plot,” “characters,” “setting,” “themes,” “what
we learned from the book.” If we didn’t follow the format, we got poor grades.
The grades didn’t always make sense. Luckily, I did well most of the time, but
I wasn’t sure what I did right aside from adhering to the format. The only suggestions I got were circled corrections where I had used the wrong pictorial characters or general remarks about my bad penmanship.
A few of my friends didn’t do so well, but they were never given suggestions
for improvement. They would simply get low grades and comments like “Your
writing needs improvement,” “You didn’t really follow the directions for the assignment,” or “I can see you tried some but you still have a long way to go.” Often, our
teachers openly scolded pupils. In front of the whole class, my friends were told
to “pay better attention” and to “try harder.” It didn’t matter that most of them
were serious and well-behaved students, not lazy and inattentive troublemakers;
they were already trying hard, trying to pay attention.
No matter what the subject, our teachers never gave us very clear advice about
how to do better. When I couldn’t understand long division or fractions and decimals in math, I felt bad at first. On the timed tests we had every day, I could finish
only half the problems before the teacher’s stopwatch beeped, telling us to put down
our pencils. The results were put up on the wall, and my name was always near

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 206

15

6/18/12 3:11 PM

mori • ScHool

207

the bottom. I was told to “try harder,” but none of my teachers spent extra time
with me to go over what I was doing wrong. Since I wasn’t given a real chance to
improve, I decided after a while that I didn’t really care how I did.
Over and over again, our Japanese education offered this sort of harsh judgment combined with vague exhortation. In every subject, kids who didn’t do well
were made to feel ashamed and yet given no chance to improve. The humiliation
was especially obvious in physical education classes. At our grade school we were
expected to learn to swim in the same way we were expected to learn to write: by
sheer repetition and “trying harder.” We were left to swim around on our own,
but the pool hours weren’t just for fun. Each of us had to wear a cloth swim-cap
with the symbol that indicated our skill level. Students who couldn’t swim at all
were singled out by the big red circle sewn on top of their caps. “Red mark, red
mark, you’ll sink like a big hammer,” some of the other kids taunted, and the
teachers did nothing to stop them. I was glad that I already knew how to swim by
the time I started school.
For those of us who could swim, there were monthly tests to determine how
far we could go without stopping. For every five or ten meters we could swim, our
mothers sewed red or black lines on the side of our caps. Those who could swim
fifty meters in the crawl, sidestroke, or breaststroke got the best marks on their
caps: five all-black lines. In fifth grade, when I passed the test for fifty meters, my
teachers praised me for having “tried so hard,” even though I was able to do so
well only because my mother had taught me to swim in the river near her parents’
home. Unlike my teachers, my mother enjoyed giving specific instructions. She
drew diagrams on paper to show me what my arms and legs should be doing for
crawl and sidestroke. Then she made me lie down on the sand on the river bank
to practice the arm and leg movements. Once I was in the water, she stood on the
bank shouting out instructions like “Stretch your arms all the way,” “Turn your
head sideways.” When my form was wrong, she showed me by imitating me —
exaggerating my awkward movements and making me laugh. “I don’t look like
that,” I protested, but I knew exactly what I needed to improve.
I did not learn how to write in Japanese because even at the private school I
attended after seventh grade, Japanese language classes were taught by older men
who had studied classical Japanese literature or Chinese poetry at the national
universities before the war. They were the most conservative and traditional of all
our teachers. In their classes, we read the works of famous authors and wrote essays
to answer questions like: “What is the theme?” “When does the main character realize the importance of morality?” “What important Buddhist philosophy is expressed
in this passage?” All the writing we did for our extracurricular activities — for
skits or school newspapers and magazines — was supervised by younger teachers
who did not teach Japanese.
During those same years, we learned how to write in English. Our English
teachers were young Japanese women who had studied in the States or England,

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 207

20

6/18/12 3:11 PM

208

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

and American women from small Midwestern towns who had just graduated
from college. In their classes, we wrote essays about our families, friends, hobbies,
future dreams — personal subjects we had not written about at school since third
grade. We were given plenty of instruction about the specifics of writing: word
choice, description, style. Our essays came back with comments both about our
writing and about the thoughts we had expressed. I looked forward to writing
essays and reading my teachers’ comments. By the time I was a high school senior,
I wanted to be a writer, and English was the only language I could write in.
To study writing, I had to go to an American college. Creative writing was
not — and still is not — offered at Japanese colleges, in English or in Japanese. I
don’t know how Japanese writers learn to write, since most of them, as children,
must have had the same kind of education I had. There are no schools or writers’
conferences where a person can study creative writing as an adult. I have never
heard of people getting together to form a writing group or workshop.
Writing is not something that comes naturally to the chosen few. Most American writers of my generation didn’t just learn to write on their own. Without the
classes we took in creative writing and modern literature, we wouldn’t have known
what to read, how to read it, how to pay attention to form and content. We needed
to be shown how to write good dialogue, smooth transitions, pared-down but
vivid character descriptions. These things didn’t come naturally. It would have
taken us thirty years to learn, on our own, the same skills we learned in eight years
of college and graduate school. My friends at graduate school came from average
Midwestern homes; they were not children of famous writers. School gave us a
chance we would never have had otherwise. In America, we are proof that the
romantic notion of the natural writer is a myth. In Japan, where no formal training is offered in writing, the myth may be a sad reality that prevents many people
from becoming writers.
My stepmother used the traditional method of harsh judgment even though she
was not a teacher. When Michiko came to live with my family, I was twelve and
already knew how to cook and bake simple foods like omelettes and chocolate
chip cookies and how to clean up the kitchen. But my attempts to help Michiko
always ended in disaster. She complained endlessly about how I had not been
taught to do things the “proper way.” Everything I did, from drying the dishes to
sweeping the floor, was wrong. “I can’t believe that you don’t know how to do
this,” she would scold in her shrill voice, and yet she never showed me exactly
what the “proper way” was. When I asked, “What do you mean? What am I doing
wrong?” she would scream, “If I have to tell you, then it’s no good. I can’t show
you something you should already know.” I was supposed to watch her silently
and learn on my own through observation, but she made me too nervous to concentrate. I had no idea what I was supposed to be looking for. If I gave up and
asked, “Do you mean the way I am holding the broom or are you saying that I
should start over there instead of here?” she would stomp out of the kitchen without a word.

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 208

6/18/12 3:11 PM

mori • ScHool

209

I know that Michiko’s silent and judgmental manner was a manifestation of
her meanspiritedness, but she didn’t invent the method. The tradition of not giving specific instruction comes from Zen. In traditional Zen philosophy, satori or
enlightenment is considered to be beyond human description. Since no one can
describe satori or ways to attain it, the teacher-monk asks his disciples a series of
koans — questions meant to puzzle and disturb rather than to provide answers.
The whole purpose of the koan is to break down the disciples’ reliance on their
own intellect by humiliating them. At its worst, the teaching technique amounts
to intellectual or spiritual hazing. The disciples are supposed to hit bottom and
suffer terrible despair before they can open their eyes to satori and experience
beauty and peace that is beyond logic or description.
To my American friends who took up Zen in college, this style of teaching
seemed liberating because of its apparent emphasis on a larger and unexplainable
truth instead of minute and trivial details. After years of American education, my
friends were tired of specific instruction. All the rules they had to learn about
writing good paragraphs or improving their tennis swings struck them as fussy
and superficial. Zen taught them that everything they had learned in their Western education was an illusion that needed to be shattered. The very destructiveness and uncertainty of enlightenment sounded uplifting.
But in the Zen-style teaching actually practiced in Japan, students are not
liberated from minute details. The details are everything. A beginning calligraphy
student writes the same letters over and over, trying to make her brush strokes
look exactly like her master’s. If she puts one dot five millimeters too far to the
right, her work is considered flawed. The master does not point out her mistake.
“No, not right yet,” he grunts. “Do it over.” Until the student can see for herself
that her dot is in the wrong place, she will have to keep copying the same letters —
she has not reached “enlightenment.”
In America, students are often drilled on the details of grammar or form and
yet are forgiven for the minor mistakes they make in their writing. Their teacher
might say, “You have a couple of awkward sentences and punctuation mistakes
here, but your paper is excellent overall. Your ideas are good and you write with a
wonderful voice.” Hearing comments like these, my friends concluded that their
teachers were being inconsistent. If the minor details weren’t important in the
end, why did the teachers spend so much time on them?
The paradox about the two styles of teaching is that neither emphasizes what
it considers to be truly important. In calligraphy and other traditional arts derived
from Zen, following the correct form is everything — there is no possibility that
you can make a few minor mistakes and still “get” the spirit or the essence of
the “truth” — and yet instruction consists of vague exhortation about “following the right balance” and “working hard.” In America, where teachers actually
value the overall spirit of the work, they spend most of their time talking about
details.
This paradox reflects a common ground all teachers share. No matter what
and how we teach, we believe that what we value the most is beyond our meager

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 209

25

30

6/18/12 3:11 PM

210

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

ability to describe. We are struck dumb with admiration at the things we value, so
we try to teach the secondary things that we think are easier to talk about. Like
most American writing teachers, I value the overall spirit or genuine voice in my
students’ work and yet nag them about the smaller details of technique like trimming their lines or writing better dialogue. Mine is a Western approach — the
same method of instruction is apparent even in the Bible, which gives God a
name that cannot be spoken, while offering book after book detailing the laws
about how to build a temple or what foods should not be eaten together.
My Japanese teachers, who thought that detail was everything, must have felt
that precision was so important that it could not be described: only the truly
enlightened can be in perfect harmony with the correct form. In the meantime,
they must have reasoned, they could at least talk about the value of hard work,
something everyone can easily understand. The contradiction we share points to
the difficulty of teaching anything: trying to pass on knowledge that seems so
clear to ourselves to people who don’t have that knowledge. When my stepmother
complained, “How can I teach you something you should already know?” she was
expressing in its meanest form the universal frustration of teachers.
In spite of our shared frustration, though, I have a hard time forgiving some of
my former teachers in Japan because they never seemed humbled by the near
impossibility of their task. Many of my teachers felt entitled to be both strict and
arbitrary — strict about their own authority and the rules of the system and yet
so arbitrary and lax about helping us.
In Japan, whether you are in school or at your private karate, judo, or ikebana1
lesson, you can never question the authority of the teacher, whom you address
simply as “sensei,” literally, “one whose life comes first.” Unless there are multiple
teachers who need to be distinguished from one another, you do not even use
their family names, much less first names (which you most likely do not know).
The teacher is like the biblical God, whom you cannot name.
Students are not expected to question the competence of their teachers or the
usefulness of their assignments, any more than Zen disciples can rebel against
their master and his koans. Japanese students who study at American universities
are amazed that at the end of the semester most universities ask their students to
evaluate their teachers. Even though students in Japan complain to each other
about their teachers, they would never think of writing an evaluation or filing
official grievances.
In the teaching of many traditional Japanese art forms, the teacher’s authority is backed up by a complete hierarchy called ie that controls instruction. Even
the choice of this word, since it means both “house” and “family origin,” reflects
high expectations of allegiance. What is described in English as a “school” (such

35

1Japanese art of flower arrangement. — Eds.

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 210

6/18/12 3:11 PM

mori • ScHool

211

as a school of writing or painting) is actually a “family” in Japanese. Each ie is
structured like a family hierarchy: at the top is the head teacher, called iemoto
(source of the house), and under him are various assistant teachers who, in
turn, take their own assistants. All these teachers are licensed by the ie. A beginner
in ikebana or Japanese dance will study with a minor assistant teacher for a few
years and then move on to a more advanced teacher. There are various levels of
competence awarded along the way, but every advancement must be approved by
the ie.
The system makes it impossible for a student to challenge any teacher’s decision, since the teacher can invoke the authority of the whole clanlike hierarchy.
Teachers can make any arbitrary decision so long as it can be backed up by the ie.
When my cousin Kazumi studied ikebana, she was disillusioned by the unfair
judgments her teachers made every year about who should be allowed to advance
to the next level of competence. There were no tests or lists of tasks and qualities
that determined the advancements. Who advanced and who didn’t seemed entirely
up to the teachers’ whims. People who were related to any of the teachers rose
through the ranks much faster than those who weren’t.
Whether or not they won an advancement to the next level, all the students
were required to attend the annual certificate ceremony in their best kimonos.
The year of the Kobe earthquake Kazumi received a letter from her ie advising
students to rent a good kimono to attend the annual ceremony if theirs had been
destroyed in the earthquake.
“I had been disillusioned with ikebana for some time anyway,” Kazumi told
me, “but the letter was the last straw. I couldn’t believe that the teachers thought
this was a time for people to be worrying about their kimonos. Even though the
letter said that we didn’t necessarily have to have a nice kimono if our family had
suffered such a great damage that we had no money, the tone was very condescending — and it was obvious that they were really saying that we should rent
one no matter what the cost. They didn’t write and say, ‘We are so sorry about the
earthquake. We would be so happy if you could still come to the annual ceremony
in spite of the damage many of you must have suffered, and of course, you can
wear whatever you would like.’”
She switched to Dutch-style flower arrangement even though it, too, has a
nationwide association that oversees its teaching and licensing. Like ikebana, Dutch
flower arrangement has different levels of teachers and different levels of competence, but Kazumi sees a big difference between the two. To advance from one to
the next in the Dutch style, people take tests in which each person is given a bucket
of flowers to make into a table arrangement, a small bouquet, and a corsage; a
group of judges scores the results. Everybody has the same amount of time, the
same number of arrangements to complete, similar flowers in the bucket, and the
same group of judges. Evaluation isn’t arbitrary the way it was for ikebana. In
the lessons she took — mostly from Dutch teachers — plenty of specific instruction
was given about colors, textures, shapes, and the flowers themselves. Her teachers

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 211

6/18/12 3:11 PM

212

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

looked at her work and gave her suggestions — something none of her ikebana
teachers ever did.
Until I talked to Kazumi, I was hoping that even though my Japanese friends
could not go back to school in their thirties and forties, they might be able to take
private lessons or receive training through volunteer work in order to pursue some
of their interests. Even in small towns like Green Bay, many people my age can
learn new skills, pursue their hobbies, or work for causes they believe in without
enrolling in school.
My Japanese friends do not have similar chances to learn something new or
feel useful. There are very few volunteer organizations in Japan for nature conservation, crisis intervention, helping children, or working with families who are
poor or homeless. The few soup kitchens one might find in big Japanese cities are
operated by international organizations like the Salvation Army. People who work
at them are mostly foreigners. A nice Japanese housewife is not expected to do
volunteer work for strangers. “If she has time to help people she doesn’t even
know,” her relatives would grumble, “why doesn’t she do more to help her own
kids study? Why doesn’t she run for an office in the P.T.A. at their school?” Most
middle-class Japanese people seem to think that poor people deserve to be poor —
it’s their own fault or the fault of their families and relatives. Nobody should
expect help from total strangers. As for conserving nature, that is the job of biologists.
My friends have a hard time justifying their passion for gardening to their husbands and in-laws. If they were to spend their afternoons taking care of injured
wildlife or clearing marshes of trash instead of cleaning their houses and preparing
special meals for their children, their families would probably disown them.
Nice housewives like my friends can take private lessons only if they can be
justified as genteel means of cultivating fine, feminine tastes — like ikebana, tea,
koto and samisen2 music — but these are the traditional Japanese arts with the
strict ie structure. Joining the ie would involve my friends in another burdensome
system of duties and obligations, something they already experience in every
facet of their lives.

40

In so many ways, Japan is a place of no second chances. Many of my friends are in
very unhappy marriages. They write to me about the shouting and shoving matches
they have with their husbands, about the night they tried to run away, only to
have the husband chase them down the street, catch them, and drag them home.
Unable to run away, my friends lock themselves up in the guest room or sleep in
their daughters’ rooms to avoid sleeping with their husbands. For most American
women, leaving a bad marriage like theirs would be nothing but happiness. My
friends stay because divorce still carries a big stigma in Japan. If they leave their
2Traditional Japanese instruments. A koto has thirteen strings of fixed tonality and is plucked,
like a harp. A samisen has three strings on a fingerboard and is picked, like a banjo. — Eds.

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 212

6/18/12 3:11 PM

mori • ScHool

213

husbands, they may never be able to see their children again. Certainly, they will
not be able to marry again and try another chance at marriage. Nobody marries a
divorced middle-aged woman in Japan.
Life in Japan is like an unending stint at a school where you have to keep taking tests — giving your answers under pressure without help or guidance, knowing that you will get no second chance if you make a mistake. Japanese people
have to make many of the big decisions of their lives — whom to marry, what company to join — without detailed information, since it is rude to ask direct questions even at omiai meetings3 and job interviews. They have no choice but to trust
authority and do their best, just as they were supposed to do in school. If their job
or marriage turns out to be a disappointment, they will be given the same vague
exhortations they heard from their teachers: keep trying, work hard, pay attention.
There is nothing intrinsically wrong with trying harder. Sometimes when I
see my former students in Green Bay seeming to flounder — waiting on tables or
working clerical jobs they hate, the whole time talking about their big plans to “go
back to school” soon — I think maybe a little Japanese perseverance might not
hurt them. I know that for them or for anyone else, going back to school does not
guarantee a job or happiness. Within school, too, when my students complain
that everything we read in a modern American literature class is depressing or that
I simply do not “like” their work (when every poem they wrote in the class is a
love poem in couplets), I long for a little Japanese respect for authority. Some of
my students would be better off if they trusted me a little rather than questioning
my decisions at every turn. Still, I would rather have students who question too
much than those who assume that I know best and don’t owe them any explanations. No one should have power that is unjustified and unjustifiable, regardless
of how convenient or efficient it may seem for the smooth running of the classroom, the educational system, or the country.
The problem with the Japanese system, ultimately, is that individual freedom —
to question the teacher, to disagree — is sacrificed for the supposed convenience
and protection of the whole group. The system works well for people who feel no
desire to rebel. The Japanese ie system my cousin complained about does ensure
that anyone who perseveres in a given art form will have some recognition; periodically, every student is asked to take part in public exhibitions or concerts. Most
Japanese students have public-performance opportunities many of my American
friends — artists and musicians — don’t.
But for me — as well as for my cousin — the price is too high. The security
comes with too many obligations. The ie system asks that you trust your teachers
who have not earned or deserved your trust. What you are required to have is blind
faith in the ie: like the church or the mosque, the ie is an institution that is designed
to inspire total obedience to its rules. In Japan, if you reject your chance to enjoy

45

3
Meetings in which two singles and their families meet to determine whether they would be a
suitable match for marriage. — Eds.

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 213

6/18/12 3:11 PM

214

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

the security that comes from joining the right group such as an ie, an elite school,
a good company, or a respectable family, you will have to leave the country or live
in it as an outcast. Life in Japan resembles the harshest interpretation of a religious
faith: the Koran or the sword, either you are with Christ or against him, either you
join the sheltering umbrella of Japanese security or you have nothing. In school
and elsewhere, people are rewarded for obeying the rules diligently, never for taking a chance and being different, or for asking good questions.
But words like security and uncertainty are misleading. Because Dutch-style
flower arrangement is not as popular as ikebana and the association does not provide the same kind of protection that a traditional ie gives its teachers, my cousin
is struggling to get enough students for the classes she offers. She has quit her
clerical job, which she did not like, and committed herself to the life of a flowerarrangement teacher. She isn’t going to get a second chance at being a clerk or
going back to ikebana. My cousin’s life is uncertain and insecure. But daily, as she
arranges her own flowers and watches her students cutting and arranging theirs,
she is certain of other things. She knows when she is making a good arrangement
and when she is not. In Dutch-style arrangements, my cousin has learned what
colors and shapes look pleasing; she has a firm sense of what she considers beautiful. She also knows that she will tell her students exactly what she thinks about
their work rather than keeping her criticism to herself or being vague. Kazumi
feels a certainty about truth, beauty, honesty. That is the only certainty worth
choosing.

Exploring the Text
1. According to Kyoko Mori, what are the major differences between the Japanese
and American educational systems? Summarize them.
2. Why does she place the phrase “the real world” in quotation marks (para. 1)?
3. What is the effect of Mori’s introducing Japanese terms, especially ronin (para. 6),
at the beginning of the essay?
4. Does Mori’s reliance on personal experience limit or enhance her analysis?
Explain.
5. What does Mori mean by the “romantic notion of the natural writer” (para. 23)?
To what extent do you believe that writing skill is a matter of “natural” talent?
6. What is the “paradox” that Mori refers to in paragraph 30?
7. What is Mori’s purpose in including her cousin Kazumi’s experience (paras.
36–39)?
8. Describe the arrangement of this essay. At the most general level, it is organized
as a comparison/contrast, but it is made up of eight sections that are separated by
space within the text. Would you say that this structure is governed more by logos
or pathos?
9. Apart from the fact that her book is written in English, how do you know that
Western readers are her audience?

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 214

6/18/12 3:11 PM

Alexie • SuPermAN ANd me

215

10. How would you describe Mori’s attitude toward Japan in this essay? Is she sympathetic? Harsh? Ambivalent? Cite specific passages to support your response.
11. How does your own experience in school compare with Mori’s as she describes it
in paragraphs 15–19?

Superman and Me
Sherman Alexie
Sherman J. Alexie Jr. (b. 1966), a member of the Spokane and the coeur d’Alene
tribes, grew up on the Spokane reservation in washington state. A graduate of
washington State university, he has published more than twenty books, most notably
The Lone Ranger and Tonto Fistfight in Heaven (1993), The Absolutely True Diary of
a Part-Time Indian (2007), and War Dances (2009), which won the PeN/Faulkner
Award for best American fiction. one of the stories in the Lone Ranger collection
was the basis for the movie Smoke Signals (1999), for which Alexie wrote the screenplay. An activist for Native American rights and culture, Alexie wrote the following
essay describing the impact of reading on his life. it was originally published in the
Los Angeles Times in 1998 for a series called “The Joy of reading and writing.”

I

learned to read with a Superman comic book. Simple enough, I suppose. I
cannot recall which particular Superman comic book I read, nor can I
remember which villain he fought in that issue. I cannot remember the plot, nor
the means by which I obtained the comic book. What I can remember is this: I was
3 years old, a Spokane Indian boy living with his family on the Spokane Indian
Reservation in eastern Washington state. We were poor by most standards, but
one of my parents usually managed to find some minimum-wage job or another,
which made us middle-class by reservation standards. I had a brother and three
sisters. We lived on a combination of irregular paychecks, hope, fear and government surplus food.
My father, who is one of the few Indians who went to Catholic school on purpose, was an avid reader of westerns, spy thrillers, murder mysteries, gangster epics,
basketball player biographies and anything else he could find. He bought his books
by the pound at Dutch’s Pawn Shop, Goodwill, Salvation Army and Value Village.
When he had extra money, he bought new novels at supermarkets, convenience
stores and hospital gift shops. Our house was filled with books. They were stacked in
crazy piles in the bathroom, bedrooms and living room. In a fit of unemploymentinspired creative energy, my father built a set of bookshelves and soon filled them
with a random assortment of books about the Kennedy assassination, Watergate,
the Vietnam War and the entire 23-book series of the Apache westerns. My father
loved books, and since I loved my father with an aching devotion, I decided to love
books as well.

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 215

6/18/12 3:11 PM

216

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

I can remember picking up my father’s books before I could read. The words
themselves were mostly foreign, but I still remember the exact moment when I
first understood, with a sudden clarity, the purpose of a paragraph. I didn’t have
the vocabulary to say “paragraph,” but I realized that a paragraph was a fence that
held words. The words inside a paragraph worked together for a common purpose.
They had some specific reason for being inside the same fence. This knowledge
delighted me. I began to think of everything in terms of paragraphs. Our reservation was a small paragraph within the United States. My family’s house was a paragraph, distinct from the other paragraphs of the LeBrets to the north, the Fords
to our south and the Tribal School to the west. Inside our house, each family member existed as a separate paragraph but still had genetics and common experiences to link us. Now, using this logic, I can see my changed family as an essay of
seven paragraphs: mother, father, older brother, the deceased sister, my younger
twin sisters and our adopted little brother.
At the same time I was seeing the world in paragraphs, I also picked up that
Superman comic book. Each panel, complete with picture, dialogue and narrative, was a three-dimensional paragraph. In one panel, Superman breaks through
a door. His suit is red, blue and yellow. The brown door shatters into many pieces.
I look at the narrative above the picture. I cannot read the words, but I assume it
tells me that “Superman is breaking down the door.” Aloud, I pretend to read the
words and say, “Superman is breaking down the door.” Words, dialogue, also float
out of Superman’s mouth. Because he is breaking down the door, I assume he says,
“I am breaking down the door.” Once again, I pretend to read the words and say
aloud, “I am breaking down the door.” In this way, I learned to read.
This might be an interesting story all by itself. A little Indian boy teaches
himself to read at an early age and advances quickly. He reads Grapes of Wrath in
kindergarten when other children are struggling through Dick and Jane. If he’d
been anything but an Indian boy living on the reservation, he might have been
called a prodigy. But he is an Indian boy living on the reservation and is simply an
oddity. He grows into a man who often speaks of his childhood in the third-person,
as if it will somehow dull the pain and make him sound more modest about his
talents.

5

A smart Indian is a dangerous person, widely feared and ridiculed by Indians
and non-Indians alike. I fought with my classmates on a daily basis. They wanted
me to stay quiet when the non-Indian teacher asked for answers, for volunteers, for help. We were Indian children who were expected to be stupid. Most
lived up to those expectations inside the classroom but subverted them on the
outside. They struggled with basic reading in school but could remember how
to sing a few dozen powwow songs. They were monosyllabic in front of their
non-Indian teachers but could tell complicated stories and jokes at the dinner
table. They submissively ducked their heads when confronted by a non-Indian
adult but would slug it out with the Indian bully who was 10 years older. As

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 216

6/18/12 3:11 PM

Alexie • SuPermAN ANd me

217

Indian children, we were expected to fail in the non-Indian world. Those who
failed were ceremonially accepted by other Indians and appropriately pitied by
non-Indians.
I refused to fail. I was smart. I was arrogant. I was lucky. I read books late into
the night, until I could barely keep my eyes open. I read books at recess, then
during lunch and in the few minutes left after I had finished my classroom assignments. I read books in the car when my family traveled to powwows or basketball
games. In shopping malls, I ran to the bookstores and read bits and pieces of as
many books as I could. I read the books my father brought home from the pawnshops and secondhand. I read the books I borrowed from the library. I read the
backs of cereal boxes. I read the newspaper. I read the bulletins posted on the walls
of the school, the clinic, the tribal offices, the post office. I read junk mail. I read
auto-repair manuals. I read magazines. I read anything that had words and paragraphs. I read with equal parts joy and desperation. I loved those books, but I also
knew that love had only one purpose. I was trying to save my life.
Despite all the books I read, I am still surprised I became a writer. I was going
to be a pediatrician. These days, I write novels, short stories, and poems. I visit
schools and teach creative writing to Indian kids. In all my years in the reservation school system, I was never taught how to write poetry, short stories or novels.
I was certainly never taught that Indians wrote poetry, short stories and novels.
Writing was something beyond Indians. I cannot recall a single time that a guest
teacher visited the reservation. There must have been visiting teachers. Who were
they? Where are they now? Do they exist? I visit the schools as often as possible.
The Indian kids crowd the classroom. Many are writing their own poems, short
stories and novels. They have read my books. They have read many other books.
They look at me with bright eyes and arrogant wonder. They are trying to save
their lives. Then there are the sullen and already defeated Indian kids who sit in
the back rows and ignore me with theatrical precision. The pages of their notebooks are empty. They carry neither pencil nor pen. They stare out the window.
They refuse and resist. “Books,” I say to them. “Books,” I say. I throw my weight
against their locked doors. The door holds. I am smart. I am arrogant. I am lucky.
I am trying to save our lives.

Exploring the Text
1. What figure of speech is the following: “We lived on a combination of irregular
paychecks, hope, fear and government surplus food” (para. 1)? What is its effect?
2. In what ways does the description of Sherman Alexie’s father play against stereotypes of Native Americans?
3. What is the effect of Alexie’s analogy of a paragraph to a fence (para. 3)?
4. What does Alexie mean when he describes “an Indian boy” who “grows into a man
who often speaks of his childhood in the third-person” (para. 5)?

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 217

6/18/12 3:11 PM

218

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

5. In paragraph 7, Alexie deliberately uses a number of short, simple sentences.
What effect do you think he trying to achieve?
6. This eight-paragraph essay is divided into two distinct sections. Why? How would
you describe its arrangement? How does it suit Alexie’s overall purpose?
7. Discuss Alexie’s use of parallel structure and repetition in the last two paragraphs.
Pay particular attention to the final sentence in each.
8. Who is the audience for this essay? Cite specific passages to support your response.
9. What is your first memory of books and reading? Do you associate it with a specific person or setting? How has your early experience affected your attitude toward
books and reading?
10. Alexie writes that he read to save his life, and many others have written that books
opened up worlds and possibilities that gave them a new life. Do you believe that
reading and books can still have that power? Explain.
11. Will you read books — plain old two-dimensional print texts with pictures — to
your children? During these times of Kindles and e-books and iPads and other
electronic means of presenting what traditionally existed on paper, do you think
that books per se will be important to the next generation? Explain the reasons
for your view.

Me Talk Pretty One Day
David Sedaris
one of America’s premier humorists, david Sedaris (b. 1956) is a playwright, essayist, and frequent contributor to National Public radio. Five of his essay collections
have been best sellers, including Naked (1997), Holidays on Ice (1997), Me Talk
Pretty One Day (2000), Dress Your Family in Corduroy and Denim (2004), and When
You Are Engulfed in Flames (2008). His most recent book is Squirrel Seeks Chipmunk:
A Modest Bestiary (2010), a collection of humorous short stories. Sedaris has been
nominated for three Grammy Awards for Best Spoken word and Best comedy Album.
much of his satiric humor is autobiographical and self-effacing as he points out the
foolishness and foibles of the human condition.

A

t the age of forty-one, I am returning to school and have to think of
myself as what my French textbook calls “a true debutant.” After paying
my tuition, I was issued a student ID, which allows me a discounted entry fee at
movie theaters, puppet shows, and Festyland, a far-flung amusement park that
advertises with billboards picturing a cartoon stegosaurus sitting in a canoe and
eating what appears to be a ham sandwich.
I’ve moved to Paris with the hopes of learning the language. My school is an
easy ten-minute walk from my apartment, and on the first day of class I arrived

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 218

6/18/12 3:11 PM

SedAriS • me TAlk PreTTy oNe dAy

219

early, watching as the returning students greeted one another in the school lobby.
Vacations were recounted, and questions were raised concerning mutual friends
with names like Kang and Vlatnya. Regardless of their nationalities, everyone spoke
in what sounded to me like excellent French. Some accents were better than others, but the students exhibited an ease and confidence I found intimidating. As an
added discomfort, they were all young, attractive, and well dressed, causing me to
feel not unlike Pa Kettle1 trapped backstage after a fashion show.
The first day of class was nerve-racking because I knew I’d be expected to
perform. That’s the way they do it here — it’s everybody into the language pool,
sink or swim. The teacher marched in, deeply tanned from a recent vacation, and
proceeded to rattle off a series of administrative announcements. I’ve spent quite
a few summers in Normandy, and I took a monthlong French class before leaving
New York. I’m not completely in the dark, yet I understood only half of what this
woman was saying.
“If you have not meimslsxp or lgpdmurct by this time, then you should not be in
this room. Has everyone apzkiubjxow? Everyone? Good, we shall begin.” She spread
out her lesson plan and sighed, saying, “All right, then, who knows the alphabet?”
It was startling because (a) I hadn’t been asked that question in a while and
(b) I realized, while laughing, that I myself did not know the alphabet. They’re the
same letters, but in France they’re pronounced differently. I know the shape of the
alphabet but had no idea what it actually sounded like.
“Ahh.” The teacher went to the board and sketched the letter a. “Do we have
anyone in the room whose first name commences with an ahh?”
Two Polish Annas raised their hands, and the teacher instructed them to present
themselves by stating their names, nationalities, occupations, and a brief list of things
they liked and disliked in this world. The first Anna hailed from an industrial town
outside of Warsaw and had front teeth the size of tombstones. She worked as a
seamstress, enjoyed quiet times with friends, and hated the mosquito.
“Oh, really,” the teacher said. “How very interesting. I thought that everyone
loved the mosquito, but here, in front of all the world, you claim to detest him.
How is it that we’ve been blessed with someone as unique and original as you?
Tell us, please?”
The seamstress did not understand what was being said but knew that this
was an occasion for shame. Her rabbity mouth huffed for breath, and she stared
down at her lap as though the appropriate comeback were stitched somewhere
alongside the zipper of her slacks.
The second Anna learned from the first and claimed to love sunshine and
detest lies. It sounded like a translation of one of those Playmate of the Month
data sheets, the answers always written in the same loopy handwriting: “Turn-ons:

5

10

1Ma and Pa Kettle were comic film characters from the 1940s to 1950s. They were caricatures
of unsophisticated country folk. — Eds.

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 219

6/18/12 3:11 PM

220

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

Mom’s famous five-alarm chili! Turnoffs: insecurity and guys who come on too
strong!!!!”
The two Polish Annas surely had clear notions of what they loved and hated,
but like the rest of us, they were limited in terms of vocabulary, and this made them
appear less than sophisticated. The teacher forged on, and we learned that Carlos,
the Argentine bandonion player, loved wine, music, and, in his words, “making sex
with the womens of the world.” Next came a beautiful young Yugoslav who identified herself as an optimist, saying that she loved everything that life had to offer.
The teacher licked her lips, revealing a hint of the saucebox we would later come
to know. She crouched low for her attack, placed her hands on the young woman’s
desk, and leaned close, saying, “Oh yeah? And do you love your little war?”
While the optimist struggled to defend herself, I scrambled to think of an
answer to what had obviously become a trick question. How often is one asked
what he loves in this world? More to the point, how often is one asked and then
publicly ridiculed for his answer? I recalled my mother, flushed with wine, pounding the tabletop late one night, saying, “Love? I love a good steak cooked rare. I love
my cat, and I love . . .” My sisters and I leaned forward, waiting to hear our names.
“Tums,” our mother said. “I love Tums.”
The teacher killed some time accusing the Yugoslavian girl of masterminding
a program of genocide, and I jotted frantic notes in the margins of my pad. While
I can honestly say that I love leafing through medical textbooks devoted to severe
dermatological conditions, the hobby is beyond the reach of my French vocabulary, and acting it out would only have invited controversy.
When called upon, I delivered an effortless list of things that I detest: blood
sausage, intestinal pâtés, brain pudding. I’d learned these words the hard way. Having given it some thought, I then declared my love for IBM typewriters, the French
word for bruise, and my electric floor waxer. It was a short list, but still I managed
to mispronounce IBM and assign the wrong gender to both the floor waxer and
the typewriter. The teacher’s reaction led me to believe that these mistakes were
capital crimes in the country of France.
“Were you always this palicmkrexis?” she asked. “Even a fiuscrzsa ticiwelmun
knows that a typewriter is feminine.”
I absorbed as much of her abuse as I could understand, thinking — but not
saying — that I find it ridiculous to assign a gender to an inanimate object
incapable of disrobing and making an occasional fool of itself. Why refer to Lady
Crack Pipe or Good Sir Dishrag when these things could never live up to all that
their sex implied?
The teacher proceeded to belittle everyone from German Eva, who hated laziness, to Japanese Yukari, who loved paintbrushes and soap. Italian, Thai, Dutch,
Korean, and Chinese — we all left class foolishly believing that the worst was over.
She’d shaken us up a little, but surely that was just an act designed to weed out the
deadweight. We didn’t know it then, but the coming months would teach us what
is was like to spend time in the presence of a wild animal, something completely

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 220

15

6/18/12 3:11 PM

SedAriS • me TAlk PreTTy oNe dAy

221

unpredictable. Her temperament was not based on a series of good and bad days,
but, rather, good and bad moments. We soon learned to dodge chalk and protect our
heads and stomachs whenever she approached us with a question. She hadn’t yet
punched anyone, but it seemed wise to protect ourselves against the inevitable.
Though we were forbidden to speak anything but French, the teacher would
occasionally use us to practice any of her five fluent languages.
“I hate you,” she said to me one afternoon. Her English was flawless. “I really,
really hate you.” Call me sensitive, but I couldn’t help but take it personally.
After being singled out as a lazy kfdtinvfm, I took to spending four hours a
night on my homework, putting in even more time whenever we were assigned
an essay. I suppose I could have gotten by with less, but I was determined to create
some sort of identity for myself: David the hard worker, David the cut-up. We’d
have one of those “complete this sentence” exercises, and I’d fool with the thing for
hours, invariably settling on something like “A quick run around the lake? I’d love
to! Just give me a moment while I strap on my wooden leg.” The teacher, through
word and action, conveyed the message that if this was my idea of an identity, she
wanted nothing to do with it.
My fear and discomfort crept beyond the borders of the classroom and accompanied me out onto the wide boulevards. Stopping for coffee, asking directions,
depositing money in my bank account: these things were out of the question, as
they involved having to speak. Before beginning school, there’d been no shutting
me up, but now I was convinced that everything I said was wrong. When the phone
rang, I ignored it. If someone asked me a question, I pretended to be deaf. I knew
my fear was getting the best of me when I started wondering why they don’t sell
cuts of meat in vending machines.
My only comfort was the knowledge that I was not alone. Huddled in the
hallways and making the most of our pathetic French, my fellow students and I
engaged in the sort of conversation commonly overheard in refugee camps.
“Sometime me cry alone at night.”
“That be common for I, also, but be more strong, you. Much work and someday you talk pretty. People start love you soon. Maybe tomorrow, okay.”
Unlike the French class I had taken in New York, here there was no sense of
competition. When the teacher poked a shy Korean in the eyelid with a freshly
sharpened pencil, we took no comfort in the fact that, unlike Hyeyoon Cho, we all
knew the irregular past tense of the verb to defeat. In all fairness, the teacher hadn’t
meant to stab the girl, but neither did she spend much time apologizing, saying
only, “Well, you should have been vkkdyo more kdeynfulh.”
Over time it became impossible to believe that any of us would ever improve.
Fall arrived and it rained every day, meaning we would now be scolded for the water
dripping from our coats and umbrellas. It was mid-October when the teacher
singled me out, saying, “Every day spent with you is like having a cesarean section.”
And it struck me that, for the first time since arriving in France, I could understand every word that someone was saying.

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 221

20

25

6/18/12 3:11 PM

222

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

Understanding doesn’t mean that you can suddenly speak the language. Far
from it. It’s a small step, nothing more, yet its rewards are intoxicating and deceptive. The teacher continued her diatribe and I settled back, bathing in the subtle
beauty of each new curse and insult.
“You exhaust me with your foolishness and reward my efforts with nothing
but pain, do you understand me?”
The world opened up, and it was with great joy that I responded, “I know the
thing that you speak exact now. Talk me more, you, plus, please, plus.”

30

Exploring the Text
1. How does David Sedaris establish a humorous tone in the first two paragraphs?
What details contribute to this tone?
2. How does Sedaris manage to make us laugh at the other students without seeming
to mock or make fun of them? What effect does he achieve by including actual
dialogue?
3. How does Sedaris characterize the teacher? Is she intentionally cruel, an effective
teacher, an overly strict disciplinarian? Is she portrayed as a stereotype? Refer to
specific details and passages from the essay to explain your response.
4. What does Sedaris mean when he writes that “understanding” another language is “a
small step, nothing more, yet its rewards are intoxicating and deceptive” (para. 28)?
5. Sedaris uses both understatement and hyperbole in this essay. Identify two examples
of each, and explain the effect.
6. Like most humorists, Sedaris makes a serious point through laughter and comedy.
What is his point in this essay? Try stating it in one or two sentences.
7. Sedaris describes what for most of us would be a very unusual class — that is, a
class in a foreign country with students from all over the world. Yet, for this essay
to be funny, it must resonate with us to some extent. What aspect of the experience
of being a student does Sedaris count on as common ground between himself and
his readers?
8. In Laughter: An Essay on the Meaning of the Comic, philosopher Henri Bergson
writes, “Several have defined man as ‘an animal which laughs.’ They might equally
as well have defined him as an animal which is laughed at; for if any other animal,
or some lifeless object, produces the same effect, it is always because of some
resemblance to man, or the stamp he gives it or the use he puts it to.” Does “Me
Talk Pretty One Day” more effectively present people as creatures who laugh or are
laughed at?

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 222

6/18/12 3:11 PM

TAlBoT • BeST iN clASS

223

Best in Class
Margaret Talbot
A senior fellow at the New America Foundation, a nonpartisan think tank, margaret
Talbot (b. 1961) writes about the cultural politics of the united States in the twentyfirst century. She has been an editor at Lingua Franca and the New Republic, and
currently she is a staff writer for the New Yorker. in the following selection, which
appeared in 2005 in the New Yorker, Talbot examines the impact of naming a single
valedictorian, multiple valedictorians, or none at all.

D

aniel Kennedy remembers when he still thought that valedictorians were
a good thing. Kennedy, a wiry fifty-nine-year-old who has a stern buzz
cut, was in 1997 the principal of Sarasota High School, in Sarasota, Florida. Toward
the end of the school year, it became apparent that several seniors were deadlocked
in the race to become valedictorian. At first, Kennedy saw no particular reason to
worry. “My innocent thought was What possible problem could those great kids
cause?” he recalled last month, during a drive around Sarasota. “And I went blindly
on with my day.”
The school had a system in place to break ties. “If the G.P.A.s were the same,
the award was supposed to go to the kid with the most credits,” Kennedy explained.
It turned out that one of the top students, Denny Davies, had learned of this rule,
and had quietly arranged to take extra courses during his senior year, including
an independent study in algebra. “The independent study was probably a breeze,
and he ended up with the most credits,” Kennedy said.
Davies was named valedictorian. His chief rivals for the honor were furious —
in particular, a girl named Kylie Barker, who told me recently that she had wanted
to be valedictorian “pretty much forever.”
Kennedy recalled, “Soon, the kids were doing everything they could to battle it
out.” As we drove past sugary-white beaches, high-rise hotels, and prosperous strip
malls, he told me that the ensuing controversy “effectively divided the school and
the community.” Kennedy took the position that Davies had followed the school’s
own policy, which he had been resourceful enough to figure out, and whether he
should have been allowed to load on an easy extra class was beside the point. He’d
done it, and he hadn’t broken any rules. Davies’s guidance counsellor, Paul Storm,
agreed. In an interview with the Sarasota Herald-Tribune at the time, he said of
Davies, “He’s very clever. He said, ‘I want to be valedictorian. I’ve figured out I
need to do this and that. Can you help me?’ Denny had a good strategy, and this
strategy was available to anyone who was a competitor.”
Barker’s supporters argued that what Davies had done was a sneaky way of
gaming the system. “It never crossed my mind to approach it as a strategy,” Barker,
who is . . . pursuing a Ph.D. in chemistry at Northwestern University, said. “I just

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 223

5

6/18/12 3:11 PM

224

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

thought it was something you worked really hard for.” Kimberly Belcher, who was
ranked third that year, and who is now studying for a doctorate in theology at
Notre Dame University, told me, “Among our friends, who were sort of the Academic Olympics and National Honor Society types, it was a big deal. Most of the
people I knew thought that it was unfair of Denny to use what we thought of as a
loophole to take a class that was too easy for him, and to do it secretly. We felt
betrayed. I’m not angry anymore, but, boy, I was angry then.” Davies, who is now
a captain in the Air Force, and is stationed in Germany, said that he didn’t care to
comment about the dispute, except to say that he was a “firm believer in the idea
that people benefit from healthy competition.”
During the final weeks of the school year, Kennedy was meeting with both
sets of riled parents, and students were buttonholing him in the hallway. “I’m telling you, it was hostile!” he said. Some teachers considered boycotting graduation;
students talked about booing Davies when he walked out onstage. Kylie Barker’s
mom, Cheryl, said that she recalls getting a call in the middle of the day from Kylie’s
chemistry teacher, Jim Harshman, who asked her to pick up Kylie from school,
saying, “She’s in a pressure cooker here, and she’s about to burst.”
Kennedy tried to broker a compromise. Davies had suggested that he and
Barker be named co-valedictorians, and Kennedy embraced the idea. But the Barkers
weren’t excited about it. “The principal was trying to make everybody happy, and
when you do that there’s always somebody who isn’t,” Cheryl Barker said. “I guess
it was me.”
Kennedy remembers finally “convincing everybody to agree reluctantly —
and I do mean extremely reluctantly — to have co-valedictorians.” He went on, “I
have been in education basically my whole life, and I’ve been to a lot of graduations in my time. But I dreaded this one. Sarasota High is a big school — three
thousand kids — and there were probably seven thousand people in the audience.
At that time, it felt like half of the students in the room hated one of those two
valedictorians and half hated the other. The tension was so thick that I was sitting
up there in my cap and gown sweating buckets the whole time.” In the end, both
students got through their speeches — Kylie’s was about integrity — without incident. But Kennedy, a likeable traditionalist who has been married to his childhood sweetheart for thirty-seven years, concluded that it was time to get rid of
valedictorians at Sarasota High.
Kennedy convened a committee to consider various alternatives, and it was
decided that from then on all students in the top ten per cent of the class — which
at Sarasota means about seventy-five people — would march in first during graduation and have an asterisk printed next to their names on the program. “Students
and parents got to see more kids recognized,” Kennedy said. “It made everybody
feel better.”
Sarasota is a competitive school district — while visiting the area, I saw a car
with a bumper sticker that read, “My Child Was Student of the Month at Tuttle
Elementary” — but most of the local high schools have followed Kennedy’s lead.

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 224

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

TAlBoT • BeST iN clASS

225

Riverview High School has also eliminated valedictorians and salutatorians; Booker
High School ended the tradition last year. Four years ago, North Port High opened
near Sarasota. George Kennedy, its principal, recalled thinking that it “would be
easier to just start out without valedictorians, so we wouldn’t be taking something
away later on.” He added, “There’s an awful lot of clawing and scratching to get to
the top. You have families at some schools coming in freshman year saying, ‘How
can my kid get to No. 1?’ And the pressure that puts on teachers is inexcusable.
‘Valedictorian’ is an antiquated title, and I think it has more negative connotations and effects than positive ones.”
When Kennedy left Sarasota High to form a charter school, the Sarasota Military Academy, in 2001, he did not even consider having a valedictorian. Kennedy
has an amiable way about him, but he’s not kidding when he says, “My advice to
other principals is, Whatever you do, do not name a valedictorian. Any principal
who does is facing peril.”
At one time, it was obvious who the best students in a school were. But now the
contenders for the valedictorian title, especially at large, top-performing suburban high schools, are numerous and determined. Many schools offer Advanced
Placement courses — and sometimes honors and International Baccalaureate
classes — extra weight when a student’s G.P.A. is calculated, so that an A earns 5.0
points, versus 4.0 in a regular class. Students who fill their schedules with A.P. classes,
as the ambitious ones tend to do, can end up with G.P.A.s well above 4.0.
Jim Conrey is the director of public information at Adlai Stevenson High School,
in Lincolnshire, Illinois — a public school with forty-five hundred students that is
well funded enough to have such a thing as a director of public information. Students at the top of their class, Conrey said, are often separated by one thousandth
of a decimal point. A few years ago, a school committee issued a report saying that
“parents routinely phone the principal’s office to express their concern over the
competitive nature of our numerical ranking practice. Minuscule differences
between the ranks of two students can often be perceived as major differences. Is
a student ranked No. 1 in a given class really the ‘best’ student in that class?” As of
this year, Stevenson High will no longer have a valedictorian and a salutatorian.
Instead, students can apply to speak at graduation, and a faculty panel will select
two winners. “If you go to a really good school, you could be ranked a hundred
and thirty-fourth in your class and still be a really good student,” Conrey said.
Between 1990 and 2000, the over-all mean G.P.A. of high-school students
increased from 2.68 to 2.94, which is attributable in part to grade inflation and in
part to the fact that students are working harder. Last year, more than a million
students took at least one A.P. course. During the nineteen-nineties, the percentage
of students taking A.P. or International Baccalaureate classes in math more than
doubled, from 4.4 per cent of graduating seniors to 9.5 per cent. My own high
school, North Hollywood High, in Los Angeles, had three or four A.P. classes when
I graduated, in 1979 (a time when we were told that our most illustrious alumnus

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 225

6/18/12 3:11 PM

226

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

was Bert Convy, the game-show host; Susan Sontag had gone there, too, but
nobody mentioned her). Now it has twenty-two.
Some schools, responding to the critique that competition has got too bruising,
have decided that naming a single valedictorian is part of the reason that today’s
students have become so anxious. (Many small private schools came to this conclusion long ago, and never adopted the valedictorian tradition.) An organization
called Stressed Out Students, which is headed by Denise Clark Pope, a Stanford
education professor, has a list of about twenty-five schools, mostly in the Bay Area
and Silicon Valley, that have pledged to try to make students and their parents less
driven. Pope told me that “it would be healthier to eliminate valedictorians or change
the rules, so that, for example, anyone who wants to can put their hat in the ring,
and then there can be a vote for the best graduation speaker. Then you get a
person who really wants to give a speech. It’s not an academic contest.”
A number of schools now call everyone who gets a 4.0 or higher a valedictorian. At Cleveland High School, in the San Fernando Valley, there will be thirtytwo valedictorians this year. At Mission San Jose, in Northern California, there will
be twenty-three. “We have such an outstanding student body that it was just hard
to get that definitive,” Stuart Kew, the principal of Mission San Jose, said. “Occasionally, we get the criticism that it’s so watered down it doesn’t mean anything.
But the students don’t feel that way.” On graduation day, each of the school’s
many valedictorians will speak at a ceremony, where, one hopes, the chairs will be
comfortable.
The single-valedictorian tradition is also being endangered by lawsuits. In
2003, Brian Delekta, who narrowly missed having the highest G.P.A. in his class,
sued his school district, near Port Huron, Michigan, asking that he be credited
with an A-plus, instead of an A, for a work-study class that he took at his mother’s
law firm. (In addition, Delekta asked for a restraining order on the publication of
class rankings.) In another case that year, Blair Hornstine, a senior at Moorestown
High School, in New Jersey, and the daughter of a New Jersey superior-court judge,
sued the local board of education to be named the school’s sole valedictorian; she
also asked for two hundred thousand dollars in compensatory damages and more
than two million dollars in punitive damages. Hornstine had an unspecified illness
that caused “substantial fatigue,” and, with the consent of the school district, she
had taken many of her classes at home, with private tutors. Her transcript showed
twenty-three A-pluses, nine A’s, and a single A-minus; two-thirds of her classes
were A.P. courses. Her weighted G.P.A. was 4.6894, which reportedly put her .055
points ahead of her closest competitor, Kenneth Mirkin.
The school board, however, decided that Hornstine’s home instruction had
given her an unfair advantage and that she should share the valedictorian title with
Mirkin. Judge Freda Wolfson sided with Hornstine. The defendants, she wrote,
“should revel in the success” of their accommodation to a student’s disability “and
the academic star it has produced,” instead of seeking “to diminish the honor that
she has rightly earned.” In her ruling, Judge Wolfson nevertheless made a larger

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 226

15

6/18/12 3:11 PM

TAlBoT • BeST iN clASS

227

point about the insidious effects of naming a top student. “The fierceness of the
competition in Moorestown High School is evidenced by the widespread involvement of parents in this dispute, which may have been fueled by the school’s
emphasis on grade-based distinctions,” she wrote. “While the school’s Handbook
states that it seeks to minimize competition by no longer reporting class rank . . .
elsewhere it heightens the levels of competition by naming a valedictorian.” The
case inspired a mocking Web site, the Blair Hornstine Project, and a flood of vitriolic Internet commentary; Hornstine was so excoriated by critics in her home
town that she did not even attend graduation. The Moorestown Board of Education acknowledged no wrongdoing but eventually agreed to an out-of-court settlement, under which Hornstine was reportedly paid sixty thousand dollars. (Harvard,
which had admitted her to the Class of 2007, rescinded the offer not long after a
local paper for which Hornstine had written a column revealed that she had plagiarized material.)
I recently spoke to some students who had been involved in legal actions over
the naming of a valedictorian, and they seemed to share a common attitude
toward the experience. On the one hand, they shrugged off the importance of the
honor — they had gone on to colleges where valedictorians were so plentiful that
to have claimed bragging rights would have been seriously uncool. On the other
hand, they could easily recall their high-school state of mind, and feel indignant
all over again, utterly convinced that they had done the right thing. In 2003, Sarah
Bird, a senior at Plano West Senior High School, in Plano, Texas, requested a
hearing before the local school board. Another student, Jennifer Wu, had been
named sole valedictorian, although her G.P.A. was virtually identical to Bird’s. Bird
had played on the school’s basketball team. The sport was treated like a physicaleducation course by the school, and for several semesters she had been given
unweighted A’s. This had put her at a disadvantage, Bird felt. The hearing, at which
Bird’s lawyer asked that the two students be named co-valedictorians, involved
some very close parsing. Brent William Bailey, Bird’s lawyer, told me, “Going in,
the other girl had a G.P.A. of 4.46885 and Sarah had 4.46731 — so that was a difference of .00154. Then the calculations were redone and Sarah came out with a
G.P.A. of 4.47647.” The school board granted Bird’s request. “I was prepared to go
ahead with a lawsuit if it hadn’t gone our way,” Bailey recalled. Wu, who expressed
unhappiness over the decision to the Dallas Morning News, then requested a hearing of her own, to question the way the process was handled. Wu is now a sophomore at Harvard, where she is a premed student. We spoke just before finals, and
she clearly had other things on her mind. “Nobody in college cares about your
having been valedictorian,” she said. “My roommate had no idea I was valedictorian. It doesn’t come up, and I don’t think about it.” Still, when I asked Wu why
she had complained to the school board, she said, “I wanted to make sure the school
knew how traumatic something like this can be — thinking you’re competing
under one set of rules, and having an expectation because of that, and then finding out you’re competing under another.”

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 227

6/18/12 3:11 PM

228

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

*

*

*

Stephanie Klotz’s academic ambitions made her stand out at Valley View High, in
Germantown, Ohio, from which she graduated in 2001. “We weren’t from here
originally,” Klotz told me. “My dad had been in the military, and we’d lived in
Pennsylvania, Idaho, Texas, and upstate New York. I knew there was a big world
out there, and I was going to go out and conquer it. I wasn’t going to get married
right out of high school and be a housewife with twenty kids.” Klotz paused, but not
for long. “I mean, Germantown is a place with only three stoplights. I come from
a very educated family, and expectations are set at a higher level than they are in
a small farming town.” Then, too, Klotz said, she was always kind of a “nerd — a
science nerd, a nature nerd.” She continued, “My dad went deer hunting when I
was three years old, and they were cutting up the deer next door, because my mom
wouldn’t let it in the house, and I was, like, ‘Daddy, can I play with the head?’” As
a young girl, she loved accompanying her father, an anesthetist, to the hospital,
where she was allowed to observe surgeries. At Valley View, where football is very
popular — T-shirts bear the slogan “Valley View Football Is Life. Nothing Else
Matters” — Klotz was often unhappy. She doesn’t like football, and was captain of
the dance team, which, she said, “got me made fun of — that and being smart. I’d
say, ‘I want to see you do a kick line for an hour!’” She also worked with the town’s
rescue squad (“I was so service-oriented; I did hundreds and hundreds of hours of
service work”), loved science, and hated English and history. She was often “bored
to tears” in classes that she found insufficiently challenging, but she got straight A’s
anyway, as well as tens of thousands of dollars in college-scholarship money.
Several weeks before the school year ended, the principal of Valley View told
Klotz that she and four other students would share the valedictorian title. Klotz
thought the decision was odd — as she recalled, one of the girls had got a B — but
she let it go. “Notices were sent out, relatives notified,” her father, Randy Klotz,
said. Three of the students had G.P.A.s above 4.0 because they’d taken at least one
A.P. course, whereas Stephanie, whose G.P.A. was 4.0, had not. (Instead of taking
A.P. history in her junior year, Stephanie, who hoped to become a doctor, had
decided to take another chemistry course.) Three weeks before graduation, Stephanie
was told that the school was reversing its decision: she and Megan Keener, another
girl with a 4.0 G.P.A., wouldn’t be valedictorians after all. (Keener, too, lacked A.P.
credits, though she had been taking classes at local colleges.) Two students with
G.P.A.s above 4.0 would be named co-valedictorians, and a third would be salutatorian. “I would be nothing,” Klotz recalled.
When Klotz told her parents, they complained first to the principal, then several times to the school board. Finally, the family hired a lawyer and sued the school
district, the superintendent, and the principal of Valley View. A judge in the Common Plea Court of Montgomery County, Ohio, sided with the Klotzes, and, days
before graduation, issued an order reinstating Klotz and Keener as valedictorians.
“At first, I was, like, I’m seventeen, I can’t be dealing with this before I graduate from high school,” Klotz told me. “I’m not strong enough. And then I thought,

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 228

20

6/18/12 3:11 PM

TAlBoT • BeST iN clASS

229

I need to fight for the people who are coming after me, who really aren’t strong
enough to fight.” Graduation day, she recalled, “was kind of a comedy event, really.
I was sitting there, bored, twirling my tassels.” Klotz said that she wasn’t allowed to
speak, because the decision to reinstate her title was made just before graduation
day. One of the valedictorians who did speak, she recalled, “read that Dr. Seuss
book ‘Oh, the Places You’ll Go!’ to the audience. I mean, she read practically the
entire book.” Klotz remembers being given “so many academic awards and plaques,
it was ridiculous. Every time I sat down, I had to get up again to get an award. I
had so many plaques I literally couldn’t carry them off the stage, and I’m, like,
‘Oh, yeah, right, I’m not valedictorian?’”
Klotz graduated magna cum laude from the University of Dayton in May,
and will start medical school at the University of Cincinnati in August. At college,
Klotz realized that she was “a little fish in a big sea with a lot of valedictorians.”
But she’s glad that she sued: she learned that she could be a fighter when she
needed to be, and she showed Germantown that she couldn’t be “walked all over.”
Klotz, who is engaged to be married to a social worker, is working as a waitress
until school starts. To her fiancé’s chagrin, she’s been watching a lot of “traumaand-E.R. shows” at home. (He lacks her strong stomach.) “There’s so much focus
on all the terrible things youths in our society do — murdering each other, using
drugs — that I think it’s good to focus on the positive things, as opposed to people
who are dropping out and are failures,” she said. “There are all these special programs to keep kids in school, give them a special experience, make them feel special. So much of classroom experience is focused on these kids who are lacking.
There’s nothing to reward the kids who are self-motivated and are working hard.”
The first public high school in the United States, Boston’s English Classical School,
was founded in 1821. Within a few decades, the practice of designating a valedictorian had become an established tradition in American high schools. There was
little public financing of secondary schools and a good deal of hostility to them, at
least until the eighteen-eighties. High schools were so widely criticized as palaces
of privilege, teaching Latin to the children of the rich, that Horace Mann, the education reformer, tried for a while to come up with a new name for “high school,”
reasoning that perhaps the phrase implied “superior and exclusive,” William J.
Reese notes in his 1995 history The Origins of the American High School. (In fact,
many high-school students in the nineteenth century were middle-class girls training to support themselves as teachers.) By 1900, roughly ten per cent of American
adolescents were enrolled in high school, and public funding remained relatively
small.
The graduation ceremony, and in particular the valedictory, served an important purpose for proponents of publicly funded secondary education. A clever
graduate declaiming loftily was something to show off to the local taxpayers, and,
besides, graduation ceremonies were popular entertainments in an age that lacked
television and radio and honored elocution and oratory. “By the late eighteenfifties, approximately four thousand spectators attended the graduation exercises

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 229

25

6/18/12 3:11 PM

230

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

at Philadelphia’s Central High School — and twice that number was turned away,”
Reese writes. “Eight to ten thousand citizens arrived for the event in Cleveland in
the eighteen-seventies.” In smaller towns, five hundred or more people might
show up to see five or six graduates.
The valedictorian prize also celebrated people who weren’t often publicly
recognized: studious girls. In the nineteenth century, young women largely outperformed young men in American high schools. They generally won more prizes,
graduated at higher rates, and displayed lovelier penmanship. At graduation, girls
would read while sitting or standing on a low step, since it wasn’t considered proper
for them to speak from a platform. Still, the opportunity to appear before an
audience of hundreds or thousands, to be singled out for one’s academic achievements, must have been heady at a time when modesty and self-effacement were
the constant counsel for young women.
In 1981, two professors, Terry Denny and Karen Arnold, began following the
lives of eighty-one high-school valedictorians — forty-six women and thirty-five
men from Illinois. (Their sample is, admittedly, narrow.) According to Arnold’s 1995
book Lives of Promise: What Becomes of High School Valedictorians, these students
continued to distinguish themselves academically in college; a little less than sixty
per cent pursued graduate studies. By their early thirties, most were “working
in high-level, prestigious, secure professions” — they were lawyers, accountants,
professors, doctors, engineers. Arnold totted up fifteen Ph.D.s, six law degrees,
three medical degrees, and twenty-two master’s degrees in her group. The valedictorians got divorced at a lower rate than did the population at large, were less
likely to use alcohol and drugs, and tended to be active in their communities. At
the same time, Arnold, who stays in touch with her cohort, has found that few of
the valedictorians seem destined for intellectual eminence or for creative work
outside of familiar career paths. Dedicated to the well-rounded ideal — to be a
valedictorian, after all, you must excel in classes that don’t interest you or are
poorly taught — the valedictorians had “used their strong work ethic to pursue
multiple academic and extracurricular interests. None was obsessed with a single
talent area to which he or she subordinated school and social involvement.” This
marks a difference, Arnold said, from what we know about many eminent achievers, who tend to evince an early passion for a particular field. For these people,
Arnold writes, a “powerful early interest evolves into lifelong, intensive, even obsessive involvement in the talent area.” She goes on, “Exceptional adult achievers
often recall formal schooling as a disliked distraction.” Valedictorians, by contrast,
conformed to the expectations of school and carefully chose careers that were
likely to be socially and financially secure: “As a rule, valedictorians relegated their
early interests to hobbies, second majors, or regretted dead ends. The serious athletes among the valedictorians never pursued sports occupations. Most of the high
school musicians hung up their instruments during college.”
Becoming a valedictorian at a top high school is a grueling trajectory — involving
perhaps a dozen A.P. classes and hours of study each night. Sometimes students

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 230

6/18/12 3:11 PM

TAlBoT • BeST iN clASS

231

cave in to the pressure. In 2002, Audrey Lin, one of Mission San Jose’s many valedictorians, admitted that she had cheated to get to the top in high school, and
gave back her valedictorian plaque. Lin, who is now a student at Berkeley, made
her confession in conjunction with the release of a study by the Josephson Institute
of Ethics, in which three-quarters of the high-school students surveyed acknowledged having cheated on a test the previous year; ten years earlier, the number
had been sixty-one per cent.
In some ways, it seems that the valedictorian is a status designed for a simpler
time, when few people aspired to college. It isn’t entirely suited to a brutally competitive age in which the dividing line between those who go to college and those
who don’t may be the most significant fissure in American society, and in which
the children (and parents) of the upper middle classes have been convinced that
going to an exceedingly selective college is the only way to insure wealth and
happiness.
Still, perhaps something is lost if schools eliminate valedictorians. Like spelling bees, the contest for valedictorian offers a pleasing image of a purer meritocracy, in which learning and performing by the rules leave one hard-working
person standing. It seems sad to abolish the tradition — and faintly ridiculous to
honor too large a group. (If we’re trying to be more sensitive, doesn’t it make
ordinary students feel worse when they can’t be one of several dozen valedictorians?) Maybe the answer is to stick to one valedictorian but to make the rules of
the contest clear, and to be sure everyone knows them. Maybe the honor should
go to the student who is not necessarily the smartest but the most adept at running a peculiarly American kind of academic marathon, one that requires prodigious energy, tactical savvy, and a Tracy Flick–like determination. (Remember the
Reese Witherspoon character from Election?)
“Over the past ten years, a lot of school districts have been abolishing the
valedictorian, and I’m against that,” Karen Arnold told me. “On the day we allow
anybody who’s always wanted to be a quarterback to play on the high-school football team, then we can get rid of valedictorians. If we rank anything, we ought to
rank what we say is most central to school, which is to say, academic learning.”

30

A few weeks ago, I met Cheryl Barker, the mother of Kylie, the girl at Sarasota High
School who, as it turned out, was one of the last two valedictorians at the school.
Her daughter went to Furman University, in South Carolina, then to Northwestern. Cheryl Barker was a waitress when Kylie was in high school, and she is now
the manager of a family-style restaurant in Sarasota. Her husband owns a print
shop, and they have two younger children, a daughter who is graduating from
Florida State this year and plans to go to law school, and a son who just graduated
in the top ten per cent from Sarasota High.
Cheryl Barker still marvels at how hard Kylie worked, how determined she was,
how she never missed a day of school, how she’d go to the library all the time to
use the computer because they didn’t have one at home. Barker thinks that it was

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 231

6/18/12 3:11 PM

232

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

a mistake for the high school to stop naming a valedictorian and a salutatorian.
“Those kids all know who the No. 1 and 2 are, anyway,” she told me over coffee.
“Everyone’s so afraid of getting sued or losing their jobs these days that they try
too hard to candy-coat things.” But, she added, “there are some kids who what
they’re good at is studying. That’s what they do. They deserve something special
to strive for. They do.”

Exploring the Text
1. Margaret Talbot spends a good deal of time at the outset of the essay describing
the situation at Sarasota High School and then returns to it at the end; however, her
primary subject is neither that school nor its students. What is her rhetorical strategy
in examining this one school in such depth?
2. In paragraph 14, Talbot refers to her own experience in high school. What is the
effect of this personal element?
3. In this essay, Talbot surveys a range of perspectives on the issue of valedictorians.
Identify at least four of them.
4. Why does Talbot rely so heavily on interviews with students? Why would this approach
appeal to her audience?
5. Beginning with paragraph 25, Talbot presents some historical background on the
American high school. How would the effect of this information have differed if
she had opened the article with it?
6. To what extent do you think that the analogy Karen Arnold draws in paragraph 32
is valid? She says, “On the day we allow anybody who’s always wanted to be a quarterback to play on the high-school football team, then we can get rid of valedictorians.”
7. Does this essay rely more heavily on logos or pathos? Cite specific examples to illustrate your response.
8. Where do Talbot’s sympathies lie? Does she believe that naming a single valedictorian is right or wrong? Identify passages that support your response.

This Is Water
Some Thoughts, Delivered on a Significant
Occasion, about Living a Compassionate Life

David Foster Wallace
david Foster wallace (1962–2008) was an American novelist and essayist and a
professor at Pomona college in claremont, california. His first novel, Infinite Jest
(1996), was named by Time magazine as one of the 100 Greatest Novels from
1923 to 2006. raised mainly in central illinois by an english professor mother and

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 232

6/18/12 3:11 PM

wAllAce • THiS iS wATer

233

a philosophy professor father, he graduated with a BA from Amherst college and
an mFA in creative writing from the university of Arizona. He published two shortstory collections, Brief Interviews with Hideous Men (1999) and Oblivion (2004); his
unfinished novel, The Pale King, was published in 2011. He received numerous literary awards and fellowships, including the lannan Award for Fiction and the whiting
Award, and in 1997 he received a macArthur Foundation “genius” grant. one of
the brightest literary stars of his generation, wallace, who suffered from depression
most of his life, committed suicide in 2008. Following is the 2005 commencement
address that wallace delivered at kenyon college in Gambier, ohio; it was published in book form under the title This Is Water.

T

here are these two young fish swimming along, and they happen to meet
an older fish swimming the other way, who nods at them and says,
“Morning, boys, how’s the water?” And the two young fish swim on for a bit, and
then eventually one of them looks over at the other and goes, “What the hell is
water?”
If at this moment, you’re worried that I plan to present myself here as
the wise old fish explaining what water is to you younger fish, please don’t be. I
am not the wise old fish. The immediate point of the fish story is that the most
obvious, ubiquitous, important realities are often the ones that are the hardest to
see and talk about. Stated as an English sentence, of course, this is just a banal
platitude — but the fact is that, in the day-to-day trenches of adult existence,
banal platitudes can have life-or-death importance. That may sound like hyperbole, or abstract nonsense.
A huge percentage of the stuff that I tend to be automatically certain of is,
it turns out, totally wrong and deluded. Here’s one example of the utter wrongness of something I tend to be automatically sure of: Everything in my own
immediate experience supports my deep belief that I am the absolute center of
the universe, the realest, most vivid and important person in existence. We rarely
talk about this sort of natural, basic self-centeredness, because it’s so socially
repulsive, but it’s pretty much the same for all of us, deep down. It is our defaultsetting, hard-wired into our boards at birth. Think about it: There is no experience you’ve had that you were not at the absolute center of. The world as you
experience it is right there in front of you, or behind you, to the left or right of
you, on your TV, or your monitor, or whatever. Other people’s thoughts and feelings have to be communicated to you somehow, but your own are so immediate,
urgent, real — you get the idea. But please don’t worry that I’m getting ready to
preach to you about compassion or other-directedness or the so-called “virtues.”
This is not a matter of virtue — it’s a matter of my choosing to do the work of
somehow altering or getting free of my natural, hard-wired default-setting, which
is to be deeply and literally self-centered, and to see and interpret everything through
this lens of self.

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 233

6/18/12 3:11 PM

234

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

People who can adjust their natural default-setting this way are often described
as being “well adjusted,” which I suggest to you is not an accidental term.
Given the triumphal academic setting here, an obvious question is how much
of this work of adjusting our default-setting involves actual knowledge or intellect.
This question gets tricky. Probably the most dangerous thing about college education, at least in my own case, is that it enables my tendency to over-intellectualize
stuff, to get lost in abstract arguments inside my head instead of simply paying
attention to what’s going on right in front of me. Paying attention to what’s going
on inside me. As I’m sure you guys know by now, it is extremely difficult to stay
alert and attentive instead of getting hypnotized by the constant monologue inside
your own head. Twenty years after my own graduation, I have come gradually to
understand that the liberal-arts cliché about “teaching you how to think” is actually shorthand for a much deeper, more serious idea: “Learning how to think” really
means learning how to exercise some control over how and what you think. It
means being conscious and aware enough to choose what you pay attention to
and to choose how you construct meaning from experience. Because if you cannot exercise this kind of choice in adult life, you will be totally hosed. Think of the
old cliché about “the mind being an excellent servant but a terrible master.” This,
like many clichés, so lame and unexciting on the surface, actually expresses a great
and terrible truth. It is not the least bit coincidental that adults who commit suicide with firearms almost always shoot themselves in the head. And the truth is
that most of these suicides are actually dead long before they pull the trigger. And
I submit that this is what the real, no-bull value of your liberal-arts education is
supposed to be about: How to keep from going through your comfortable, prosperous, respectable adult life dead, unconscious, a slave to your head and to your
natural default-setting of being uniquely, completely, imperially alone, day in and
day out.
That may sound like hyperbole, or abstract nonsense. So let’s get concrete. The
plain fact is that you graduating seniors do not yet have any clue what “day in, day
out” really means. There happen to be whole large parts of adult American life
that nobody talks about in commencement speeches. One such part involves boredom, routine, and petty frustration. The parents and older folks here will know
all too well what I’m talking about.
By way of example, let’s say it’s an average day, and you get up in the morning, go to your challenging job, and you work hard for nine or ten hours, and at
the end of the day you’re tired, and you’re stressed out, and all you want is to go
home and have a good supper and maybe unwind for a couple of hours and then
hit the rack early because you have to get up the next day and do it all again. But
then you remember there’s no food at home — you haven’t had time to shop this
week, because of your challenging job — and so now after work you have to get in
your car and drive to the supermarket. It’s the end of the workday, and the traffic’s very bad, so getting to the store takes way longer than it should, and when
you finally get there the supermarket is very crowded, because of course it’s the

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 234

5

6/18/12 3:11 PM

wAllAce • THiS iS wATer

235

time of day when all the other people with jobs also try to squeeze in some grocery shopping, and the store’s hideously, fluorescently lit, and infused with soulkilling Muzak or corporate pop, and it’s pretty much the last place you want to be,
but you can’t just get in and quickly out: You have to wander all over the huge, overlit store’s crowded aisles to find the stuff you want, and you have to maneuver your
junky cart through all these other tired, hurried people with carts, and of course
there are also the glacially slow old people and the spacey people and the ADHD
kids who all block the aisle and you have to grit your teeth and try to be polite as
you ask them to let you by, and eventually, finally, you get all your supper supplies,
except now it turns out there aren’t enough checkout lanes open even though it’s
the end-of-the-day-rush, so the checkout line is incredibly long, which is stupid
and infuriating, but you can’t take your fury out on the frantic lady working the
register.
Anyway, you finally get to the checkout line’s front, and pay for your food,
and wait to get your check or card authenticated by a machine, and then get told
to “Have a nice day” in a voice that is the absolute voice of death, and then you
have to take your creepy flimsy plastic bags of groceries in your cart through the
crowded, bumpy, littery parking lot, and try to load the bags in your car in such a
way that everything doesn’t fall out of the bags and roll around in the trunk on
the way home, and then you have to drive all the way home through slow, heavy,
SUV-intensive rush-hour traffic, et cetera, et cetera.
The point is that petty, frustrating crap like this is exactly where the work of
choosing comes in. Because the traffic jams and crowded aisles and long checkout
lines give me time to think, and if I don’t make a conscious decision about how to
think and what to pay attention to, I’m going to be pissed and miserable every time
I have to food-shop, because my natural default-setting is the certainty that situations like this are really all about me, about my hungriness and my fatigue and my
desire to just get home, and it’s going to seem, for all the world, like everybody else
is just in my way, and who are all these people in my way? And look at how repulsive most of them are and how stupid and cow-like and dead-eyed and nonhuman
they seem here in the checkout line, or at how annoying and rude it is that people
are talking loudly on cell phones in the middle of the line, and look at how deeply
unfair this is: I’ve worked really hard all day and I’m starved and tired and I can’t
even get home to eat and unwind because of all these stupid g-d- people.
Or, of course, if I’m in a more socially conscious form of my default-setting,
I can spend time in the end-of-the-day traffic jam being angry and disgusted at
all the huge, stupid, lane-blocking SUV’s and Hummers and V-12 pickup trucks
burning their wasteful, selfish, forty-gallon tanks of gas, and I can dwell on the
fact that the patriotic or religious bumper stickers always seem to be on the biggest, most disgustingly selfish vehicles driven by the ugliest, most inconsiderate and
aggressive drivers, who are usually talking on cell phones as they cut people off in
order to get just twenty stupid feet ahead in a traffic jam, and I can think about
how our children’s children will despise us for wasting all the future’s fuel and

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 235

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

236

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

probably screwing up the climate, and how spoiled and stupid and disgusting we
all are, and how it all just sucks, and so on and so forth. . . .
Look, if I choose to think this way, fine, lots of us do — except that thinking
this way tends to be so easy and automatic it doesn’t have to be a choice. Thinking
this way is my natural default-setting. It’s the automatic, unconscious way that I
experience the boring, frustrating, crowded parts of adult life when I’m operating
on the automatic, unconscious belief that I am the center of the world and that
my immediate needs and feelings are what should determine the world’s priorities. The thing is that there are obviously different ways to think about these kinds
of situations. In this traffic, all these vehicles stuck and idling in my way: It’s not
impossible that some of these people in SUV’s have been in horrible auto accidents in the past and now find driving so traumatic that their therapist has all but
ordered them to get a huge, heavy SUV so they can feel safe enough to drive; or
that the Hummer that just cut me off is maybe being driven by a father whose
little child is hurt or sick in the seat next to him, and he’s trying to rush to the
hospital, and he’s in a way bigger, more legitimate hurry than I am — it is actually
I who am in his way. Or I can choose to force myself to consider the likelihood
that everyone else in the supermarket’s checkout line is just as bored and frustrated as I am, and that some of these people probably have much harder, more
tedious or painful lives than I do, overall.
Again, please don’t think that I’m giving you moral advice, or that I’m saying
you’re “supposed to” think this way, or that anyone expects you to just automatically do it, because it’s hard, it takes will and mental effort, and if you’re like me,
some days you won’t be able to do it, or you just flat-out won’t want to. But most
days, if you’re aware enough to give yourself a choice, you can choose to look differently at this fat, dead-eyed, over-made lady who just screamed at her little child
in the checkout line — maybe she’s not usually like this; maybe she’s been up
three straight nights holding the hand of her husband who’s dying of bone cancer, or maybe this very lady is the low-wage clerk at the Motor Vehicles Dept. who
just yesterday helped your spouse resolve a nightmarish red-tape problem through
some small act of bureaucratic kindness. Of course, none of this is likely, but it’s
also not impossible — it just depends on what you want to consider. If you’re
automatically sure that you know what reality is and who and what is really
important — if you want to operate on your default-setting — then you, like me,
will not consider possibilities that aren’t pointless and annoying. But if you’ve
really learned how to think, how to pay attention, then you will know you have
other options. It will actually be within your power to experience a crowded,
loud, slow, consumer-hell-type situation as not only meaningful but sacred, on
fire with the same force that lit the stars — compassion, love, the sub-surface unity
of all things. Not that that mystical stuff ’s necessarily true: The only thing that’s
capital-T True is that you get to decide how you’re going to try to see it. You get to
consciously decide what has meaning and what doesn’t. You get to decide what to
worship. . . .

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 236

6/18/12 3:11 PM

wAllAce • THiS iS wATer

237

Because here’s something else that’s true. In the day-to-day trenches of adult
life, there is actually no such thing as atheism. There is no such thing as not worshipping. Everybody worships. The only choice we get is what to worship. And
an outstanding reason for choosing some sort of God or spiritual-type thing to
worship — be it J.C. or Allah, be it Yahweh or the Wiccan mother-goddess or the
Four Noble Truths or some infrangible set of ethical principles — is that pretty
much anything else you worship will eat you alive. If you worship money and
things — if they are where you tap real meaning in life — then you will never have
enough. Never feel you have enough. It’s the truth. Worship your own body and
beauty and sexual allure and you will always feel ugly, and when time and age start
showing, you will die a million deaths before they finally plant you. On one level,
we all know this stuff already — it’s been codified as myths, proverbs, clichés, bromides, epigrams, parables: the skeleton of every great story. The trick is keeping
the truth up-front in daily consciousness. Worship power — you will feel weak and
afraid, and you will need ever more power over others to keep the fear at bay. Worship your intellect, being seen as smart — you will end up feeling stupid, a fraud,
always on the verge of being found out. And so on.
Look, the insidious thing about these forms of worship is not that they’re evil
or sinful; it is that they are unconscious. They are default-settings. They’re the
kind of worship you just gradually slip into, day after day, getting more and more
selective about what you see and how you measure value without ever being fully
aware that that’s what you’re doing. And the world will not discourage you from
operating on your default-settings, because the world of men and money and
power hums along quite nicely on the fuel of fear and contempt and frustration
and craving and the worship of self. Our own present culture has harnessed these
forces in ways that have yielded extraordinary wealth and comfort and personal
freedom. The freedom to be lords of our own tiny skull-sized kingdoms, alone at
the center of all creation. This kind of freedom has much to recommend it. But
of course there are all different kinds of freedom, and the kind that is most precious you will not hear much talked about in the great outside world of winning
and achieving and displaying. The really important kind of freedom involves
attention, and awareness, and discipline, and effort, and being able truly to care
about other people and to sacrifice for them, over and over, in myriad petty little
unsexy ways, every day. That is real freedom. The alternative is unconsciousness,
the default-setting, the “rat race” — the constant gnawing sense of having had and
lost some infinite thing.
I know that this stuff probably doesn’t sound fun and breezy or grandly inspirational. What it is, so far as I can see, is the truth with a whole lot of rhetorical bullshit pared away. Obviously, you can think of it whatever you wish. But please don’t
dismiss it as some finger-wagging Dr. Laura sermon. None of this is about morality,
or religion, or dogma, or big fancy questions of life after death. The capital-T Truth
is about life before death. It is about making it to 30, or maybe 50, without wanting to shoot yourself in the head. It is about simple awareness — awareness of what

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 237

15

6/18/12 3:11 PM

238

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

is so real and essential, so hidden in plain sight all around us, that we have to keep
reminding ourselves, over and over: “This is water, this is water.”
It is unimaginably hard to do this, to stay conscious and alive, day in and
day out.

Exploring the Text
1. What is the purpose of the anecdote with which David Foster Wallace opens the
speech? What is the effect of his returning to the line “This is water” again near
the end of the speech and repeating it there?
2. What does Wallace mean when he refers to the “natural, hard-wired default-setting”
of himself and others (para. 3)? To what extent do you think that most of us are
“deeply and literally self-centered”?
3. Wallace points out that the phrase “being ‘well-adjusted’ . . . is not an accidental
term” (para. 4); in the next sentence he refers to “this work of adjusting our
default-setting” (para. 5). Reflect on the word adjust, its denotations and connotations. Why does Wallace emphasize the deliberate choice of this word?
4. What does Wallace mean in the following sentences: “‘Learning how to think’
really means learning how to exercise some control over how and what you think.
It means being conscious and aware enough to choose what you pay attention to
and to choose how you construct meaning from experience” (para. 5)? What view
of “thinking” does he seem to be arguing against?
5. What effect does Wallace achieve by using the hypothetical narrative of “an average day” in paragraphs 7–11?
6. Examine the syntax in one or two paragraphs of this piece. In paragraph 7, for
instance, how does the form of the sentence beginning “It’s the end of the workday” reinforce its content?
7. Throughout the speech, Wallace emphasizes that he is not offering “banal platitude[s]” (para. 2) or “moral advice” (para. 12). Why? What is he concerned about
avoiding? Explain whether you think he is successful.
8. Wallace contends that once we have “really learned how to think, how to pay
attention,” then “[i]t will actually be within your power to experience a crowded,
loud, slow, consumer-hell-type situation as not only meaningful but sacred, on
fire with the same force that lit the stars — compassion, love, the sub-surface unity
of all things” (para. 12). What is the causal link between attention and experience
that he is asserting?
9. In paragraphs 13 and 14, Wallace discusses the concept of worship, claiming,
“There is no such thing as not worshipping.” Do you agree? Do you think that he
risked offending members of his audience in his use of worship to mean something
other than traditional religions? Why or why not?
10. How does he make the transition from the concept and forms of worship to his
definition of “real freedom” (para. 14)? What is the connection?

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 238

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ciSNeroS • eleVeN

239

11. In paragraph 14, Wallace asserts, “That is real freedom.” How does he define “real
freedom” in this speech? To what extent — and why — do you agree with him?
12. Throughout this speech, Wallace shifts between sophisticated, formal diction and
colloquial language. Find examples of the latter, and discuss how appropriate and
effective you think they are within the context of this speech.
13. Throughout this speech, Wallace builds a tension between two ways of being/
living in the world. What are they? How does he explain and illustrate each to
build his argument for the superiority of one over the other?
14. According to one researcher, a commencement speech has four major characteristics: it acknowledges the graduates, creates an identification between the graduates
and the speaker, presents the world and its challenges, and instills hope. To what
extent does this speech embody these characteristics? Cite specific passages to support and illustrate your response.
15. If someone asked you what this speech is about, how would you answer in under
ten words? Explain your response.

Eleven
Sandra Cisneros
one of the first latina writers to achieve commercial success, Sandra cisneros
(b. 1954) is a novelist, short-story writer, and poet, best known for The House on
Mango Street (1983), a collection of connected stories and sketches. recipient of
many awards, including a macArthur Foundation “genius” grant, cisneros has
published the short-story collection Woman Hollering Creek (1991), the poetry
collections My Wicked Wicked Ways (1987) and Loose Woman (1994), and
the novel Caramelo (2002). The New York Times Book Review says cisneros
“embraces . . . the endless variety of mexican and American culture — songs and
stories, jokes and legends, furniture and food.” The story “eleven” explores the nature
of power in the classroom.

W

hat they don’t understand about birthdays and what they never tell
you is that when you’re eleven, you’re also ten, and nine, and eight, and
seven, and six, and five, and four, and three, and two, and one. And when you
wake up on your eleventh birthday you expect to feel eleven, but you don’t. You open
your eyes and everything’s just like yesterday, only it’s today. And you don’t feel
eleven at all. You feel like you’re still ten. And you are — underneath the year that
makes you eleven.
Like some days you might say something stupid, and that’s the part of you
that’s still ten. Or maybe some days you might need to sit on your mama’s lap
because you’re scared, and that’s the part of you that’s five. And maybe one day

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 239

6/18/12 3:11 PM

240

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

when you’re all grown up maybe you will need to cry like if you’re three, and that’s
okay. That’s what I tell Mama when she’s sad and needs to cry. Maybe she’s feeling
three.
Because the way you grow old is kind of like an onion or like the rings inside
a tree trunk or like my little wooden dolls that fit one inside the other, each year
inside the next one. That’s how being eleven years old is.
You don’t feel eleven. Not right away. It takes a few days, weeks even, sometimes even months before you say Eleven when they ask you. And you don’t feel
smart eleven, not until you’re almost twelve. That’s the way it is.
Only today I wish I didn’t have only eleven years rattling inside me like pennies in a tin Band-Aid box. Today I wish I was one hundred and two instead of
eleven because if I was one hundred and two I’d have known what to say when
Mrs. Price put the red sweater on my desk. I would’ve known how to tell her it
wasn’t mine instead of just sitting there with that look on my face and nothing
coming out of my mouth.
“Whose is this?” Mrs. Price says, and she holds the red sweater up in the air
for all the class to see. “Whose? It’s been sitting in the coatroom for a month.”
“Not mine,” says everybody. “Not me.”
“It has to belong to somebody,” Mrs. Price keeps saying, but nobody can
remember. It’s an ugly sweater with red plastic buttons and a collar and sleeves all
stretched out like you could use it for a jump rope. It’s maybe a thousand years
old and even if it belonged to me I wouldn’t say so.
Maybe because I’m skinny, maybe because she doesn’t like me, that stupid
Sylvia Saldívar says, “I think it belongs to Rachel.” An ugly sweater like that, all
raggedy and old, but Mrs. Price believes her. Mrs. Price takes the sweater and puts
it right on my desk, but when I open my mouth nothing comes out.
“That’s not, I don’t, you’re not . . . Not mine,” I finally say in a little voice that
was maybe me when I was four.
“Of course it’s yours,” Mrs. Price says. “I remember you wearing it once.”
Because she’s older and the teacher, she’s right and I’m not.
Not mine, not mine, not mine, but Mrs. Price is already turning to page
thirty-two, and math problem number four. I don’t know why but all of a sudden
I’m feeling sick inside, like the part of me that’s three wants to come out of my
eyes, only I squeeze them shut tight and bite down on my teeth real hard and try
to remember today I am eleven, eleven. Mama is making a cake for me tonight,
and when Papa comes home everybody will sing Happy birthday, happy birthday
to you.
But when the sick feeling goes away and I open my eyes, the red sweater’s still
sitting there like a big red mountain. I move the red sweater to the corner of my
desk with my ruler. I move my pencil and books and eraser as far from it as possible. I even move my chair a little to the right. Not mine, not mine, not mine.
In my head I’m thinking how long till lunchtime, how long till I can take
the red sweater and throw it over the schoolyard fence, or leave it hanging on

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 240

5

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ciSNeroS • eleVeN

241

a parking meter, or bunch it up into a little ball and toss it in the alley. Except
when math period ends Mrs. Price says loud and in front of everybody, “Now,
Rachel, that’s enough,” because she sees I’ve shoved the red sweater to the tippytip corner of my desk and it’s hanging all over the edge like a waterfall, but I
don’t care.
“Rachel,” Mrs. Price says. She says it like she’s getting mad. “You put that
sweater on right now and no more nonsense.”
“But it’s not —”
“Now!” Mrs. Price says.
This is when I wish I wasn’t eleven, because all the years inside of me — ten,
nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, and one — are pushing at the back of
my eyes when I put one arm through one sleeve of the sweater that smells like
cottage cheese, and then the other arm through the other and stand there with my
arms apart like if the sweater hurts me and it does, all itchy and full of germs that
aren’t even mine.
That’s when everything I’ve been holding in since this morning, since when
Mrs. Price put the sweater on my desk, finally lets go, and all of a sudden I’m crying in front of everybody. I wish I was invisible but I’m not. I’m eleven and it’s my
birthday today and I’m crying like I’m three in front of everybody. I put my head
down on the desk and bury my face in my stupid clown-sweater arms. My face all
hot and spit coming out of my mouth because I can’t stop the little animal noises
from coming out of me, until there aren’t any more tears left in my eyes, and it’s
just my body shaking like when you have the hiccups, and my whole head hurts
like when you drink milk too fast.
But the worst part is right before the bell rings for lunch. That stupid Phyllis
Lopez, who is even dumber than Sylvia Saldívar, says she remembers the red
sweater is hers! I take it off right away and give it to her, only Mrs. Price pretends
like everything’s okay.
Today I’m eleven. There’s a cake Mama’s making for tonight, and when Papa
comes home from work we’ll eat it. There’ll be candles and presents and everybody will sing Happy birthday, happy birthday to you, Rachel, only it’s too late.
I’m eleven today. I’m eleven, ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two,
and one, but I wish I was one hundred and two. I wish I was anything but eleven,
because I want today to be far away already, far away like a runaway balloon, like
a tiny o in the sky, so tiny-tiny you have to close your eyes to see it.

15

20

Exploring the Text
1. Why do you think Sandra Cisneros chose to tell “Eleven” from the viewpoint of the
young girl rather than of an omniscient narrator? What effect does this have?
2. What is the source of Mrs. Price’s authority? Is it solely “[b]ecause she’s older and
the teacher” (para. 11)?

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 241

6/18/12 3:11 PM

242

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

3. In what ways does Cisneros’s juxtaposition of home life and school life make for
an effective rhetorical strategy?
4. Discuss the figurative language in this story, especially the similes. What purposes
do they serve?
5. How is this a story about having a voice in society, about who gets to talk and who
gets heard?

The Spirit of Education
Norman Rockwell
Norman rockwell (1894–1978) was a popular American painter and illustrator
best known for his depictions of everyday life and positive American values. His first
cover for the Saturday Evening Post appeared in 1916, and over three hundred fol-

(See insert for color version.)

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 242

6/18/12 3:11 PM

cHAST • wHAT i leArNed

243

lowed during the next forty-seven years. in the early 1960s, he began working for
Look magazine, where he turned to more political concerns such as civil rights and
space exploration. in 1977, rockwell received the nation’s highest civilian honor,
the Presidential medal. on the facing page is a rockwell painting, The Spirit of
Education, that was featured on the cover of the Saturday Evening Post in 1934.

Exploring the Text
1. Examine the props carefully. What are the “tools” of education, according to Norman
Rockwell’s image?
2. On the basis of this depiction alone, who is excluded from Rockwell’s ideal vision
of education?
3. What assumptions about education does Rockwell make in this illustration?
4. In 1934, the United States was in the midst of the Great Depression. How does this
painting encourage an optimistic outlook on the future?

What I Learned
A Sentimental Education from Nursery School
through Twelfth Grade

Roz Chast
roz chast (b. 1954) grew up in Brooklyn, the child of two schoolteachers, and
received a BFA from the rhode island School of design, where she studied graphic
design and painting. After she graduated, as she says on her web site, she “reverted
to type and began drawing cartoons once again.” more than a thousand of her
cartoons have been published in the New Yorker magazine since 1978. A collection
of twenty-five years of her work was published in Theories of Everything (2006).
She collaborated with comedian and novelist Steve martin on the children’s book
The Alphabet from A to Y with a Bonus Letter Z! (2007); she has also written the children’s book Too Busy Marco (2010) and a collection of cartoons entitled What I
Hate: From A–Z (2011). She has won numerous awards and received an Honorary
doctorate of Fine Arts from Pratt institute and the Art institute of Boston. chast is
known for her wry commentaries on the experiences of ordinary life such as going
to school, which the following cartoon depicts. She has written of her own experience:
“i doodled all the time in school — that is what kept me from going completely out
of my head.”

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 243

6/18/12 3:11 PM

244

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

(See insert for color version.)

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 244

6/18/12 3:11 PM

cHAST • wHAT i leArNed

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 245

245

6/18/12 3:11 PM

246

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 246

6/18/12 3:11 PM

cHAST • wHAT i leArNed

247

Exploring the Text
1. Identify one part of this cartoon, a single frame or several, that you find to be an
especially effective synergy of written and visual text. Why do you think the section you chose works so well?
2. On the second page, the middle frame is a large one with a whole list of what Roz
Chast learned “Up through sixth grade.” Is she suggesting that all these things are
foolish or worthless? Explain your response.
3. The three-page cartoon presents a narrative, a story. Discuss the extent to which
Chast uses the techniques of a fiction writer, such as plot, character, and setting.
4. Chast subtitles her cartoon “A Sentimental Education . . . ,” which is a reference to
a French novel of that title written by Gustave Flaubert in 1869. The American
writer Henry James described A Sentimental Education as far inferior to Flaubert’s
earlier and more successful novel Madame Bovary; in fact, he characterized the
1869 work as “elaborately and massively dreary.” Why do you think Chast uses this
reference to Flaubert’s novel? Or do you think that she is not specifically alluding
to Flaubert but, rather, to more generalized “sentimental” notions of education?
Consider her audience as you respond to these questions.
5. What, ultimately, is Chast’s critique? What is the relationship she sees among
learning, K–12 school, and education?

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 247

6/18/12 3:11 PM

Conversation
The American High School
Each of the following texts presents a viewpoint on the American high school.

Sources
1. Horace Mann, from Report of the Massachusetts Board of Education
2. Todd Gitlin, The Liberal Arts in an Age of Info-Glut
3. Leon Botstein, Let Teenagers Try Adulthood
4. Edward Koren, Two Scoreboards (cartoon)
5. Diane Ravitch, Stop the Madness
6. Eric A. Hanushek et al., from U.S. Math Performance in Global Perspective
(tables)
7. David Barboza, from Shanghai Schools’ Approach Pushes Students to Top of Tests
After you have read, studied, and synthesized these pieces, enter the conversation
with one of the suggested topics on pp. 266–7.

1. from Report of the Massachusetts
Board of Education
Horace Mann
The following selection is taken from an official 1848 policy document by
Horace mann (1796–1859), who is known as the father of American public
education.

Intellectual Education as a Means of Removing Poverty,
and Securing Abundance
. . . According to the European theory, men are divided into classes, — some to
toil and earn, others to seize and enjoy. According to the Massachusetts theory, all
are to have an equal chance for earning, and equal security in the enjoyment of
what they earn. The latter tends to equality of condition; the former, to the grossest inequalities. . . .
But is it not true that Massachusetts, in some respects, instead of adhering
more and more closely to her own theory, is becoming emulous of the baneful
examples of Europe? The distance between the two extremes of society is lengthening, instead of being abridged. With every generation, fortunes increase on the one
hand, and some new privation is added to poverty on the other. We are verging
towards those extremes of opulence and of penury, each of which unhumanizes

248

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 248

6/18/12 3:11 PM

coNVerSATioN

249

the human mind. A perpetual struggle for the bare necessaries of life, without the
ability to obtain them, makes men wolfish. Avarice, on the other hand, sees, in all
the victims of misery around it, not objects for pity and succor, but only crude
materials to be worked up into more money.
I suppose it to be the universal sentiment of all those who mingle any ingredient of benevolence with their notions on political economy, that vast and overshadowing private fortunes are among the greatest dangers to which the happiness
of the people in a republic can be subjected. Such fortunes would create a feudalism of a new kind, but one more oppressive and unrelenting than that of the
middle ages. The feudal lords in England and on the Continent never held their
retainers in a more abject condition of servitude than the great majority of foreign manufacturers and capitalists hold their operatives and laborers at the present day. The means employed are different; but the similarity in results is striking.
What force did then, money does now. The villein1 of the middle ages had no spot
of earth on which he could live, unless one were granted to him by his lord. The
operative or laborer of the present day has no employment, and therefore no
bread, unless the capitalist will accept his services. The vassal had no shelter but
such as his master provided for him. Not one in five thousand of English operatives or farm-laborers is able to build or own even a hovel; and therefore they must
accept such shelter as capital offers them. The baron prescribed his own terms to
his retainers: those terms were peremptory, and the serf must submit or perish.
The British manufacturer or farmer prescribes the rate of wages he will give to his
work-people; he reduces these wages under whatever pretext he pleases; and they,
too, have no alternative but submission or starvation. In some respects, indeed,
the condition of the modern dependent is more forlorn than that of the corresponding serf class in former times. Some attributes of the patriarchal relation did spring
up between the lord and his lieges to soften the harsh relations subsisting between
them. Hence came some oversight of the condition of children, some relief in sickness, some protection and support in the decrepitude of age. But only in instances
comparatively few have kindly offices smoothed the rugged relation between
British capital and British labor. The children of the work-people are abandoned
to their fate; and notwithstanding the privations they suffer, and the dangers they
threaten, no power in the realm has yet been able to secure them an education;
and when the adult laborer is prostrated by sickness, or eventually worn out by
toil and age, the poorhouse, which has all along been his destination, becomes his
destiny. . . .
Now, surely nothing but universal education can counterwork this tendency
to the domination of capital and servility of labor. If one class possesses all the
wealth and the education, while the residue of society is ignorant and poor, it

1In a feudal society, a serf who has the right to own property. — Eds.

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 249

6/18/12 3:11 PM

250

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

matters not by what name the relation between them may be called: the latter, in
fact and in truth, will be the servile dependants and subjects of the former. But, if
education be equably diffused, it will draw property after it by the strongest of all
attractions, for such a thing never did happen, and never can happen, as that an
intelligent and practical body of men should be permanently poor. Property and
labor in different classes are essentially antagonistic; but property and labor in the
same class are essentially fraternal. The people of Massachusetts have, in some
degree, appreciated the truth, that the unexampled prosperity of the State — its
comfort, its competence, its general intelligence and virtue — is attributable to
the education, more or less perfect, which all its people have received: but are they
sensible of a fact equally important; namely, that it is to this same education that
two-thirds of the people are indebted for not being today the vassals of as severe
a tyranny, in the form of capital, as the lower classes of Europe are bound to in the
form of brute force?
Education, then, beyond all other devices of human origin, is the great equalizer of the conditions of men, — the balance-wheel of the social machinery. I do
not here mean that it so elevates the moral nature as to make men disdain and
abhor the oppression of their fellow-men. This idea pertains to another of its
attributes. But I mean that it gives each man the independence and the means by
which he can resist the selfishness of other men. It does better than to disarm the
poor of their hostility towards the rich: it prevents being poor. Agrarianism is the
revenge of poverty against wealth. The wanton destruction of the property of
others — the burning of hay-ricks and corn-ricks, the demolition of machinery
because it supersedes hand-labor, the sprinkling of vitriol on rich dresses — is
only agrarianism run mad. Education prevents both the revenge and the madness.
On the other hand, a fellow-feeling for one’s class or caste is the common instinct
of hearts not wholly sunk in selfish regards for person or for family. The spread
of education, by enlarging the cultivated class or caste, will open a wider area over
which the social feelings will expand; and, if this education should be universal and
complete, it would do more than all things else to obliterate factitious distinctions
in society. . . .
For the creation of wealth, then, — for the existence of a wealthy people and
a wealthy nation, — intelligence is the grand condition. The number of improvers
will increase as the intellectual constituency, if I may call it, increases. In former
times, and in most parts of the world even at the present day, not one man in a
million has ever had such a development of mind as made it possible for him to
become a contributor to art or science. Let this development precede, and contributions, numberless, and of inestimable value, will be sure to follow. That political
economy, therefore, which busies itself about capital and labor, supply and demand,
interest and rents, favorable and unfavorable balances of trade, but leaves out of
account the element of a widespread mental development, is nought but stupendous
folly. The greatest of all the arts in political economy is to change a consumer into a
producer; and the next greatest is to increase the producer’s producing power, — an

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 250

5

6/18/12 3:11 PM

coNVerSATioN

251

end to be directly attained by increasing his intelligence. For mere delving, an ignorant man is but little better than a swine, whom he so much resembles in his appetites, and surpasses in his powers of mischief.

Questions
1. Why does Horace Mann begin with a description of the “feudal lords in England
and on the Continent” (para. 3)?
2. What does Mann mean by the following statement: “Property and labor in different classes are essentially antagonistic; but property and labor in the same class are
essentially fraternal” (para. 4)?
3. When Mann uses the term intelligence, does he mean innate ability or developed
skill?
4. Describe Mann’s style in this excerpt. In what ways is it appropriate for his audience?
5. Identify one claim Mann makes and explain whether you believe it remains true
today.

2. The Liberal Arts in an Age of Info-Glut
Todd Gitlin
in the following selection, which ran in the Chronicle of Higher Education in
1998, author and university professor Todd Gitlin argues that studying the liberal
arts is even more important now in this age of mass media.

The glut of images is, in many respects, unprecedented, and so is the challenge it
poses for education and the arts. On average, Americans watch television, or are in
its presence, for more than four hours a day — half the waking hours that are not
taken up with work (and sometimes even then). For the sake of argument, let us
suppose that, during those hours of watching television, the representative American tunes in to six fictional programs. Those might include half-hour comedies,
hour-long dramas, and two-hour movies. (Actually, thanks to remote-control
devices, many viewers see more than one program at a time. More than two-thirds
of cable subscribers surf channels, and the younger they are, the more they surf.)
For simplicity’s sake, assume 16 minutes of commercials per hour on commercial channels — say, 40 distinct commercials per hour. That gives us roughly 160
more short units of mass-mediated message per day. For viewers who watch news
shows, throw in, as a conservative estimate, 30 separate news items every day. Add
trailers for upcoming shows and trivia quizzes. Add sporting events. Add videocassettes. Add billboards along the highway, on street corners, on buses. Add
newspaper and magazine stories and advertisements, video and computer games,
books — especially lightweight fiction. Add the photo-studded displays of wiggling,
potentially meaningful units of information and disinformation that flood into

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 251

6/18/12 3:11 PM

252

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

millions of households and offices through the Internet. Read me! Notice me! Click
on me! All told, we are exposed to thousands of mass-produced stories a month,
not counting thousands more freestanding images and labels that flash into the
corners of our consciousness.
Note, too, that this imagescape has a sound track — the vast quantities of performed music and other auditory stimuli, including songs, sound effects, tapes,
compact disks, voice-mail filler — all the currents and ejaculations of organized
sound that have become the background of our lives.
Now, it is true that no one but impressionable psychotics could be held in
thrall for long by most of the minuscule dramas and depictions we find in popular culture. We experience most of the messages minimally, as sensations of the
moment. But some part of the imagescape is nearly always clamoring for attention. Caught in the cross hairs of what the comedy writer Larry Gelbart has called
“weapons of mass distraction,” how shall we know, deeply, who we are? How shall
we find still points in a turning world? How shall we learn to govern ourselves?
What does it mean, this information for which we are to be grateful and
upgrade our facilities? When a neo-Nazi creates a World Wide Web site that maintains that Auschwitz was not a death camp, he is, technically, adding as much “information” to the gross informational product as when someone posts an analysis of
global warming. Garbage in, garbage sloshing around. When people “chat” about
the weather in Phoenix or Paris, they are circulating information, but this does
not mean they are either deepening their sensibilities or improving their democratic capacity to govern themselves. Long before Hollywood or computers, the
French observer Alexis de Tocqueville wrote of America: “What is generally sought
in the productions of mind is easy pleasure and information without labor.”
Toward that very end, the genius of our consumer-oriented marketplace has been
to produce the Walkman, the remote-control device, and the computer mouse.
When information piles up higgledy-piggledy — when information becomes
the noise of our culture — the need to teach the lessons of the liberal arts is urgent.
Students need “chaff detectors.” They need some orientation to philosophy, history, language, literature, music, and arts that have lasted more than 15 minutes.
In a high-velocity culture, the liberal arts have to say, “Take your time.” They have
to tell students, “Trends are fine, but you need to learn about what endures.”
Faculty members in the liberal arts need to say: “We don’t want to add to your
information glut, we want to offer some ground from which to perceive the rest of
what you will see. Amid the weightless fluff of a culture of obsolescence, here is
Jane Austen on psychological complication, Balzac on the pecuniary squeeze. Here
is Dostoyevsky wrestling with God, Melville with nothingness, Douglass with slavery. Here is Rembrandt’s religious inwardness, Mozart’s exuberance, Beethoven’s
longing. In a culture of chaff, here is wheat.”
The point is not simply to help us find our deepest individual beings. It is also
to help new generations discover that they are not that different from the common run of humanity. Common concerns about life and death, right and wrong,

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 252

5

6/18/12 3:11 PM

coNVerSATioN

253

beauty and ugliness persist throughout the vicissitudes of individual life, throughout our American restlessness, global instabilities, the multiple livelihoods that we
must shape in an age of retraining, downsizing, and resizing. We badly need continuities to counteract vertigo as we shift identities, careen through careers and
cultural changes.
Finally, we need to cultivate the liberal arts in a democratic spirit — not necessarily for the sake of piety before the past (though that spirit is hardly ruled out),
but to pry us out of parochialism. In preparation for citizenship, the liberal arts
tell us that human beings have faced troubles before; they tell us how people have
managed, well and badly. Access to a common, full-blooded humanities curriculum will help our students cross social boundaries in their imaginations. Studying
a common core of learning will help orient them to common tasks as citizens; it
will challenge or bolster — make them think through — their views and, in any case,
help them understand why not everyone in the world (or in their classroom) agrees
with them.
Regardless of one’s views of the curricular conflicts of our time, surely no one
who is intellectually serious can help but notice how students of all stripes arrive
at college with shallow and scattered educations, ill-prepared to learn. They are
greeted by budget pressures and shortsighted overseers. A strong liberal-arts curriculum could teach them about their history, their social condition, themselves.
Today’s common curriculum would not be that of 1950 — anymore than 1950’s
was that of 1900. What overlap it would have with the past would generate cultural ballast. Surely the academic left and right (and center) might find some
common ground in the quest to offer a higher education that is democratically
useful, citizenly, and smart.

10

Questions
1. Why does Todd Gitlin explain in detail the television-watching habits of most
Americans? How does this information lay the foundation for his argument?
2. How does the style of paragraph 2, which begins “For simplicity’s sake,” reflect its
content? Pay special attention to the sentence structure.
3. What effect does Gitlin’s use of such emotional terms and references as “impressionable psychotics” (para. 3) and “neo-Nazi” (para. 4) have on his audience?
4. What is his purpose in quoting nineteenth-century critic Alexis de Tocqueville
(para. 5)?
5. Gitlin offers several reasons for the importance of the liberal arts. What are they?
Why does he present them in the order that he does?
6. This selection is from a longer article about the need for a common core curriculum in colleges. To what extent do you think that its argument is relevant to high
schools as well?

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 253

6/18/12 3:11 PM

254

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

3. Let Teenagers Try Adulthood
Leon Botstein
The following opinion piece, published in the New York Times in 1999, was
written by leon Botstein, president of Bard college and author of Jefferson’s
Children: Education and the Promise of American Culture (1997).

The national outpouring after the Littleton [Columbine High School] shootings
has forced us to confront something we have suspected for a long time: the American high school is obsolete and should be abolished. In the . . . month [after the
shootings] high school students present and past [came] forward with stories
about cliques and the artificial intensity of a world defined by insiders and outsiders, in which the insiders hold sway because of superficial definitions of good
looks and attractiveness, popularity and sports prowess.
The team sports of high school dominate more than student culture. A
community’s loyalty to the high school system is often based on the extent to
which varsity teams succeed. High school administrators and faculty members
are often former coaches, and the coaches themselves are placed in a separate,
untouchable category. The result is that the culture of the inside elite is not contested by the adults in the school. Individuality and dissent are discouraged.
But the rules of high school turn out not to be the rules of life. Often the high
school outsider becomes the more successful and admired adult. The definitions of
masculinity and femininity go through sufficient transformation to make the game
of popularity in high school an embarrassment. No other group of adults young
or old is confined to an age-segregated environment, much like a gang in which
individuals of the same age group define each other’s world. In no workplace, not
even in colleges or universities, is there such a narrow segmentation by chronology.
Given the poor quality of recruitment and training for high school teachers,
it is no wonder that the curriculum and the enterprise of learning hold so little
sway over young people. When puberty meets education and learning in modern
America, the victory of puberty masquerading as popular culture and the tyranny
of peer groups based on ludicrous values meet little resistance.
By the time those who graduate from high school go on to college and realize
what really is at stake in becoming an adult, too many opportunities have been lost
and too much time has been wasted. Most thoughtful young people suffer the high
school environment in silence and in their junior and senior years mark time
waiting for college to begin. The Littleton killers, above and beyond the psychological demons that drove them to violence, felt trapped in the artificiality of the
high school world and believed it to be real. They engineered their moment of
undivided attention and importance in the absence of any confidence that life
after high school could have a different meaning.
Adults should face the fact that they don’t like adolescents and that they have
used high school to isolate the pubescent and hormonally active adolescent away
from both the picture-book idealized innocence of childhood and the more account-

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 254

5

6/18/12 3:11 PM

coNVerSATioN

255

able world of adulthood. But the primary reason high school doesn’t work anymore,
if it ever did, is that young people mature substantially earlier in the late 20th
century than they did when the high school was invented. For example, the age of
first menstruation has dropped at least two years since the beginning of this century,
and not surprisingly, the onset of sexual activity has dropped in proportion. An
institution intended for children in transition now holds young adults back well
beyond the developmental point for which high school was originally designed.
Furthermore, whatever constraints to the presumption of adulthood among
young people may have existed decades ago have now fallen away. Information
and images, as well as the real and virtual freedom of movement we associate with
adulthood, are now accessible to every 15- and 16-year-old.
Secondary education must be rethought. Elementary school should begin at
age 4 or 5 and end with the sixth grade. We should entirely abandon the concept of
the middle school and junior high school. Beginning with the seventh grade, there
should be four years of secondary education that we may call high school. Young
people should graduate at 16 rather than 18.
They could then enter the real world, the world of work or national service,
in which they would take a place of responsibility alongside older adults in mixed
company. They could stay at home and attend junior college, or they could go
away to college. For all the faults of college, at least the adults who dominate the
world of colleges, the faculty, were selected precisely because they were exceptional
and different, not because they were popular. Despite the often cavalier attitude
toward teaching in college, at least physicists know their physics, mathematicians
know and love their mathematics, and music is taught by musicians, not by graduates of education schools, where the disciplines are subordinated to the study of
classroom management.
For those 16-year-olds who do not want to do any of the above, we might construct new kinds of institutions, each dedicated to one activity, from science to
dance, to which adolescents could devote their energies while working together
with professionals in those fields.
At 16, young Americans are prepared to be taken seriously and to develop the
motivations and interests that will serve them well in adult life. They need to enter
a world where they are not in a lunchroom with only their peers, estranged from
other age groups and cut off from the game of life as it is really played. There is
nothing utopian about this idea; it is immensely practical and efficient, and its
implementation is long overdue. We need to face biological and cultural facts and
not prolong the life of a flawed institution that is out of date.

10

Questions
1. In the first paragraph, Leon Botstein states, “[T]he American high school is obsolete and should be abolished.” Why? What specific reasons does he provide?
2. What does Botstein mean by “the rules of high school turn out not to be the rules
of life” (para. 3)?

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 255

6/18/12 3:11 PM

256

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

3. What is Botstein’s proposed solution?
4. Where does Botstein address a counterargument? Does he refute (or concede) in
sufficient detail to be persuasive?
5. Which parts of Botstein’s reasoning do you find to be the strongest? The weakest?
Explain.

4. Two Scoreboards
Edward Koren
edward koren is best known for his work in the New Yorker, where he has published more than nine hundred cartoons, including the following one from 2002,
which comments on the relationship between athletics and academics.

Questions
1. Consider the words and the images separately. What is the relationship between
them? Do the images support the words or vice versa?
2. What point does the cartoon make about the relationship between sports and academics? Do you agree with Edward Koren’s thesis?
3. What does the American flag add to the cartoon’s impact?

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 256

6/18/12 3:11 PM

coNVerSATioN

257

5. Stop the Madness
Diane Ravitch
diane ravitch (b. 1938) is a former Assistant Secretary of education and currently a research professor of education at New york university. The following
excerpt from her book The Death and Life of the Great American School System:
How Testing and Choice Are Undermining Education (2010) appeared on the
web site of the National education Association, the largest professional association and union of educators in America.

On “No Child Left Behind”
I was initially supportive of NCLB. Who could object to ensuring that children
mastered the basic skills of reading and mathematics? Who could object to an
annual test of those skills? Certainly not I.
My support for NCLB remained strong until November 30, 2006. That was
the day I went to a conference at the American Enterprise Institute, a well-respected
conservative think tank in Washington, D.C. The conference examined whether
the major remedies prescribed by NCLB — especially choice and after-school
tutoring — were effective. Was the “NCLB toolkit” working? The various presentations that day demonstrated that state education departments were drowning
in new bureaucratic requirements, procedures, and routines, and that none of the
prescribed remedies was making a difference.
I started to doubt the entire approach to school reform that NCLB represented.
I started to see the danger of the culture of testing that was spreading through
every school in every community, town, city and state.
The most toxic flaw in NCLB was its legislative command that all students in
every school must be proficient in reading and mathematics by 2014, including
students with special needs, students whose native language is not English, students who are homeless and lacking in any societal advantage, and students who
have every societal advantage but are not interested in their schoolwork. All will be
proficient by 2014. And if they are not, then their schools and teachers will suffer
the consequences.
The 2014 goal is a timetable for the demolition of public education in the
United States. The goal of 100 percent proficiency has placed thousands of public
schools at risk of being privatized, turned into charters, or closed. And indeed,
scores of schools in New York City, Chicago, Washington, D.C., and other districts
were closed because they were unable to meet the unreasonable demands of NCLB.
Superintendents in those districts boasted of how many schools they had closed,
as if it were a badge of honor rather than an admission of defeat.
As the clock ticks toward 2014, ever larger numbers of public schools will be
forced to close or become charter schools, relinquish control to state authorities,
become privately managed, or undergo some other major restructuring. Yet, to date,

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 257

5

6/18/12 3:11 PM

258

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

there is no substantial body of evidence that demonstrates that low-performing
schools can be turned around by any of the remedies prescribed in the law. Furthermore, [NCLB’s] simpleminded and singular focus on test scores distorts and
degrades the meaning and practice of education.
One of the unintended consequences of NCLB was the shrinkage of time
available to teach anything other than reading and math. Other subjects, including history, science, the arts, geography, even recess, were curtailed in many schools.
Reading and mathematics were the only subjects that counted in calculating a
school’s adequate yearly progress, and even in these subjects, instruction gave way
to intensive test preparation. Test scores became an obsession. Many school districts invested heavily in test-preparation materials and activities. Test-taking skills
and strategies took precedence over knowledge. Teachers used the tests from previous years to prepare their students, and many of the questions appeared in precisely the same format every year; sometimes the exact same questions reappeared
on the state tests. In urban schools, where there are many low-performing students,
drill and practice became a significant part of the daily routine.
NCLB assumed that shaming schools that were unable to lift test scores every
year — and the people who work in them — would lead to higher scores. It assumed
that low scores are caused by lazy teachers and lazy principals. Perhaps most
naively, it assumed that higher test scores on standardized tests of basic skills are
synonymous with good education. Its assumptions were wrong.

On Her Favorite Teacher
My favorite teacher was Mrs. Ruby Ratliff. More than fifty years ago, she was my
homeroom teacher at San Jacinto High School in Houston, and I was lucky enough
to get into her English class as a senior.
Mrs. Ratliff was gruff and demanding. She did not tolerate foolishness or
disruptions. She had a great reputation among students. When it came time each
semester to sign up for classes, there was always a long line outside her door. What I
remember most about her was what she taught us. We studied the greatest writers
of the English language, not their long writings like novels (no time for that), but
their poems and essays. I still recall a class discussion of Shelley’s “Ozymandias,”
and the close attention that thirty usually rowdy adolescents paid to a poem about
a time and place we could barely imagine. Now, many years later, in times of stress
or sadness, I still turn to poems that I first read in Mrs. Ratliff ’s class.
She had a red pen and she used it freely. Still, she was always sure to make a
comment that encouraged us to do a better job. Clearly she had multiple goals for
her students, beyond teaching literature and grammar. She was also teaching about
character and personal responsibility. These are not the sorts of things that appear
on any standardized test.
At our graduation, she made a gift of a line or two of poetry to each of the
students in her homeroom. I got these two: “To strive, to seek, to find, and not to

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 258

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

coNVerSATioN

259

yield,” the last line of Tennyson’s “Ulysses,” which we had read in class, and “among
them, but not of them,” from Byron’s “Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage,” which we had
not read in class. As she did in class, Mrs. Ratliff used the moment to show us how
literature connected to our own lives, without condescending into shallow “relevance.” I think these were the best graduation presents I got, because they are the
only ones I remember a half century later.
I think of Mrs. Ratliff when I hear the latest proposals to improve the teaching force. I believe Mrs. Ratliff was a great teacher, but I don’t think she would
have been considered “great” if she had been judged by the kind of hard data that
is used now. How would the experts have measured what we learned? We never
took a multiple-choice test. We wrote essays and took written tests in which we
had to explain our answers, not check a box or fill in a bubble. If she had been
evaluated by the grades she gave, she would have been in deep trouble, because
she did not award many A grades. An observer might have concluded that she was
a very ineffective teacher.
Would any school today recognize her ability to inspire her students to love
literature? Would she get a bonus for expecting her students to use good grammar, accurate spelling, and good syntax? Would she win extra dollars for insisting
that her students write long essays and for grading them promptly? I don’t think
so. And let’s face it: She would be stifled not only by the data mania of her supervisors, but by the jargon, the indifference to classical literature, and the hostility
to her manner of teaching that now prevail in our schools. . . .

On How to Improve Our Schools
What, then, can we do to improve schools and education? Plenty.
We must first of all have a vision of what good education is. We should have
goals that are worth striving for. Everyone involved in educating children should
ask themselves why we educate. What is a well-educated person? What knowledge
is of most worth? What do we hope for when we send our children to school?
What do we want them to learn and accomplish by the time they graduate from
school?
Certainly we want them to be able to read and write and be numerate. But
that is not enough. We want to prepare them for a useful life. We want them to be
able to think for themselves when they are out in the world on their own. We want
them to have good character and to make sound decisions about their life, their
work, and their health. We want them to face life’s joys and travails with courage
and humor. We hope that they will be kind and compassionate in their dealings
with others. We want them to have a sense of justice and fairness. We want them
to understand our nation and our world and the challenges we face. We want them
to be active, responsible citizens, prepared to think issues through carefully, to
listen to differing views, and to reach decisions rationally. We want them to learn
science and mathematics so they understand the problems of modern life and

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 259

15

6/18/12 3:11 PM

260

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

participate in finding solutions. We want them to enjoy the rich artistic and cultural heritage of our society and other societies.
If these are our goals, the current narrow, utilitarian focus of our national
testing regime is not sufficient to reach any of them. Indeed, to the extent that we
make the testing regime our master, we may see our true goals recede farther and
farther into the distance. By our current methods, we may be training (not educating) a generation of children who are repelled by learning, thinking that it means
only drudgery, worksheets, test preparation, and test-taking.
Our nation’s commitment to provide universal, free public education has been
a crucial element in the successful assimilation of millions of immigrants and in
the ability of generations of Americans to improve their lives. As we seek to reform
our schools, we must take care to do no harm. In fact, we must take care to make
our public schools once again the pride of our nation. To the extent that we
strengthen them, we strengthen our democracy.

Questions
1. What effect does Diane Ravitch achieve by opening with an explanation of how
and why she changed her mind on the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) legislation?
2. What does she mean by “toxic flaw” (para. 4)? What other criticisms does she level
at NCLB?
3. Ravitch ends the first section of her article by enumerating why NCLB’s “assumptions were wrong” (para. 8). How does that analysis connect with the following
section, where she describes her “favorite teacher”?
4. What are the traits of Mrs. Ratliff that make Ravitch remember her so many years
later?
5. What point is Ravitch making when she asserts, “An observer might have concluded that [Mrs. Ratliff] was a very ineffective teacher” (para. 13)?
6. In paragraph 17, Ravitch lists what most of us want our education to include, but
her list would be difficult to quantify and measure. Why do you believe these qualities should or should not be goals of public education?
7. What is the difference between “training” and “educating” that Ravitch implies in
paragraph 18?

6. from U.S. Math Performance in Global Perspective
Eric A. Hanushek et al.
The following two charts appeared in a study by professors from Stanford university, Harvard university, and munich university. This study compares student
math performance internationally based on results from the 2009 Program for
international Student Assessment (PiSA) exam.

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 260

6/18/12 3:11 PM

coNVerSATioN

261

Class of 2009: Percentage of students at advanced level in math in U.S. states and
countries participating in PISA 2006.
Taiwan
Hong Kong
Korea
Finland
Switzerland
Belgium
Netherlands
Liechtenstein
New Zealand
Czech Rep.
Japan
Canada
Macao
Australia
Germany
Austria
Massachusetts
Slovenia
Denmark
Minnesota
Iceland
France
Estonia
Sweden
U.K.
Slovakia
Vermont
New Jersey
Washington
Luxembourg
Hungary
Poland
Norway
Virginia
Ireland
Connecticut
Oregon
Lithuania
North Carolina
Maryland
South Carolina
Wisconsin
Ohio
New Hampshire
South Dakota
Colorado
New York
Texas
U.S.

U.S. average
30 25 20 15 10 5

0

Percent at advanced level

U.S. average

30 25 20 15 10 5

U.S.
Nebraska
Russia
Alaska
Iowa
Spain
Pennsylvania
Montana
Michigan
Illinois
Latvia
Kansas
Indiana
Delaware
Maine
Italy
Israel
North Dakota
Utah
Arizona
Florida
California
Idaho
Portugal
Georgia
Missouri
Greece
Croatia
Turkey
Wyoming
Kentucky
Rhode Island
Nevada
Arkansas
Tennessee
Hawaii
Uruguay
Bulgaria
Oklahoma
Alabama
Serbia
Louisiana
West Virginia
New Mexico
Mississippi
Chile
Thailand

0

Percent at advanced level

FIGURE 1
note: excludes participating countries below 1 percent: romania, Brazil, Argentina, Azerbaijan, mexico,
montenegro, Qatar, Tunisia, colombia, indonesia, Jordan, and kyrgyzstan.

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 261

6/18/12 3:11 PM

262

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

Percentages of all students at the advanced level per state and countries with similar
and higher percentages at the advanced level in overall student population.
State

Percent
advanced

Significantly
outperformed by*

Countries with similar percentages
of advanced students**

1. Massachusetts

11.4%

14

Austria • Germany • Denmark • France • Iceland • Slovenia

2. New Hampshire

10.8

16

Denmark • Estonia • France • Iceland • Slovenia • Sweden

3. Vermont

8.8

22

U.K. • Hungary • Ireland • Luxembourg • Norway • Poland •
Slovakia

4. New Jersey

8.7

18

Estonia • France • U.K. • Hungary • Ireland • Iceland •
Lithuania • Luxembourg • Norway • Poland • Slovakia • Sweden

4. Washington

8.7

21

U.K. • Hungary • Ireland • Lithuania • Luxembourg • Norway •
Poland • Slovakia • Sweden

6. Virginia

7.9

22

U.K. • Hungary • Ireland • Lithuania • Luxembourg • Norway •
Poland • Slovakia

7. Connecticut

7.8

23

Hungary • Ireland • Lithuania • Luxembourg • Norway • Poland
• Slovakia

8. Oregon

7.3

25

Hungary • Ireland • Lithuania • Poland

9. North Carolina

7.1

27

Slovakia • Ireland • Lithuania • Poland

10. Maryland

6.8

29

Lithuania • Russia

11. South Carolina

6.7

29

Lithuania • Russia

11. Wisconsin

6.7

29

Lithuania • Russia

13. Ohio

6.6

29

Lithuania • Russia

14. New Hampshire

6.5

29

Lithuania • Russia

14. South Dakota

6.5

29

Lithuania • Russia

16. Colorado

6.3

29

Spain • Lithuania • Russia

16. New York

6.3

29

Lithuania • Russia

18. Texas

6.2

29

Lithuania • Russia

United States

6.0

30

Russia

19. Nebraska

6.0

29

Spain • Lithuania • Russia

20. Alaska

5.8

30

Spain • Latvia • Russia

21. Iowa

5.7

30

Spain • Latvia • Russia

21. Pennsylvania

5.7

30

Spain • Israel • Italy • Lithuania • Latvia • Russia

23. Montana

5.6

30

Spain • Latvia • Russia

24. Michigan

5.5

30

Spain • Israel • Italy • Latvia • Russia

25. Illinois

5.4

30

Spain • Israel • Italy • Latvia • Russia

26. Kansas

5.2

30

Spain • Israel • Italy • Latvia • Russia

27. Indiana

5.1

30

Spain • Israel • Italy • Latvia • Russia

28. Delaware

5.0

32

Israel • Italy • Latvia

28. Maine

5.0

32

Israel • Italy • Latvia

30. North Dakota

4.8

32

Israel • Italy • Latvia • Portugal • Turkey

31. Utah

4.7

32

Israel • Italy • Latvia • Portugal • Turkey

32. Arizona

4.6

33

Israel • Italy • Portugal • Turkey

32. Florida

4.6

32

Israel • Italy • Latvia • Portugal • Turkey

34. California

4.5

33

Israel • Italy • Portugal • Turkey

34. Idaho

4.5

33

Israel • Italy • Portugal • Turkey

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 262

6/18/12 3:11 PM

coNVerSATioN

Percent
advanced

Significantly
outperformed by*

36. Georgia

4.3

34

Greece • Israel • Portugal • Turkey

37. Missouri

4.1

35

Greece • Portugal • Turkey

38. Wyoming

3.5

37

Croatia • Turkey

39. Kentucky

3.4

37

Croatia • Turkey

40. Rhode Island

3.3

37

Croatia • Turkey

41. Nevada

3.1

38

Turkey

42. Arkansas

3.0

38

Bulgaria • Turkey

43. Tennessee

2.9

38

Bulgaria • Turkey

44. Hawaii

2.5

38

Bulgaria • Turkey • Uruguay

45. Oklahoma

2.4

38

Bulgaria • Serbia • Turkey • Uruguay

46. Alabama

2.3

38

Bulgaria • Serbia • Turkey • Uruguay

47. Louisiana

1.7

42

Bulgaria

48. West Virginia

1.4

42

Bulgaria

48. New Mexico

1.4

42

Bulgaria

50. Mississippi

1.3

42

Turkey

State

263

Countries with similar percentages
of advanced students**

FIGURE 2
*Number of countries whose percent advanced was statistically significantly higher
**countries where the percentage of students at the advanced level did not differ significantly from state. if no
country had similar percentage, the country with the percentage just higher than that of state is listed.

Questions
1. According to Figure 1, how many states have higher advanced-level math achievement than the overall United States?
2. Based on the top-ten ranked countries, what conclusions can you draw? Now look
at the top-twenty ranked countries and states; how does your observation change?
3. According to Figure 2, do most states rank closer to developing or to developed
countries in advanced math skills?
4. Based on information from Figure 2, what hypotheses can you develop about the competitiveness of U.S. students in the global market? Develop at least two hypotheses.
5. What questions might you ask about the data that is used as the basis for these two
charts? What specific information would you need either to challenge or to draw
conclusions from these charts?

7. from Shanghai Schools’ Approach
Pushes Students to Top of Tests
David Barboza
The following excerpt from a 2010 New York Times article compares the
approach to instruction in Shanghai with that in the united States.

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 263

6/18/12 3:11 PM

264

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

SHANGHAI — In Li Zhen’s ninth-grade mathematics class here last week, the
morning drill was geometry. Students at the middle school affiliated with Jing’An
Teachers’ College were asked to explain the relative size of geometric shapes by
using Euclid’s theorem of parallelograms.
“Who in this class can tell me how to demonstrate two lines are parallel without using a proportional segment?” Ms. Li called out to about 40 students seated
in a cramped classroom.
One by one, a series of students at this medium-size public school raised their
hands. When Ms. Li called on them, they each stood politely by their desks and
usually answered correctly. They returned to their seats only when she told them
to sit down.
Educators say this disciplined approach helps explain the announcement this
month that 5,100 15-year-olds in Shanghai outperformed students from about
65 countries on an international standardized test that measured math, science
and reading competency.
American students came in between 15th and 31st place in the three categories. France and Britain also fared poorly.
Experts said comparing scores from countries and cities of different sizes is
complicated. They also said that the Shanghai scores were not representative of
China, since this fast-growing city of 20 million is relatively affluent. Still, they
were impressed by the high scores from students in Shanghai.
The results were seen as another sign of China’s growing competitiveness. The
United States rankings are a “wake-up call,” said Arne Duncan, the secretary of
education.
Although it was the first time China had taken part in the test, which was
administered by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development,
based in Paris, the results bolstered this country’s reputation for producing students with strong math and science skills.
Many educators were also surprised by the city’s strong reading scores, which
measured students’ proficiency in their native Chinese.
The Shanghai students performed well, experts say, for the same reason students
from other parts of Asia — including South Korea, Singapore and Hong Kong —
do: Their education systems are steeped in discipline, rote learning and obsessive
test preparation.
Public school students in Shanghai often remain at school until 4 p.m., watch
very little television and are restricted by Chinese law from working before the
age of 16.
“Very rarely do children in other countries receive academic training as
intensive as our children do,” said Sun Baohong, an authority on education at the
Shanghai Academy of Social Sciences. “So if the test is on math and science, there’s
no doubt Chinese students will win the competition.”
But many educators say China’s strength in education is also a weakness. The
nation’s education system is too test-oriented, schools here stifle creativity and
parental pressures often deprive children of the joys of childhood, they say.

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 264

5

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

coNVerSATioN

265

“These are two sides of the same coin: Chinese schools are very good at preparing their students for standardized tests,” Jiang Xueqin, a deputy principal
at Peking University High School in Beijing, wrote in an opinion article published
in the Wall Street Journal shortly after the test results were announced. “For
that reason, they fail to prepare them for higher education and the knowledge
economy.”
In an interview, Mr. Jiang said Chinese schools emphasized testing too much,
and produced students who lacked curiosity and the ability to think critically or
independently.
“It creates very narrow-minded students,” he said. “But what China needs now
is entrepreneurs and innovators.”
This is a common complaint in China. Educators say an emphasis on standardized tests is partly to blame for the shortage of innovative start-ups in China.
And executives at global companies operating here say they have difficulty finding middle managers who can think creatively and solve problems.
In many ways, the system is a reflection of China’s Confucianist past. Children
are expected to honor and respect their parents and teachers.
“Discipline is rarely a problem,” said Ding Yi, vice principal at the middle school
affiliated with Jing’An Teachers’ College. “The biggest challenge is a student who
chronically fails to do his homework.”
While the quality of schools varies greatly in China (rural schools often lack
sufficient money, and dropout rates can be high), schools in major cities typically
produce students with strong math and science skills.
Shanghai is believed to have the nation’s best school system, and many students here gain admission to America’s most selective colleges and universities.
In Shanghai, teachers are required to have a teaching certificate and to undergo
a minimum of 240 hours of training; higher-level teachers can be required to
have up to 540 hours of training. There is a system of incentives and merit pay,
just like the systems in some parts of the United States.
“Within a teacher’s salary package, 70 percent is basic salary,” said Xiong Bingqi,
a professor of education at Shanghai Jiaotong University. “The other 30 percent is
called performance salary.”
Still, teacher salaries are modest, about $750 a month before bonuses and
allowances — far less than what accountants, lawyers or other professionals earn.

15

20

Questions
1. What does the description of class at the start of the article (paras. 1–3) establish
about public school in Shanghai?
2. According to this article, what are the strengths and weaknesses of China’s approach
to education?
3. In what ways do Chinese families and society in general support the “discipline,
rote learning and obsessive test preparation” (para. 10) emphasized in schools?
4. Why is this approach “a reflection of China’s Confucianist past” (para. 18)?

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 265

6/18/12 3:11 PM

266

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

5. What characteristics and skills are prized in a global marketplace, according to this
article?

Making Connections
1. How would Todd Gitlin respond to the report on the schools in Shanghai? Would
he be likely to recommend de-emphasizing math and science?
2. Which author in this Conversation do you think Diane Ravitch would have
the most in common with? Why?
3. Based on his beliefs about the interconnection of democracy and education,
do you think that Horace Mann would approve or disapprove of standardized
testing as we know it today? Explain your response. To what extent does standardized testing contribute to “the balance-wheel of the social machinery”
(para. 5), as Mann describes education?
4. In what ways does the low-ranking achievement in math of American students
challenge Leon Botstein’s position? In what ways does it support his position?

Entering the Conversation
As you respond to the following prompts, support your argument with references to at
least three of the sources in this conversation on the American high school. For help
using sources, see Chapter 4.

1. Write an essay explaining whether you agree with Leon Botstein’s critique of
the American high school (p. 254).
2. Using the texts in this conversation on the American high school, as well as your
own insights into high school, identify two serious problems with the educational system, and propose recommendations for addressing them. Cite at
least two sources from the conversation in your response.
3. John Dewey, the father of experiential education, described the interaction of
education and democracy as follows:
Democratic society is peculiarly dependent for its maintenance upon the use in
forming a course of study of criteria which are broadly human. Democracy cannot
flourish where the chief influences in selecting subject matter of instruction are utilitarian ends narrowly conceived for the masses, and, for the higher education of the
few, the traditions of a specialized cultivated class. The notion that the “essentials”
of elementary education are the three R’s mechanically treated, is based upon ignorance of the essentials needed for realization of democratic ideals. . . . A curriculum
which acknowledges the social responsibilities of education must present situations

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 266

6/18/12 3:11 PM

STudeNT wriTiNG

267

where problems are relevant to the problems of living together, and where observation and information are calculated to develop social insight and interest.
— Democracy and Education, 1916

Write an essay explaining the extent to which you believe that high schools
today are preparing citizens to achieve Dewey’s vision. Draw on your experience
and observation, and cite at least three of the readings from the conversation to
develop your argument.
4. Suppose you had the freedom to design a high school that you want to attend.
What would be the prevailing philosophy of the school? What would be three
or four key characteristics of the school that implement this philosophy? Draw
on at least three of the sources from the Conversation in your discussion.

Student Writing
Argument: Using Personal Experiences as Evidence
The following essay is one AP student’s response to the following prompt.
James Baldwin delivered “A Talk to Teachers” to a group of educators in New York
City in 1963 — over forty years ago. Do the problems and prejudices he discussed still
exist, or are they history?

As you read, consider how the student explains and supports his viewpoint.

A Talk to High School Teachers
Tyler Wilchek
In James Baldwin’s “A Talk to Teachers,” he writes a social criticism of public
schools and describes how the problems are reflected in the larger society. Forty-two years
later, some of the problems Baldwin mentions still exist in public schools. If I were to
give a talk to teachers today, I would be sure to talk about segregation in different parts
of a typical school such as class level, athletics, and social situations. Regular, honors,
and Advanced Placement classes definitely have trends linking race to the difficulty of
the class. Also, sports are often dominated by particular races, so teams end up with
predominantly one race. Last, social situations during lunch prove race is still a factor.
In my school a link can be made between the race of students and the level of
classes enrolled in. Often in AP and honors classes, the students are predominantly white.
In regular classes, the students are predominantly African American and Hispanic. This
trend reflects the experiences Baldwin discusses in his essay. Used to the more “undesirable”
part of the city that he grew up in, he knows that downtown Park Avenue is not really
meant for him. Baldwin writes, “You know — you know instinctively — that none of this

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 267

6/18/12 3:11 PM

268

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

is for you. You know this before you are told.” He points out that he feels unwelcome
and shunned from this part of Park Avenue. I feel as if this is how African American
students feel today towards advanced-level classes. The low enrollment of African American
students in upper-level classes can perhaps be explained by the premise that Baldwin brings
up. Minority students believe that they cannot be accepted in the society of advanced-level
classes. Although expectations can sometime define how much a person can push himself,
if students believe that they are not meant for honors classes, they will not attempt to
try them. African American students often do not have people raising their expectations.
Therefore, when they look at honors courses, their perception is already denying any
chance for success. They assume, rightly or wrongly, that these classes are not for them.
Another problem in high schools today is segregation in athletics. As an active
member of two varsity sports at my high school for three years, I have noticed the “white
sports” and the “black sports.” Participating in two almost exclusively white sports
(swimming and lacrosse) has shown me that sports teams are just as segregated as classes.
In the sports that I play, involvement and encouragement from parents is essential for
success. Swimming requires parents to volunteer at meets and pay for membership to
pools, while lacrosse is just not as popular a sport as basketball or football. It is much
harder for black people to succeed in swimming and lacrosse because of the lack of
opportunities. Baldwin agrees that black children are not given a fair opportunity to
succeed in life. Baldwin states that “the Negro child has had, effectively, almost all the
doors of opportunity slammed in his face, and there are very few things he can do about
it.” African American children do not have these doors of opportunity in sports such as
swimming and lacrosse. Many black students do not have the thousand dollars a year to
swim or hundreds of dollars to purchase lacrosse equipment. These doors of opportunity
are just not available for minority students in high school. At my school, basketball and
football are dominated by African American students because the equipment is more
readily available and there are more opportunities to play.
Last, public high schools are segregated in social situations, such as where
students choose to eat lunch in the cafeteria. Each and every student has his own group
of friends, his own place to sit, his home sweet home, during every lunch period. There
are very distinct areas for each group of students. But usually these students are linked by
more than common interests; they are also linked by race. The most distinct areas in my
school are probably the Asian math-and-science magnet section, the Gothic (white)
students near the trophy cases, the African American students near the lunch line, and
the Hispanic students in the hallway. Students today feel a sense of security when they
are with people of their own race, and so they choose to isolate themselves with people
of their own race.
Segregation is the core problem that exists in public high schools today.
Although Baldwin wrote his essay many years ago, the issue of race still plays a large
part in public education. The lack of African American enrollment in advanced classes,
segregation in sports teams, and racial isolation in the cafeteria illustrate that this is

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 268

6/18/12 3:11 PM

GrAmmAr AS rHeToric ANd STyle

269

still very much a problem today. Although there have been improvements over the past
forty years, segregation is still a concern for public schools.

Questions
1. How has Tyler drawn connections to James Baldwin’s essay? Examine places where
he refers specifically to Baldwin’s essay. Should Tyler have added more explicit references, perhaps even quotations? Explain.
2. Assuming that the third sentence (“If I were to give a talk to teachers today . . .”) is
Tyler’s thesis, would you recommend eliminating the following three sentences? If
so, why? If not, what do you think they add to the introductory paragraph?
3. Are the specific details in this essay one of its strengths or weaknesses? Explain.
4. Try rewriting a paragraph of this essay in the third person. Do you think Tyler’s decision to write in the first person is more effective, or would the distance achieved by
the third person have given his position greater weight?
5. Tyler opens his final paragraph with the statement, “Segregation is the core problem
that exists in public high schools today.” How well do you think he has prepared
for and supported this conclusion?

Grammar as Rhetoric and Style
Appositives
An appositive is a noun or noun phrase that tells you more about a nearby noun
or pronoun. In each sentence below, the appositive is bracketed. The arrow shows
the noun or pronoun that the appositive describes.
It turned out that one of the top students, Denny Davies, had learned of
this rule.
— Margaret Talbot

Kennedy, a wiry fifty-nine-year-old who has a stern buzz cut, was in 1997
the principal of Sarasota High School.
— Margaret Talbot

In 1981, two professors . . . began following the lives of eighty-one
high-school valedictorians — forty-six women and thirty-five men
from Illinois.
— Margaret Talbot

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 269

6/18/12 3:11 PM

270

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

Japanese people have to make many of the big decisions of their lives —
whom to marry, what company to join — without detailed information.
— Kyoko Mori

We were given plenty of instruction about the specifics of writing: word
choice, description, style.
— Kyoko Mori

When my cousin Kazumi studied ikebana, she was disillusioned by the
unfair judgments her teachers made every year.
— Kyoko Mori

Punctuation and Appositives
The last example given does not use punctuation to set off the appositive from the
rest of the sentence, but the others do. Here’s why: If the appositive is not essential
to the meaning of the sentence but is more of an aside or parenthetical remark,
then the writer uses punctuation to set off the appositive. If the appositive is essential to the meaning of the sentence, then the writer does not set off the appositive
with punctuation marks. Include what is essential; exclude what is not. In the second example given, the description of the principal is a minor detail, so Margaret
Talbot sets off the appositive with commas. In the final sentence, Kyoko Mori thought
it essential that she personalize the anecdote by telling the reader which cousin
she is describing, so she does not punctuate the appositive.

Choosing Punctuation
If your appositive needs punctuation, you can set off the appositive in one of three
ways. First, you can use one or two commas.
The principal of Sarasota High School in 1997 was Daniel Kennedy, a wiry fifty-nineyear-old who has a stern buzz cut.
Kennedy, a wiry fifty-nine-year-old who has a stern buzz cut, was in 1997 the principal
of Sarasota High School.
— Margaret Talbot

Second, you can use one or two dashes.
In 1981, two professors . . . began following the lives of eighty-one high-school valedictorians — forty-six women and thirty-five men from Illinois.
— Margaret Talbot

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 270

6/18/12 3:11 PM

GrAmmAr AS rHeToric ANd STyle

271

Japanese people have to make many of the big decisions of their lives — whom to
marry, what company to join — without detailed information.
— Kyoko Mori

Third, you can use a colon.
We were given plenty of instruction about the specifics of writing: word choice,
description, style.
— Kyoko Mori

Dashes emphasize the appositive more than commas do. Furthermore, if an appositive contains its own internal commas, then one dash, two dashes, or a colon makes
it easier to read the complete sentence.

Position of Appositive: Before or after the Noun?
All the examples so far in this lesson have shown an appositive coming after the noun
or pronoun it details. Although that is the most common use of an appositive, it
can come before the noun or pronoun as well.
A wiry fifty-nine-year-old who has a stern buzz cut, Daniel Kennedy was the principal
of Sarasota High School in 1997.

Whether you put the appositive before or after the noun it details is a stylistic
choice. If in doubt, read the sentence aloud with several surrounding sentences to
determine which placement sounds better.

Rhetorical and Stylistic Strategy
An appositive serves two rhetorical and stylistic functions:
• First, an appositive can clarify a term by providing a proper noun or a synonym for the term, by defining or explaining the term, or by getting more
specific.
proper noun

Its hero is Scout’s father, the saintly Atticus Finch.
— Francine Prose

synonym

. . . an automaton, a machine, can be made to keep a
school so.
— Ralph Waldo Emerson

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 271

6/18/12 3:11 PM

272

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

longer definition

First published in 1970, I Know Why the Caged Bird
Sings is what we have since learned to recognize as a
“survivor” memoir, a first-person narrative of
victimization and recovery.
— Francine Prose

explanation

[O]ne might suppose that teenagers might enjoy
the transformative science-fiction aspects of The
Metamorphosis, a story about a young man so alienated
from his “dysfunctional” family that he turns . . . into a
giant beetle.
— Francine Prose

specificity

Yet in other genres — fiction and memoir — the news is
far more upsetting.
— Francine Prose

• Second, an appositive can smooth choppy writing. Note how stilted each of
the following items is compared with the preceding versions.
Its hero is Scout’s father. His name is Atticus Finch. He is saintly.
An automaton is a machine. An automaton can be made to keep a school so.
I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings was first published in 1970. It is what we have
since learned to recognize as a “survivor” memoir. A “survivor” memoir is a firstperson narrative. The narrative deals with victimization and recovery.
[O]ne might suppose that teenagers might enjoy the transformative sciencefiction aspects of The Metamorphosis. The Metamorphosis is a story about a
young man.
Yet in other genres the news is far more upsetting. Other genres are fiction and
memoir.

• ExErciSE 1 •
Identify the appositive in each of the following sentences and the word or
phrase it details.
1. My father, a truly exceptional man, worked at an ordinary job and was
unknown outside the small town where he lived.
2. His rage passes description — the sort of rage that is only seen when
rich folk that have more than they can enjoy suddenly lose something
that they have long had but have never before used or wanted.
— J. R. R. Tolkien, The Hobbit

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 272

6/18/12 3:11 PM

GrAmmAr AS rHeToric ANd STyle

273

3. [W. E. B.] DuBois saw the grandeur and degradation in a single unifying
thought — slavery was the West’s tragic flaw; yet it was tragic precisely
because of the greatness of the civilization that encompassed it.
— Dinesh D’Souza, “Equality and the Classics”
4. The eruptions in the early part of our century — the time of world wars
and emergent modernity — were premonitions of a sort.
— Sven Birkerts, The Gutenberg Elegies
5. Evidently I need this starting point — the world as it appeared before
people bent it to their myriad plans — from which to begin dreaming
up my own myriad, imaginary hominid agendas.
— Barbara Kingsolver, “Knowing Our Place”
6. The war America waged in Vietnam, the first to be witnessed day after day
by television cameras, introduced the home front to new tele-intimacy
with death and destruction.
— Susan Sontag, Regarding the Pain of Others
7. The restaurant’s signature dish, a tantalizing fish taco, is also one of the
least expensive entrees on the menu.

• ExErciSE 2 •
Provide the correct punctuation for each of the following sentences by using
a dash, comma, or colon to separate the appositive from the rest of the sentence. Or, if a sentence does not need punctuation around the appositive, for
that sentence write “NP” for “no punctuation.” Be ready to explain why your
choice of punctuation is the most effective in each case.
1. Several West African countries Nigeria, Ghana, Benin, Cameroon, and
Togo were at some time in their history under colonial rule.
2. The mayoral candidate’s rally opened to throngs of people an unusually
large turnout for a cold, rainy day.
3. The British parliamentary system has two branches the House of Lords
and the House of Commons.
4. The fifth canon of rhetoric style includes a writer’s choices of diction
and syntax.
5. One of our most popular poets Billy Collins is also one of our most
gifted.
6. The surgeons reconstructed his hand the most damaged part of
his body.
7. The rewards of hard work both physical and mental are often intangible.

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 273

6/18/12 3:11 PM

274

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

8. Nadine Gordimer a white South African author won the Nobel Prize for
Literature in 1991 when the country was still under the rule of apartheid.
9. Don’t you think that businesses should close on July 4 the birthday of our
country?

• ExErciSE 3 •
Combine each of the following pairs of sentences into one more fluent and
coherent sentence by using an appositive. Be sure to punctuate correctly.
1. The Times is a world-renowned newspaper. It is delivered to my house
every day.
2. Dolores Cunningham is the first mayor in our town’s history to increase
jobs during her four-year term. She is an advocate of the supply-side
theory of economics.
3. A major health problem for teenagers is bulimia. Bulimia is a potentially life-threatening eating disorder.
4. My car is in the parking lot. It’s an old blue station wagon with a dent
in the fender.
5. That call was from Bridget. She’s the top student in my calculus class.
6. The Edwardsville Tigers are the only baseball team ever to lose a series
that it had led three games to none. They will be forever remembered
for this colossal choke.
7. Warren G. Harding defeated James Cox in the 1920 presidential election
by 26 percentage points. This was the biggest landslide victory in the
history of U.S. presidential elections.
8. The service opened to the choir’s rendition of Handel’s “Hallelujah
Chorus.” That performance was a smashing success.

• ExErciSE 4 •
Identify the appositives in the following sentences from “I Know Why the Caged
Bird Can’t Read,” and explain their effect. Note that all are direct quotations.
1. Traditionally, the love of reading has been born and nurtured in high
school English class — the last time many students will find themselves
in a roomful of people who have all read the same text and are, in
theory, prepared to discuss it.
2. The intense loyalty adults harbor for books first encountered in youth
is one probable reason for the otherwise baffling longevity of vintage

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 274

6/18/12 3:11 PM

GrAmmAr AS rHeToric ANd STyle

275

mediocre novels, books that teachers may themselves have read in
adolescence. . . .
3. My older son spent the first several weeks of sophomore English discussing the class’s summer assignment, Ordinary People, a weeper
and former bestseller by Judith Guest about a “dysfunctional” family
recovering from a teenage son’s suicide attempt.
4. Yet in other genres — fiction and memoir — the news is far more
upsetting.
5. First published in 1970, I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings is what we
have since learned to recognize as a “survivor” memoir, a first-person
narrative of victimization and recovery.
6. Its hero is Scout’s father, the saintly Atticus Finch, a lawyer who represents everything we cherish about justice and democracy and the American Way.
7. The novel has a shadow hero, too, the descriptively named Boo Radley,
a gooney recluse who becomes the occasion for yet another lesson in
tolerance and compassion.
8. To read the novel is, for most, an exercise in wish-fulfillment and selfcongratulation, a chance to consider thorny issues of race and prejudice
from a safe distance and with the comfortable certainty that the reader
would never harbor the racist attitudes espoused by the lowlifes in the
novel.
9. The question is no longer what the writer has written but rather who the
writer is — specifically, what ethnic group or gender identity an author
represents.
10. Meanwhile, aesthetic beauty — felicitous or accurate language, images,
rhythm, wit, the satisfaction of recognizing something in fiction that
seems fresh and true — is simply too frivolous, suspect, and elitist even
to mention.

• ExErciSE 5 •
Each of the following sentences includes one or more appositives. Identify
the appositives, explain their effect, and then write a sentence of your own
using that sentence as a model.
1. And on the basis of the evidence — the moral and political evidence —
one is compelled to say that this is a backward society.
— James Baldwin, A Talk to Teachers

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 275

6/18/12 3:11 PM

276

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

2. So to regard the young child, the young man, requires, no doubt, rare
patience: a patience that nothing but faith in the medial forces of the
soul can give.
— Ralph Waldo Emerson, Education
3. In their classes, we wrote essays about our families, friends, hobbies,
future dreams — personal subjects we had not written about at school
since third grade.
— Kyoko Mori, School
4. I am also other selves: a late starter, a casualty of the culture wars of the
1960s, an alienated adolescent sopping up pop culture and dreaming of
escape, an American kid growing up in the 1950s, playing touch football and watching I Love Lucy.
— Sven Birkerts, The Gutenberg Elegies
5. Mr. Somervell — a most delightful man, to whom my debt is great — was
charged with the duty of teaching the stupidest boys the most regarded
thing — namely, to write mere English.
— Winston Churchill, A Roving Commission: My Early Life

Suggestions for Writing
Education
Now that you have examined a number of readings and other texts that focus on
education, explore this topic yourself by synthesizing your own ideas and the
readings. You might want to do more research or use readings from other classes
as you write.
1. Many see standardized testing as the answer to improving public education
in the United States. Thus, students face district- and state-mandated tests as
well as national ones. What do you think? Write an essay discussing whether
standardized testing is an effective way to improve instruction and performance.
Be sure to research the topic, and broaden the scope of your essay beyond
your own experience.
2. Homeschooling has become a popular alternative to public or private school
for an increasing number of students in the United States. Research this trend
by consulting print and electronic resources and, if possible, by interviewing
someone involved with homeschooling. Would Ralph Waldo Emerson (p. 189)
or Horace Mann (p. 248) support or oppose this method of education? Write
an essay exploring both the benefits and the liabilities of homeschooling.
3. Many people believe that children should be required to attend at least one
year of school prior to kindergarten. Write an essay explaining why tax dol-

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 276

6/18/12 3:11 PM

SuGGeSTioNS For wriTiNG

277

lars should or should not be used to pay for mandatory, government-funded
preschool. You might want to do some research to develop and support your
position.
4. Write your own “Talk to Teachers,” addressing either the teachers in your
school or teachers in general. To start this assignment, replace the name
Khrushchev with the word terrorism in the opening paragraph of James Baldwin’s “A Talk to Teachers” (p. 197). How does this substitution set the stage
for your more contemporary view?
5. Write a roundtable discussion among three or four of the authors in this
chapter as they discuss one of the following quotations:
• The only real education comes from what goes counter to you.
— André Gide

• I have never let my schooling interfere with my education.
— Mark Twain

• Education is not filling a bucket but lighting a fire.
— William Butler Yeats

• Rewards and punishments are the lowest form of education.
— Chuang-Tzu

6. According to Francine Prose, “Education, after all, is a process intended to
produce a product.” Examine your school or another part of an educational
system (for example, your school district, a Montessori class, a private religionaffiliated school). Describe specific parts of the educational process, and the
“product” they strive to produce. Think of this as a cause-and-effect essay, with
the process as the cause and the product as the effect.
7. Write a comparison/contrast of the high school classroom as you’ve experienced
it in the United States with the high school experience in another country. If
you’ve attended school in another country, you can use your own experience;
if you know someone who has, you might interview that person; or you can
research the topic in print and electronic sources. Consider how the classroom, including the relationship of teacher and student, reflects the values of
the larger society.
8. Congratulations class of 2035! What will high school be like for the next generation? Write an essay explaining what changes you anticipate for high
schools in the not-too-distant future. Will the high school be pretty much the
same as yours? Will students interact with teachers solely online? Or will
future students face a backlash to a more traditional model? What books will
students be reading? Will they be reading at all? Can you imagine yourself as
one of the teachers?

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 277

6/18/12 3:11 PM

278

cHAPTer 5 • educATioN

9. Create your own version of Roz Chast’s “What I Learned,” presenting your
thoughts on education as a cartoon with a narrative line. Feel free to develop
your own illustration style, rather than emulating hers.
10. Write your own humorous account of a learning experience, either in a traditional classroom or in a different context. Use some of David Sedaris’s rhetorical strategies, such as dialogue, a self-deprecating persona, or hyperbolic
descriptions.
11. Suppose you are delivering the commencement address at your high school.
Consider David Foster Wallace’s speech and the characteristics of commencement addresses in general, and write one that is tailored to your school and
community. Keep in mind that, unlike Wallace at Kenyon College, you are
writing as an insider speaking to fellow classmates.

05_SHE_67650_Ch05_175_278.indd 278

6/18/12 3:11 PM

6
Community
What is the relationship of the individual
to the community?

H

ow can an individual maintain integrity and pursue personal dreams
while contributing to the overall society? This is the central question
facing every community. In the United States, we pride ourselves on rugged individualism and the pioneering spirit; at the same time, we believe in collective
values. In other parts of the world, people perceive the balance of the individual
and the community differently, but the history and literature of most societies
depict the struggle of the individual to live life in good faith or conscience while
being part of a community.
In the twenty-first century, the speed of our lives and an increasingly global
perspective are redefining what a community is. The word community itself is
changing, coming to mean a group of like-minded people sharing common
interests, when in the past it referred to a group of people of various skills and
interests cooperating with one another in order to survive. Geography and uniformity, once the main criteria of a community, now bow to technology and
diversity, which today underlie the definition of ethnic communities, the intelligence community, or online communities, for example. Consider the notion of
the “gated community.” Is the phrase an expression of a different kind of community, one defined not by inclusion but rather by exclusion?
We find — and forge — communities based on geography, ethnicity, race,
religion, marital status, occupation, class, economic status, gender, political affiliation, shared interest, or even language. Are those features more important than
values, principles, and ideals? Or do we belong to various communities based on
distinct criteria? How can we belong to several communities simultaneously?
The readings in this chapter explore the balance of individual concerns and
community values, and they examine how different types of communities arise,
some intentionally, some coincidentally. As you discuss these ideas, consider how
people form communities, how individuals gain membership, how the community contributes to an individual’s identity, and how outsiders perceive the community. Such discussions will help you formulate questions about the meaning of
community in your own life.

279

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 279

6/18/12 3:11 PM

Letter from Birmingham Jail
Martin Luther King Jr.
Martin Luther King Jr. (1929–1968) was one of the most influential
leaders of the civil rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s. Dr.
King was born in Atlanta, Georgia, and grew up in the Ebenezer
Baptist Church, where his father and grandfather were ministers. He
earned a BA at Morehouse College, a divinity degree at Crozer
Theological Seminary, and a PhD in theology at Boston University, all
by the age of 26. In 1957, he founded the Southern Christian Leadership Conference and later led numerous protests against segregation
by practicing the Gandhian doctrine of nonviolent resistance. In 1963, while King
was in Birmingham, Alabama, eight clergymen published a letter in the Post-​Herald
criticizing his presence and his strategies. From the cell where he was jailed for
demonstrating, King responded by writing what has come to be known as “Letter
from Birmingham Jail.”

The following is the public statement directed to Martin Luther King Jr. by eight
Alabama clergymen that occasioned King’s letter.

We the undersigned clergymen are among those who, in January, issued
“an appeal for law and order and common sense,” in dealing with racial
problems in Alabama. We expressed understanding that honest convictions in racial matters could properly be pursued in the courts, but urged
that decisions of those courts should in the meantime be peacefully obeyed.
Since that time there has been some evidence of increased forbearance
and a willingness to face facts. Responsible citizens have undertaken to work
on various problems which cause racial friction and unrest. In Birmingham, recent public events have given indication that we all have opportunity for a new constructive and realistic approach to racial problems.
However, we are now confronted by a series of demonstrations by
some of our Negro citizens, directed and led in part by outsiders. We recognize the natural impatience of people who feel that their hopes are slow
in being realized. But we are convinced that these demonstrations are
unwise and untimely.
We agree rather with certain local Negro leadership which has called
for honest and open negotiation of racial issues in our area. And we believe
this kind of facing of issues can best be accomplished by citizens of our

280

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 280

6/18/12 3:11 PM

KInG • LETTEr FroM BIrMInGHAM JAIL

281

own metropolitan area, white and Negro, meeting with their knowledge
and experience of the local situation. All of us need to face that responsibility and find proper channels for its accomplishment.
Just as we formerly pointed out that “hatred and violence have no
sanction in our religious and political traditions,” we also point out that
such actions as incite to hatred and violence, however technically peaceful
those actions may be, have not contributed to the resolution of our local
problems. We do not believe that these days of new hope are days when
extreme measures are justified in Birmingham.
We commend the community as a whole, and the local news media and
law enforcement officials in particular, on the calm manner in which these
demonstrations have been handled. We urge the public to continue to show
restraint should the demonstrations continue, and the law enforcement
officials to remain calm and continue to protect our city from violence.
We further strongly urge our own Negro community to withdraw
support from these demonstrations, and to unite locally in working peacefully for a better Birmingham. When rights are consistently denied, a
cause should be pressed in the courts and in negotiations among local
leaders, and not in the streets. We appeal to both our white and Negro
citizenry to observe the principles of law and order and common sense.

5

Bishop C. C. J. Carpenter, D.D., LL.D., Episcopalian Bishop of Alabama
Bishop Joseph A. Durick, D.D., Auxiliary Bishop, Roman Catholic Diocese
of Mobile, Birmingham
Rabbi Milton L. Grafman, Temple Emanu-El, Birmingham, Alabama
Bishop Paul Hardin, Methodist Bishop of the Alabama–West Florida
Conference
Bishop Nolan B. Harmon, Bishop of the North Alabama Conference
of the Methodist Church
Rev. George M. Murray, D.D., LL.D., Bishop Coadjutor, Episcopal
Diocese of Alabama
Rev. Edward V. Ramage, Moderator, Synod of the Alabama Presbyterian
Church in the United States
Rev. Earl Stallings, Pastor, First Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama

April 12, 1963

My Dear Fellow Clergymen:
While confined here in the Birmingham city jail, I came across your recent
statement calling my present activities “unwise and untimely.” Seldom do I pause

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 281

6/18/12 3:11 PM

282

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

to answer criticism of my work and ideas. If I sought to answer all the criticisms
that cross my desk, my secretaries would have little time for anything other than
such correspondence in the course of the day, and I would have no time for constructive work. But since I feel that you are men of genuine good will and that
your criticisms are sincerely set forth, I want to try to answer your statement in
what I hope will be patient and reasonable terms.
I think I should indicate why I am here in Birmingham, since you have been
influenced by the view which argues against “outsiders coming in.” I have the
honor of serving as president of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference,
an organization operating in every southern state, with headquarters in Atlanta,
Georgia. We have some eighty-five affiliated organizations across the South, and
one of them is the Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights. Frequently
we share staff, educational, and financial resources with our affiliates. Several
months ago the affiliate here in Birmingham asked us to be on call to engage in a
nonviolent direct-action program if such were deemed necessary. We readily consented, and when the hour came we lived up to our promise. So I, along with
several members of my staff, am here because I was invited here. I am here because
I have organizational ties here.
But more basically, I am in Birmingham because injustice is here. Just as the
prophets of the eighth century b.c. left their villages and carried their “thus saith
the Lord” far beyond the boundaries of their home towns, and just as the Apostle
Paul left his village of Tarsus and carried the gospel of Jesus Christ to the far corners of the Greco-Roman world, so am I compelled to carry the gospel of freedom beyond my own home town. Like Paul, I must constantly respond to the
Macedonian call for aid.
Moreover, I am cognizant of the interrelatedness of all communities and
states. I cannot sit idly by in Atlanta and not be concerned about what happens in
Birmingham. Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere. We are caught
in an inescapable network of mutuality, tied in a single garment of destiny. Whatever affects one directly, affects all indirectly. Never again can we afford to live
with the narrow, provincial “outside agitator” idea. Anyone who lives inside the
United States can never be considered an outsider anywhere within its bounds.
You deplore the demonstrations taking place in Birmingham. But your statement, I am sorry to say, fails to express a similar concern for the conditions that
brought about the demonstrations. I am sure that none of you would want to rest
content with the superficial kind of social analysis that deals merely with effects
and does not grapple with underlying causes. It is unfortunate that demonstrations are taking place in Birmingham, but it is even more unfortunate that the
city’s white power structure left the Negro community with no alternative.
In any nonviolent campaign there are four basic steps: collection of the facts
to determine whether injustices exist; negotiation; self-purification; and direct
action. We have gone through all these steps in Birmingham. There can be no
gainsaying the fact that racial injustice engulfs this community. Birmingham is

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 282

5

6/18/12 3:11 PM

KInG • LETTEr FroM BIrMInGHAM JAIL

283

probably the most thoroughly segregated city in the United States. Its ugly record
of brutality is widely known. Negroes have experienced grossly unjust treatment
in the courts. There have been more unsolved bombings of Negro homes and
churches in Birmingham than in any other city in the nation. These are the hard,
brutal facts of the case. On the basis of these conditions, Negro leaders sought to
negotiate with the city fathers. But the latter consistently refused to engage in
good-faith negotiation.
Then, last September, came the opportunity to talk with leaders of Birmingham’s economic community. In the course of the negotiations, certain promises
were made by the merchants — for example, to remove the stores’ humiliating
racial signs. On the basis of these promises, the Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth and
the leaders of the Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights agreed to a
moratorium on all demonstrations. As the weeks and months went by, we realized that we were the victims of a broken promise. A few signs, briefly removed,
returned; the others remained.
As in so many past experiences, our hopes had been blasted, and the shadow
of deep disappointment settled upon us. We had no alternative except to prepare
for direct action, whereby we would present our very bodies as a means of laying
our case before the conscience of the local and the national community. Mindful
of the difficulties involved, we decided to undertake a process of self-purification.
We began a series of workshops on nonviolence, and we repeatedly asked ourselves: “Are you able to accept blows without retaliating?” “Are you able to endure
the ordeal of jail?” We decided to schedule our direct-action program for the
Easter season, realizing that except for Christmas, this is the main shopping
period of the year. Knowing that a strong economic withdrawal program would
be the by-product of direct action, we felt that this would be the best time to
bring pressure to bear on the merchants for the needed change.
Then it occurred to us that Birmingham’s mayoral election was coming up in
March, and we speedily decided to postpone action until after election day. When
we discovered that the Commissioner of Public Safety, Eugene “Bull” Connor,
had piled up enough votes to be in the runoff, we decided again to postpone
action until the day after the runoff so that the demonstrations could not be used
to cloud the issues. Like many others, we wanted to see Mr. Connor defeated, and
to this end we endured postponement after postponement. Having aided in this
community need, we felt that our direct-action program could be delayed no
longer.
You may well ask, “Why direct action? Why sit-ins, marches, and so forth?
Isn’t negotiation a better path?” You are quite right in calling for negotiation.
Indeed, this is the very purpose of direct action. Nonviolent direct action seeks to
create such a crisis and foster such a tension that a community which has constantly refused to negotiate is forced to confront the issue. It seeks so to dramatize
the issue that it can no longer be ignored. My citing the creation of tension as part
of the work of the nonviolent-resister may sound rather shocking. But I must

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 283

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

284

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

confess that I am not afraid of the word “tension.” I have earnestly opposed violent tension, but there is a type of constructive, nonviolent tension which is necessary for growth. Just as Socrates felt that it was necessary to create a tension in
the mind so that individuals could rise from the bondage of myths and halftruths to the unfettered realm of creative analysis and objective appraisal, so must
we see the need for nonviolent gadflies to create the kind of tension in society that
will help men rise from the dark depths of prejudice and racism to the majestic
heights of understanding and brotherhood.
The purpose of our direct-action program is to create a situation so crisispacked that it will inevitably open the door to negotiation. I therefore concur
with you in your call for negotiation. Too long has our beloved Southland been
bogged down in a tragic effort to live in monologue rather than dialogue.
One of the basic points in your statement is that the action that I and my
associates have taken in Birmingham is untimely. Some have asked: “Why didn’t
you give the new city administration time to act?” The only answer that I can give
to this query is that the new Birmingham administration must be prodded about
as much as the outgoing one, before it will act. We are sadly mistaken if we feel
that the election of Albert Boutwell as mayor will bring the millennium to Birmingham. While Mr. Boutwell is a much more gentle person than Mr. Connor,
they are both segregationists, dedicated to maintenance of the status quo. I have
hoped that Mr. Boutwell will be reasonable enough to see the futility of massive
resistance to desegregation. But he will not see this without pressure from devotees of civil rights. My friends, I must say to you that we have not made a single
gain in civil rights without determined legal and nonviolent pressure. Lamentably, it is an historical fact that privileged groups seldom give up their privileges
voluntarily. Individuals may see the moral light and voluntarily give up their
unjust posture, but, as Reinhold Niebuhr1 has reminded us, groups tend to be
more immoral than individuals.
We know through painful experience that freedom is never voluntarily given
by the oppressor; it must be demanded by the oppressed. Frankly, I have yet to
engage in a direct-action campaign that was “well timed” in the view of those
who have not suffered unduly from the disease of segregation. For years now I
have heard the word “Wait!” It rings in the ear of every Negro with piercing familiarity. This “Wait” has almost always meant “Never.” We must come to see, with
one of our distinguished jurists, that “justice too long delayed is justice denied.”
We have waited for more than 340 years for our constitutional and Godgiven rights. The nations of Asia and Africa are moving with jet-like speed toward
gaining political independence, but we still creep at horse-and-buggy pace toward
gaining a cup of coffee at a lunch counter. Perhaps it is easy for those who have
never felt the stinging darts of segregation to say, “Wait.” But when you have seen

1Niebuhr (1892–1971) was a U.S. clergyman and a Protestant theologian. — Eds.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 284

6/18/12 3:11 PM

KInG • LETTEr FroM BIrMInGHAM JAIL

285

vicious mobs lynch your mothers and fathers at will and drown your sisters and
brothers at whim; when you have seen hate-filled policemen curse, kick, and even
kill your black brothers and sisters; when you see the vast majority of your twenty
million Negro brothers smothering in an airtight cage of poverty in the midst of
an affluent society; when you suddenly find your tongue twisted and your speech
stammering as you seek to explain to your six-year-old daughter why she can’t go
to the public amusement park that has just been advertised on television, and see
tears welling up in her eyes when she is told that Funtown is closed to colored
children, and see ominous clouds of inferiority beginning to form in her little
mental sky, and see her beginning to distort her personality by developing an
unconscious bitterness toward white people; when you have to concoct an answer
for a five-year-old son who is asking, “Daddy, why do white people treat colored
people so mean?”; when you take a cross-country drive and find it necessary to
sleep night after night in the uncomfortable corners of your automobile because
no motel will accept you; when you are humiliated day in and day out by nagging
signs reading “white” and “colored”; when your first name becomes “nigger,” your
middle name becomes “boy” (however old you are) and your last name becomes
“John,” and your wife and mother are never given the respected title “Mrs.”; when
you are harried by day and haunted by night by the fact that you are a Negro, living constantly at tiptoe stance, never quite knowing what to expect next, and are
plagued with inner fears and outer resentments; when you are forever fighting a
degenerating sense of “nobodiness” — then you will understand why we find it
difficult to wait. There comes a time when the cup of endurance runs over, and
men are no longer willing to be plunged into the abyss of despair. I hope, sirs, you
can understand our legitimate and unavoidable impatience.
You express a great deal of anxiety over our willingness to break laws. This is
certainly a legitimate concern. Since we so diligently urge people to obey the
Supreme Court’s decision of 1954 outlawing segregation in the public schools, at
first glance it may seem rather paradoxical for us consciously to break laws. One
may well ask: “How can you advocate breaking some laws and obeying others?”
The answer lies in the fact that there are two types of laws: just and unjust. I
would be the first to advocate obeying just laws. One has not only a legal but a
moral responsibility to obey just laws. Conversely, one has a moral responsibility
to disobey unjust laws. I would agree with St. Augustine that “an unjust law is no
law at all.”
Now, what is the difference between the two? How does one determine
whether a law is just or unjust? A just law is a man-made code that squares with
the moral law or the law of God. An unjust law is a code that is out of harmony
with the moral law. To put it in the terms of St. Thomas Aquinas: An unjust law
is a human law that is not rooted in eternal law and natural law. Any law that
uplifts human personality is just. Any law that degrades human personality is
unjust. All segregation statutes are unjust because segregation distorts the soul
and damages the personality. It gives the segregator a false sense of superiority

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 285

15

6/18/12 3:11 PM

286

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

and the segregated a false sense of inferiority. Segregation, to use the terminology
of the Jewish philosopher Martin Buber, substitutes an “I-it” relationship for an
“I-thou” relationship and ends up relegating persons to the status of things.
Hence segregation is not only politically, economically, and sociologically unsound, it is morally wrong and sinful. Paul Tillich2 has said that sin is separation.
Is not segregation an existential expression of man’s tragic separation, his awful
estrangement, his terrible sinfulness? Thus it is that I can urge men to obey the
1954 decision of the Supreme Court, for it is morally right; and I can urge them
to disobey segregation ordinances, for they are morally wrong.
Let us consider a more concrete example of just and unjust laws. An unjust
law is a code that a numerical or power majority group compels a minority group
to obey but does not make binding on itself. This is difference made legal. By the
same token, a just law is a code that a majority compels a minority to follow and
that it is willing to follow itself. This is sameness made legal.
Let me give another explanation. A law is unjust if it is inflicted on a minority
that, as a result of being denied the right to vote, had no part in enacting or devising the law. Who can say that the legislature of Alabama which set up that state’s
segregation laws was democratically elected? Throughout Alabama all sorts of
devious methods are used to prevent Negroes from becoming registered voters,
and there are some counties in which, even though Negroes constitute a majority
of the population, not a single Negro is registered. Can any law enacted under
such circumstances be considered democratically structured?
Sometimes a law is just on its face and unjust in its application. For instance,
I have been arrested on a charge of parading without a permit. Now, there is
nothing wrong in having an ordinance which requires a permit for a parade. But
such an ordinance becomes unjust when it is used to maintain segregation and to
deny citizens the First-Amendment privilege of peaceful assembly and protest.
I hope you are able to see the distinction I am trying to point out. In no sense
do I advocate evading or defying the law, as would the rabid segregationist. That
would lead to anarchy. One who breaks an unjust law must do so openly, lovingly,
and with a willingness to accept the penalty. I submit that an individual who
breaks a law that conscience tells him is unjust, and who willingly accepts the
penalty of imprisonment in order to arouse the conscience of the community
over its injustice, is in reality expressing the highest respect for law.
Of course, there is nothing new about this kind of civil disobedience. It was
evidenced sublimely in the refusal of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego to obey
the laws of Nebuchadnezzar, on the ground that a higher moral law was at stake.
It was practiced superbly by the early Christians, who were willing to face hungry
lions and the excruciating pain of chopping blocks rather than submit to certain
unjust laws of the Roman Empire. To a degree, academic freedom is a reality

20

2Tillich (1886–1965) was a German American philosopher and a Christian theologian. — Eds.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 286

6/18/12 3:11 PM

KInG • LETTEr FroM BIrMInGHAM JAIL

287

today because Socrates practiced civil disobedience. In our own nation, the Boston Tea Party represented a massive act of civil disobedience.
We should never forget that everything Adolf Hitler did in Germany was
“legal” and everything the Hungarian freedom fighters did in Hungary was “illegal.” It was “illegal” to aid and comfort a Jew in Hitler’s Germany. Even so, I am
sure that, had I lived in Germany at the time, I would have aided and comforted
my Jewish brothers. If today I lived in a Communist country where certain principles dear to the Christian faith are suppressed, I would openly advocate disobeying that country’s antireligious laws.
I must make two honest confessions to you, my Christian and Jewish brothers.
First, I must confess that over the past few years I have been gravely disappointed
with the white moderate. I have almost reached the regrettable conclusion that
the Negro’s great stumbling block in his stride toward freedom is not the White
Citizen’s Counciler or the Ku Klux Klanner, but the white moderate, who is more
devoted to “order” than to justice; who prefers a negative peace which is the
absence of tension to a positive peace which is the presence of justice; who constantly says, “I agree with you in the goal you seek, but I cannot agree with your
methods of direct action”; who paternalistically believes he can set the timetable
for another man’s freedom; who lives by a mythical concept of time and who
constantly advises the Negro to wait for a “more convenient season.” Shallow
understanding from people of good will is more frustrating than absolute misunderstanding from people of ill will. Lukewarm acceptance is much more bewildering than outright rejection.
I had hoped that the white moderate would understand that law and order
exist for the purpose of establishing justice and that when they fail in this purpose
they become the dangerously structured dams that block the flow of social progress. I had hoped that the white moderate would understand that the present
tension in the South is a necessary phase of the transition from an obnoxious
negative peace, in which the Negro passively accepted his unjust plight, to a substantive and positive peace, in which all men will respect the dignity and worth of
human personality. Actually, we who engage in nonviolent direct action are not
the creators of tension. We merely bring to the surface the hidden tension that is
already alive. We bring it out in the open, where it can be seen and dealt with. Like
a boil that can never be cured so long as it is covered up but must be opened with
all its ugliness to the natural medicines of air and light, injustice must be exposed,
with all the tension its exposure creates, to the light of human conscience and the
air of national opinion, before it can be cured.
In your statement you assert that our actions, even though peaceful, must be
condemned because they precipitate violence. But is this a logical assertion? Isn’t
this like condemning a robbed man because his possession of money precipitated
the evil act of robbery? Isn’t this like condemning Socrates because his unswerving commitment to truth and his philosophical inquiries precipitated the act
by the misguided populace in which they made him drink hemlock? Isn’t this

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 287

25

6/18/12 3:11 PM

288

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

like condemning Jesus because his unique God-consciousness and never-ceasing
devotion to God’s will precipitated the evil act of crucifixion? We must come to
see that, as the federal courts have consistently affirmed, it is wrong to urge an
individual to cease his efforts to gain his basic constitutional rights because the
quest may precipitate violence. Society must protect the robbed and punish the
robber.
I had also hoped that the white moderate would reject the myth concerning
time in relation to the struggle for freedom. I have just received a letter from a
white brother in Texas. He writes: “All Christians know that the colored people
will receive equal rights eventually, but it is possible that you are in too great a
religious hurry. It has taken Christianity almost two thousand years to accomplish what it has. The teachings of Christ take time to come to earth.” Such an
attitude stems from a tragic misconception of time, from the strangely irrational
notion that there is something in the very flow of time that will inevitably cure all
ills. Actually, time itself is neutral; it can be used either destructively or constructively. More and more I feel that the people of ill will have used time much more
effectively than have the people of good will. We will have to repent in this generation not merely for the hateful words and actions of the bad people, but for the
appalling silence of the good people. Human progress never rolls in on wheels of
inevitability; it comes through the tireless efforts of men willing to be co-workers
with God, and without this hard work, time itself becomes an ally of the forces of
social stagnation. We must use time creatively, in the knowledge that the time is
always ripe to do right. Now is the time to make real the promise of democracy
and transform our pending national elegy into a creative psalm of brotherhood.
Now is the time to lift our national policy from the quicksand of racial injustice
to the solid rock of human dignity.
You speak of our activity in Birmingham as extreme. At first I was rather
disappointed that fellow clergymen would see my nonviolent efforts as those of
an extremist. I began thinking about the fact that I stand in the middle of two
opposing forces in the Negro community. One is a force of complacency, made
up in part of Negroes who, as a result of long years of oppression, are so drained
of self-respect and a sense of “somebodiness” that they have adjusted to segregation; and in part of a few middle-class Negroes who, because of a degree of academic and economic security and because in some ways they profit by segregation,
have become insensitive to the problems of the masses. The other force is one of
bitterness and hatred, and it comes perilously close to advocating violence. It is
expressed in the various black nationalist groups that are springing up across the
nation, the largest and best-known being Elijah Muhammad’s Muslim movement. Nourished by the Negro’s frustration over the continued existence of racial
discrimination, this movement is made up of people who have lost faith in America, who have absolutely repudiated Christianity, and who have concluded that
the white man is an incorrigible “devil.”
I have tried to stand between these two forces, saying that we need emulate
neither the “do-nothingism” of the complacent nor the hatred and despair of the

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 288

6/18/12 3:11 PM

KInG • LETTEr FroM BIrMInGHAM JAIL

289

black nationalist. For there is the more excellent way of love and nonviolent protest. I am grateful to God that, through the influence of the Negro church, the way
of nonviolence became an integral part of our struggle.
If this philosophy had not emerged, by now many streets of the South would,
I am convinced, be flowing with blood. And I am further convinced that if our
white brothers dismiss as “rabble-rousers” and “outside agitators” those of us who
employ nonviolent direct action, and if they refuse to support our nonviolent
efforts, millions of Negroes will, out of frustration and despair, seek solace and
security in black-nationalist ideologies — a development that would inevitably
lead to a frightening racial nightmare.
Oppressed people cannot remain oppressed forever. The yearning for freedom eventually manifests itself, and that is what has happened to the American
Negro. Something within has reminded him of his birthright of freedom, and
something without has reminded him that it can be gained. Consciously or
unconsciously, he has been caught up by the Zeitgeist,3 and with his black brothers of Africa and his brown and yellow brothers of Asia, South America, and the
Caribbean, the United States Negro is moving with a sense of great urgency
toward the promised land of racial justice. If one recognizes this vital urge that
has engulfed the Negro community, one should readily understand why public
demonstrations are taking place. The Negro has many pent-up resentments and
latent frustrations, and he must release them. So let him march; let him make
prayer pilgrimages to the city hall; let him go on freedom rides — and try to
understand why he must do so. If his repressed emotions are not released in nonviolent ways, they will seek expression through violence; this is not a threat but a
fact of history. So I have not said to my people, “Get rid of your discontent.”
Rather, I have tried to say that this normal and healthy discontent can be channeled into the creative outlet of nonviolent direct action. And now this approach
is being termed extremist.
But though I was initially disappointed at being categorized as an extremist,
as I continued to think about the matter I gradually gained a measure of satisfaction from the label. Was not Jesus an extremist for love: “Love your enemies, bless
them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which
despitefully use you, and persecute you.” Was not Amos an extremist for justice:
“Let justice roll down like waters and righteousness like an ever-flowing stream.”
Was not Paul an extremist for the Christian gospel: “I bear in my body the marks
of the Lord Jesus.” Was not Martin Luther an extremist: “Here I stand; I cannot do
otherwise, so help me God.” And John Bunyan: “I will stay in jail to the end of my
days before I make a butchery of my conscience.” And Abraham Lincoln: “This
nation cannot survive half slave and half free.” And Thomas Jefferson: “We hold
these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal. . . .” So the question
is not whether we will be extremists, but what kind of extremists we will be. Will

30

3German, “spirit of the time.” — Eds.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 289

6/18/12 3:11 PM

290

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

we be extremists for hate or for love? Will we be extremists for the preservation of
injustice or for the extension of justice? In that dramatic scene on Calvary’s hill
three men were crucified. We must never forget that all three were crucified for
the same crime — the crime of extremism. Two were extremists for immorality,
and thus fell below their environment. The other, Jesus Christ, was an extremist
for love, truth, and goodness, and thereby rose above his environment. Perhaps
the South, the nation, and the world are in dire need of creative extremists.
I had hoped that the white moderate would see this need. Perhaps I was too
optimistic; perhaps I expected too much. I suppose I should have realized that
few members of the oppressor race can understand the deep groans and passionate yearnings of the oppressed race, and still fewer have the vision to see that
injustice must be rooted out by strong, persistent, and determined action. I am
thankful, however, that some of our white brothers in the South have grasped the
meaning of this social revolution and committed themselves to it. They are still
all too few in quantity, but they are big in quality. Some — such as Ralph McGill,
Lillian Smith, Harry Golden, James McBridge Dabbs, Ann Braden, and Sarah
Patton Boyle — have written about our struggle in eloquent and prophetic terms.
Others have marched with us down nameless streets of the South. They have
languished in filthy, roach-infested jails, suffering the abuse and brutality of
policemen who view them as “dirty nigger-lovers.” Unlike so many of their moderate brothers and sisters, they have recognized the urgency of the moment
and sensed the need for powerful “action” antidotes to combat the disease of
segregation.
Let me take note of my other major disappointment. I have been so greatly
disappointed with the white church and its leadership. Of course, there are some
notable exceptions. I am not unmindful of the fact that each of you has taken
some significant stands on this issue. I commend you, Reverend [Earl] Stallings,
for your Christian stand on this past Sunday, in welcoming Negroes to your worship service on a nonsegregated basis. I commend the Catholic leaders of this
state for integrating Spring Hill College several years ago.
But despite these notable exceptions, I must honestly reiterate that I have
been disappointed with the church. I do not say this as one of those negative critics who can always find something wrong with the church. I say this as a minister
of the gospel, who loves the church; who was nurtured in its bosom; who has
been sustained by its spiritual blessings and who will remain true to it as long as
the cord of life shall lengthen.
When I was suddenly catapulted into the leadership of the bus protest in
Montgomery, Alabama, a few years ago, I felt we would be supported by the white
church. I felt that the white ministers, priests, and rabbis of the South would be
among our strongest allies. Instead, some have been outright opponents, refusing
to understand the freedom movement and misrepresenting its leaders; all too
many others have been more cautious than courageous and have remained silent
behind the anesthetizing security of stained-glass windows.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 290

35

6/18/12 3:11 PM

KInG • LETTEr FroM BIrMInGHAM JAIL

291

In spite of my shattered dreams, I came to Birmingham with the hope that
the white religious leadership of this community would see the justice of our
cause and, with deep moral concern, would serve as the channel through which
our just grievances could reach the power structure. I had hoped that each of you
would understand. But again I have been disappointed.
I have heard numerous southern religious leaders admonish their worshipers
to comply with a desegregation decision because it is the law, but I have longed to
hear white ministers declare: “Follow this decree because integration is morally
right and because the Negro is your brother.” In the midst of blatant injustices
inflicted upon the Negro, I have watched white church men stand on the sideline
and mouth pious irrelevancies and sanctimonious trivialities. In the midst of a
mighty struggle to rid our nation of racial and economic injustice, I have heard
many ministers say: “Those are social issues, with which the gospel has no real
concern.” And I have watched many churches commit themselves to a completely
otherworldly religion which makes a strange, un-Biblical distinction between
body and soul, between the sacred and the secular.
I have traveled the length and breadth of Alabama, Mississippi, and all the
other southern states. On sweltering summer days and crisp autumn mornings
I have looked at the South’s beautiful churches with their lofty spires pointing heavenward. I have beheld the impressive outlines of her massive religiouseducation buildings. Over and over I have found myself asking: “What kind of
people worship here? Who is their God? Where were their voices when the lips of
Governor [Ross] Barnett dripped with words of interposition and nullification?
Where were they when Governor [George] Wallace gave a clarion call for defiance
and hatred? Where were their voices of support when bruised and weary Negro
men and women decided to rise from the dark dungeons of complacency to the
bright hills of creative protest?”
Yes, these questions are still in my mind. In deep disappointment I have wept
over the laxity of the church. But be assured that my tears have been tears of love.
There can be no deep disappointment where there is not deep love. Yes, I love the
church. How could I do otherwise? I am in the rather unique position of being
the son, the grandson, and the great-grandson of preachers. Yes, I see the church
as the body of Christ. But, oh! How we have blemished and scarred that body
through social neglect and through fear of being nonconformists.
There was a time when the church was very powerful — in the time when the
early Christians rejoiced at being deemed worthy to suffer for what they believed.
In those days the church was not merely a thermometer that recorded the ideas
and principles of popular opinion; it was a thermostat that transformed the
mores of society. Whenever the early Christians entered a town, the people in
power became disturbed and immediately sought to convict the Christians for
being “disturbers of the peace” and “outside agitators.” But the Christians pressed
on, in the conviction that they were “a colony of heaven,” called to obey God
rather than man. Small in number, they were big in commitment. They were too

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 291

40

6/18/12 3:11 PM

292

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

God-intoxicated to be “astronomically intimidated.” By their effort and example
they brought an end to such ancient evils as infanticide and gladiatorial contests.
Things are different now. So often the contemporary church is a weak, ineffectual voice with an uncertain sound. So often it is an archdefender of the status
quo. Far from being disturbed by the presence of the church, the power structure
of the average community is consoled by the church’s silent — and often even
vocal — sanction of things as they are.
But the judgment of God is upon the church as never before. If today’s church
does not recapture the sacrificial spirit of the early church, it will lose its authenticity, forfeit the loyalty of millions, and be dismissed as an irrelevant social club
with no meaning for the twentieth century. Every day I meet young people whose
disappointment with the church has turned into outright disgust.
Perhaps I have once again been too optimistic. Is organized religion too inextricably bound to the status quo to save our nation and the world? Perhaps I must
turn my faith to the inner spiritual church, the church within the church, as the
true ekklesia and the hope of the world. But again I am thankful to God that some
noble souls from the ranks of organized religion have broken loose from the paralyzing chains of conformity and joined us as active partners in the struggle for
freedom. They have left their secure congregations and walked the streets of
Albany, Georgia, with us. They have gone down the highways of the South on
tortuous rides for freedom. Yes, they have gone to jail with us. Some have been
dismissed from their churches, have lost the support of their bishops and fellow
ministers. But they have acted in the faith that right defeated is stronger than evil
triumphant. Their witness has been the spiritual salt that has preserved the true
meaning of the gospel in these troubled times. They have carved a tunnel of hope
through the dark mountain of disappointment.
I hope the church as a whole will meet the challenge of this decisive hour. But
even if the church does not come to the aid of justice, I have no despair about the
future. I have no fear about the outcome of our struggle in Birmingham, even if
our motives are at present misunderstood. We will reach the goal of freedom in
Birmingham and all over the nation, because the goal of America is freedom.
Abused and scorned though we may be, our destiny is tied up with America’s
destiny. Before the pilgrims landed at Plymouth, we were here. Before the pen of
Jefferson etched the majestic words of the Declaration of Independence across
the pages of history, we were here. For more than two centuries our forebears
labored in this country without wages: they made cotton king; they built the
homes of their masters while suffering gross injustice and shameful humiliation — and yet out of a bottomless vitality they continued to thrive and develop.
If the inexpressible cruelties of slavery could not stop us, the opposition we now
face will surely fail. We will win our freedom because the sacred heritage of our
nation and the eternal will of God are embodied in our echoing demands.
Before closing I feel impelled to mention one other point in your statement
that has troubled me profoundly. You warmly commended the Birmingham

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 292

45

6/18/12 3:11 PM

KInG • LETTEr FroM BIrMInGHAM JAIL

293

police force for keeping “order” and “preventing violence.” I doubt that you would
have so warmly commended the police force if you had seen its dogs sinking their
teeth into unarmed, nonviolent Negroes. I doubt that you would so quickly commend the policemen if you were to observe their ugly and inhumane treatment
of Negroes here in the city jail; if you were to watch them push and curse old
Negro women and young Negro girls; if you were to see them slap and kick old
Negro men and young boys; if you were to observe them, as they did on two occasions, refuse to give us food because we wanted to sing our grace together. I cannot join you in your praise of the Birmingham police department.
It is true that the police have exercised a degree of discipline in handling
the demonstrators. In this sense they have conducted themselves rather “nonviolently” in public. But for what purpose? To preserve the evil system of segregation. Over the past few years I have consistently preached that nonviolence
demands that the means we use must be as pure as the ends we seek. I have tried
to make clear that it is wrong to use immoral means to attain moral ends. But
now I must affirm that it is just as wrong, or perhaps even more so, to use moral
means to preserve immoral ends. Perhaps Mr. Connor and his policemen have
been rather nonviolent in public, as was Chief Pritchett in Albany, Georgia, but
they have used the moral means of nonviolence to maintain the immoral end of
racial injustice. As T. S. Eliot has said, “The last temptation is the greatest treason:
To do the right deed for the wrong reason.”
I wish you had commended the Negro sit-inners and demonstrators of Birmingham for their sublime courage, their willingness to suffer, and their amazing
discipline in the midst of great provocation. One day the South will recognize its
real heroes. They will be the James Merediths, with the noble sense of purpose
that enables them to face jeering and hostile mobs, and with the agonizing loneliness that characterizes the life of the pioneer. They will be old, oppressed,
battered Negro women, symbolized in a seventy-two-year-old woman in Montgomery, Alabama, who rose up with a sense of dignity and with her people
decided not to ride segregated buses, and who responded with ungrammatical
profundity to one who inquired about her weariness: “My feets is tired, but my
soul is at rest.” They will be the young high school and college students, the young
ministers of the gospel and a host of their elders, courageously and nonviolently
sitting in at lunch counters and willingly going to jail for conscience’ sake. One
day the South will know that when these disinherited children of God sat down
at lunch counters, they were in reality standing up for what is best in the American dream and for the most sacred values in our Judaeo-Christian heritage,
thereby bringing our nation back to those great wells of democracy which were
dug deep by the founding fathers in their formulation of the Constitution and the
Declaration of Independence.
Never before have I written so long a letter. I’m afraid it is much too long to
take your precious time. I can assure you that it would have been much shorter if
I had been writing from a comfortable desk, but what else can one do when he is

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 293

6/18/12 3:11 PM

294

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

alone in a narrow jail cell, other than write long letters, think long thoughts, and
pray long prayers?
If I have said anything in this letter that overstates the truth and indicates an
unreasonable impatience, I beg you to forgive me. If I have said anything that
understates the truth and indicates my having a patience that allows me to settle
for anything less than brotherhood, I beg God to forgive me.
I hope this letter finds you strong in the faith. I also hope that circumstances
will soon make it possible for me to meet each of you, not as an integrationist or
a civil-rights leader but as a fellow clergyman and a Christian brother. Let us all
hope that the dark clouds of racial prejudice will soon pass away and the deep fog
of misunderstanding will be lifted from our fear-drenched communities, and in
some not too distant tomorrow the radiant stars of love and brotherhood will
shine over our great nation with all their scintillating beauty.

50

Yours for the cause of Peace and Brotherhood,
Martin Luther King Jr.

Questions for Discussion
1. Martin Luther King writes as a member of several communities, some overlapping, some in conflict. What are they? Focusing on two or three, explain how he
defines himself within each.
2. What is the meaning of ekklesia (para. 43)? What does King mean when he invokes
“the true ekklesia”?
3. How does King balance the twin appeals to religion and patriotism throughout
“Letter from Birmingham Jail”? Do you think he puts more emphasis on religion
or patriotism? Why do you think he makes that choice?
4. In the later 1960s, Alice Walker wrote an essay titled “The Civil Rights Movement:
What Good Was It?” How would you answer her question today? What good do
you believe has resulted from the civil rights movement?

Questions on Rhetoric and Style
1. What is King’s tone in the opening paragraph? How might you make an argument for its being ironic?
2. Why does King arrange paragraphs 2–4 in the order that he does? How would
reversing the order change the impact?
3. How do King’s allusions to biblical figures and events appeal to both ethos and
pathos?
4. Why does King go into such detail to explain the basic principles and process of
the nonviolent protest movement?
5. In sentence 2 of paragraph 14, what is the effect of juxtaposing the rate of change
in Asian and African cultures with the rate of change in American culture?

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 294

6/18/12 3:11 PM

KInG • LETTEr FroM BIrMInGHAM JAIL

295

6. In the long sentence in paragraph 14 (beginning with “But when you have seen”),
why does King arrange the “when” clauses in the order that he does? Try repositioning them, and then discuss the difference in effect.
7. What rhetorical strategies are used in paragraph 25? Identify at least four.
8. What are the chief rhetorical strategies used in paragraph 31? Identify at least
five.
9. Why does King wait until paragraph 45 to address the alleged commendable
behavior of the Birmingham police in “preventing violence”?
10. Trace one of the following patterns of figurative language throughout King’s letter: darkness and light, high and low, sickness and health.
11. King uses repetition of single words or phrases, of sentence structures, and of
sounds. Focusing on a passage of one or more paragraphs, discuss the effect of
this use of repetition.
12. Considering the final three paragraphs as King’s conclusion, discuss whether you
believe it is rhetorically effective.

Suggestions for Writing
1. Write an essay analyzing the style of this letter, paying close attention to how the
stylistic devices and resources of language contribute to achieving King’s purpose.
2. King spends nearly half of his letter addressing counterarguments before he
launches into his main argument to the clergymen. Write an essay analyzing this
argument. What are his major claims, his assumptions, the types of evidence he
uses?
3. Compare and contrast the rhetorical strategies King employs in “Letter from Birmingham Jail” with those he uses in another piece, such as the “I Have a Dream”
speech or the introduction to Why We Can’t Wait (which appeared on the 1989 AP
Language exam). Why are certain strategies more appropriate for a speech than for
an essay or a letter?
4. Select a quotation from King’s letter, and explain (1) why you find it compelling or
(2) on what grounds you would challenge it. Cite evidence from your own experience or reading to support your position. Possible quotations to focus on include:
a. “Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere.” (para. 4)
b. “. . . freedom is never voluntarily given by the oppressor; it must be demanded
by the oppressed.” (para. 13)
c. “Shallow understanding from people of good will is more frustrating than
absolute misunderstanding from people of ill will.” (para. 23)
5. Describe a time when your participation in, or loyalty to, two different communities conflicted. Explain the nature of the conflict and how you resolved it.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 295

6/18/12 3:11 PM

Where I Lived, and What I Lived For
Henry David Thoreau
Henry David Thoreau (1817 –1862) was a philosopher, poet, essayist, and naturalist as well as an outspoken social critic. He was born
in Concord, Massachusetts, and was educated at Harvard. He
worked in a variety of professions, from land surveyor to teacher to
pencil maker. Strongly influenced by his neighbor and friend ralph
Waldo Emerson, Thoreau considered himself a fierce patriot who
honored his country and its ideals, if not always its government. He
spoke out against the war against Mexico, and slavery — specifically
the Fugitive Slave Act — and defended the abolitionist John Brown. He is best
known for Walden,​or​Life​in​the​Woods, published in 1854, which is his account
of living in a cabin on Walden Pond for two years. This selection is from the second
chapter of Walden.

I

went to the woods because I wished to live deliberately, to front only the
essential facts of life, and see if I could not learn what it had to teach,
and not, when I came to die, discover that I had not lived. I did not wish to live
what was not life, living is so dear; nor did I wish to practice resignation, unless
it was quite necessary. I wanted to live deep and suck out all the marrow of
life, to live so sturdily and Spartan-like as to put to rout all that was not life, to
cut a broad swath and shave close, to drive life into a corner, and reduce it to
its lowest terms, and, if it proved to be mean, why then to get the whole and
genuine meanness of it, and publish its meanness to the world; or if it were
sublime, to know it by experience, and be able to give a true account of it in
my next excursion. For most men, it appears to me, are in a strange uncertainty about it, whether it is of the devil or of God, and have somewhat hastily
concluded that it is the chief end of man here to “glorify God and enjoy him
forever.”1
Still we live meanly, like ants; though the fable tells us that we were long ago
changed into men; like pygmies we fight with cranes;2 it is error upon error, and
clout upon clout, and our best virtue has for its occasion a superfluous and evi-

1
The first question and answer in the Westminster Catechism, a statement of religious doctrine
that came out of the Protestant Reformation, is “Q: What is the chief end of man? A: To glorify
God and enjoy him forever.” — Eds.
2
Allusions to the Greek fable of the Myrmidons (ant-people), and to Book III of the Iliad,
respectively. The Iliad draws a parallel between the Trojan War and the mythological war
between the cranes and the pygmies. — Eds.

296

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 296

6/18/12 3:11 PM

THorEAU • WHErE I LIvED, AnD WHAT I LIvED For

297

table wretchedness. Our life is frittered away by detail. An honest man has hardly
need to count more than his ten fingers, or in extreme cases he may add his ten
toes, and lump the rest. Simplicity, simplicity, simplicity! I say, let your affairs be
as two or three, and not a hundred or a thousand; instead of a million count half
a dozen, and keep your accounts on your thumb-nail. In the midst of this chopping sea of civilized life, such are the clouds and storms and quicksands and
thousand-and-one items to be allowed for, that a man has to live, if he would not
founder and go to the bottom and not make his port at all, by dead reckoning,
and he must be a great calculator indeed who succeeds. Simplify, simplify. Instead
of three meals a day, if it be necessary eat but one; instead of a hundred dishes,
five; and reduce other things in proportion. Our life is like a German Confederacy, made up of petty states, with its boundary forever fluctuating, so that even a
German cannot tell you how it is bounded at any moment. The nation itself, with
all its so-called internal improvements, which, by the way are all external and
superficial, is just such an unwieldy and overgrown establishment, cluttered with
furniture and tripped up by its own traps, ruined by luxury and heedless expense,
by want of calculation and a worthy aim, as the million households in the land;
and the only cure for it, as for them, is in a rigid economy, a stern and more than
Spartan simplicity of life and elevation of purpose. It lives too fast. Men think
that it is essential that the Nation have commerce, and export ice, and talk through
a telegraph, and ride thirty miles an hour, without a doubt, whether they do or
not; but whether we should live like baboons or like men, is a little uncertain. If
we do not get out sleepers,3 and forge rails, and devote days and nights to the
work, but go to tinkering upon our lives to improve them, who will build railroads? And if railroads are not built, how shall we get to heaven in season? But if
we stay at home and mind our business, who will want railroads? We do not ride
on the railroad; it rides upon us. Did you ever think what those sleepers are that
underlie the railroad? Each one is a man, an Irishman, or a Yankee man. The rails
are laid on them, and they are covered with sand, and the cars run smoothly over
them. They are sound sleepers, I assure you. And every few years a new lot is laid
down and run over, so that, if some have the pleasure of riding on a rail, others
have the misfortune to be ridden upon. And when they run over a man that is
walking in his sleep, a supernumerary sleeper in the wrong position, and wake
him up, they suddenly stop the cars, and make a hue and cry about it, as if this
were an exception. I am glad to know that it takes a gang of men for every five
miles to keep the sleepers down and level in their beds as it is, for this is a sign that
they may sometimes get up again.
Why should we live with such hurry and waste of life? We are determined to
be starved before we are hungry. Men say that a stitch in time saves nine, and so
they take a thousand stitches today to save nine tomorrow. As for work, we haven’t

3Here, sleepers means “railroad ties.” — Eds.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 297

6/18/12 3:11 PM

298

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

any of any consequence. We have the Saint Vitus’ dance,4 and cannot possibly
keep our heads still. If I should only give a few pulls at the parish bell-rope, as for
a fire, that is, without setting the bell, there is hardly a man on his farm in the
outskirts of Concord, notwithstanding that press of engagements which was his
excuse so many times this morning, nor a boy, nor a woman, I might almost say,
but would foresake all and follow that sound, not mainly to save property from
the flames, but, if we will confess the truth, much more to see it burn, since burn
it must, and we, be it known, did not set it on fire — or to see it put out, and have
a hand in it, if that is done as handsomely; yes, even if it were the parish church
itself. Hardly a man takes a half-hour’s nap after dinner, but when he wakes he
holds up his head and asks, “What’s the news?” as if the rest of mankind had stood
his sentinels. Some give directions to be waked every half-hour, doubtless for no
other purpose; and then, to pay for it, they tell what they have dreamed. After a
night’s sleep the news is as indispensable as the breakfast. “Pray tell me anything
new that has happened to a man anywhere on this globe” — and he reads it over
his coffee and rolls, that a man has had his eyes gouged out this morning on the
Wachito River; never dreaming the while that he lives in the dark unfathomed
mammoth cave of this world, and has but the rudiment of an eye himself.
For my part, I could easily do without the post-office. I think that there are
very few important communications made through it. To speak critically, I never
received more than one or two letters in my life — I wrote this some years ago —
that were worth the postage. The penny-post is, commonly, an institution through
which you seriously offer a man that penny for his thoughts which is so often safely
offered in jest. And I am sure that I never read any memorable news in a newspaper. If we read of one man robbed, or murdered, or killed by accident, or one
house burned, or one vessel wrecked or one steamboat blown up, or one cow run
over on the Western Railroad, or one mad dog killed, or one lot of grasshoppers in
the winter — we never need read of another. One is enough. If you are acquainted
with the principle, what do you care for a myriad instances and applications? To
a philosopher all news, as it is called, is gossip, and they who edit and read it are
old women over their tea. Yet not a few are greedy after this gossip. There was such
a rush, as I hear, the other day at one of the offices to learn the foreign news by the
last arrival, that several large squares of plate glass belonging to the establishment
were broken by the pressure — news which I seriously think a ready wit might
write a twelvemonth, or twelve years, beforehand with sufficient accuracy. As for
Spain, for instance, if you know how to throw in Don Carlos and the Infanta, and
Don Pedro and Seville and Granada, from time to time in the right proportions — they may have changed the names a little since I saw the papers — and
serve up a bullfight when other entertainments fail, it will be true to the letter, and
give us as good an idea of the exact state or ruin of things in Spain as the most
4A disease that causes the victim to twitch uncontrollably. St. Vitus is the patron saint of
dancers. — Eds.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 298

6/18/12 3:11 PM

THorEAU • WHErE I LIvED, AnD WHAT I LIvED For

299

succinct and lucid reports under this head in the newspapers; and as for England,
almost the last significant scrap of news from that quarter was the revolution of
1649; and if you have learned the history of her crops for an average year, you
never need attend to that thing again, unless your speculations are of a merely
pecuniary character. If one may judge who rarely looks into the newspapers,
nothing new does ever happen in foreign parts, a French revolution not excepted.
What news! how much more important to know what that is which was
never old! “Kieou-pe-yu (great dignitary of the state of Wei) sent a man to
Khoung-tseu to know his news. Khoung-tseu caused the messenger to be seated
near him, and questioned him in these terms: What is your master doing? The
messenger answered with respect: My master desires to diminish the number of
his faults, but he cannot come to the end of them. The messenger being gone, the
philosopher remarked: What a worthy messenger! What a worthy messenger!”
The preacher, instead of vexing the ears of drowsy farmers on their day of rest at
the end of the week — for Sunday is the fit conclusion of an ill-spent week, and
not the fresh and brave beginning of a new one — with this one other draggle-tail
of a sermon, should shout with thundering voice, “Pause! Avast! Why so seeming
fast, but deadly slow?”
Shams and delusions are esteemed for soundless truths, while reality is fabulous. If men would steadily observe realities only, and not allow themselves to be
deluded, life, to compare it with such things as we know, would be like a fairy tale
and the Arabian Nights’ Entertainments. If we respected only what is inevitable
and has a right to be, music and poetry would resound along the streets. When we
are unhurried and wise, we perceive that only great and worthy things have any
permanent and absolute existence, that petty fears and petty pleasures are but the
shadow of the reality. This is always exhilarating and sublime. By closing the eyes
and slumbering, and consenting to be deceived by shows, men establish and confirm their daily life of routine and habit everywhere, which still is built on purely
illusory foundations. Children, who play life, discern its true law and relations
more clearly than men, who fail to live it worthily, but who think that they are
wiser by experience, that is, by failure. I have read in a Hindoo book, that “there
was a king’s son, who, being expelled in infancy from his native city, was brought
up by a forester, and, growing up to maturity in that state, imagined himself to
belong to the barbarous race with which he lived. One of his father’s ministers
having discovered him, revealed to him what he was, and the misconception of
his character was removed, and he knew himself to be a prince. So soul,” continues the Hindoo philosopher, “from the circumstances in which it is placed, mistakes its own character, until the truth is revealed to it by some holy teacher and
then it knows itself to be Brahme.”5 I perceive that we inhabitants of New England
live this mean life that we do because our vision does not penetrate the surface of
things. We think that that is which appears to be. If a man should walk through

5

5One of the three main Hindu gods, now spelled Brahma. — Eds.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 299

6/18/12 3:11 PM

300

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

this town and see only the reality, where, think you, would the “Milldam”6 go to?
If he should give us an account of the realities he beheld there, we should not
recognize the place in his description. Look at the meetinghouse, or a courthouse,
or a jail, or a shop, or a dwelling-house, and say what that thing really is before a
true gaze, and they would all go to pieces in your account of them. Men esteem
truth remote, in the outskirts of the system behind the farthest star, before Adam
and after the last man. In eternity there is indeed something true and sublime.
But all these times and places and occasions are now and here. God himself culminates in the present moment, and will never be more divine in the lapse of all
the ages. And we are enabled to apprehend at all what is sublime and noble only
by the perpetual instilling and drenching of the reality that surrounds us. The
universe constantly and obediently answers to our conceptions; whether we travel
fast or slow, the track is laid for us. Let us spend our lives in conceiving then. The
poet or the artist never yet had so fair and noble a design but some of his posterity at least could accomplish it.
Let us spend one day as deliberately as Nature, and not be thrown off the
track by every nutshell and mosquito’s wing that falls on the rails. Let us rise early
and fast, or breakfast, gently and without perturbation; let company come and let
company go, let the bells ring and the children cry — determined to make a day
of it. Why should we knock under and go with the stream? Let us not be upset and
overwhelmed in that terrible rapid and whirlpool called a dinner, situated in the
meridian shallows. Weather this danger and you are safe, for the rest of the way is
downhill. With unrelaxed nerves, with morning vigor, sail by it, looking another
way, tied to the mast like Ulysses. If the engine whistles, let it whistle till it is
hoarse for its pains. If the bell rings, why should we run? We will consider what
kind of music they are like. Let us settle ourselves and work and wedge our feet
downward through the mud and slush of opinion, and prejudice, and tradition,
and delusion, and appearance, that alluvion7 which covers the globe, through
Paris and London, through New York and Boston and Concord, through Church
and State, through poetry and philosophy and religion, till we come to a hard
bottom and rocks in place, which we can call reality, and say, This is, and no mistake; and then begin, having a point d’appui,8 below freshet and frost and fire, a
place where you might found a wall or a state, or set a lamppost safely, or perhaps
a gauge, not a Nilometer, but a Realometer, that future ages might know how
deep a freshet of shams and appearances had gathered from time to time. If you
stand right fronting and face to face to a fact, you will see the sun glimmer on
both its surfaces, as if it were a cimeter,9 and feel its sweet edge dividing you
6

Concord’s business center. — Eds.
The flow of water against a shore. — Eds.
8French, “foundation.” — Eds.
9Also known as a scimeter or scimitar, a curved bladed sword traditionally used in the Middle
East. — Eds.
7

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 300

6/18/12 3:11 PM

THorEAU • WHErE I LIvED, AnD WHAT I LIvED For

301

through the heart and marrow, and so you will happily conclude your mortal
career. Be it life or death, we crave only reality. If we are really dying, let us hear
the rattle in our throats and feel cold in the extremities; if we are alive, let us go
about our business.
Time is but the stream I go afishing in. I drink at it; but while I drink I see the
sandy bottom and detect how shallow it is. Its thin current slides away but eternity remains. I would drink deeper; fish in the sky, whose bottom is pebbly with
stars. I cannot count one. I know not the first letter of the alphabet. I have always
been regretting that I was not as wise as the day I was born. The intellect is a
cleaver; it discerns and rifts its way into the secret of things. I do not wish to be
any more busy with my hands than is necessary. My head is hands and feet. I feel
all my best faculties concentrated in it. My instinct tells me that my head is an
organ for burrowing, as some creatures use their snout and fore paws, and with it
I would mine and burrow my way through these hills. I think that the richest vein
is somewhere hereabouts, so by the divining-rod and thin rising vapors, I judge;
and here I will begin to mine.

Questions for Discussion
1. What is Henry David Thoreau calling for early in paragraph 2 when he writes,
“Simplicity, simplicity, simplicity!”?
2. Thoreau writes, “We do not ride on the railroad; it rides upon us” (para. 2). Consider an electronic device (such as a laptop computer, a smartphone, a tablet, or an
MP3 player). What would Thoreau say about it? Has this device helped to simplify
our lives, or has it had a negative impact on them?
3. What does Thoreau mean when he says, “As for work, we haven’t any of any consequence” (para. 3)? What is his definition of work?
4. How do you interpret this assertion: “Shams and delusions are esteemed for
soundless truths, while reality is fabulous” (para. 6)? Use that as a topic sentence,
and develop it with examples from your own experience.
5. Do you think Thoreau’s advice and sentiments in this essay are meant as recommendations for living one’s entire life or as suggestions for periodically reflecting
on life’s true meaning? Is he suggesting isolation as a lifestyle?
6. In today’s terms, how would you characterize Thoreau’s politics? Is he very conservative or very progressive? Is he somewhere in between?

Questions on Rhetoric and Style
1. In the first paragraph, how does Thoreau use antitheses to describe his purpose
in going to live in the woods?

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 301

6/18/12 3:11 PM

302

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

2. Paragraph 2 opens with a simile and continues its lengthy development with
more similes and an extended metaphor. Identify these and explain their effect.
3. Throughout the text, Thoreau uses repetition, particularly parallel structure.
Identify three or four examples and analyze their effect. Try to find ones that
illustrate different effects.
4. Thoreau opens paragraph 3 with a rhetorical question. How effectively does the
rest of the paragraph answer it — or does he intend to “answer” the question?
5. What does Thoreau mean by the phrase “starved before we are hungry” in the
second sentences of paragraph 3? What other examples of paradox do you find in
this excerpt from Walden?
6. Compare the probable rhetorical effect of paragraph 4 at the time it was written
with its effect today.
7. What is the purpose of the parable in paragraph 5? In telling this story, what
assumptions does Thoreau make about his audience?
8. In paragraph 6, Thoreau sets forth a series of “if . . . then” statements to support
his opening sentence. Explain the deductive logic in at least one of these statements, specifying the major and minor premises and conclusion. Note that the
assumption may be unexpressed.
9. What is the meaning of the allusion to Ulysses in paragraph 7?
10. In what ways do the ideas Thoreau presents in paragraph 6 become the foundation for the beliefs he expresses in paragraph 7? For instance, how do the ideas
explained in paragraph 6 lead to his exhortation, “If the engine whistles, let it
whistle till it is hoarse for its pains”?
11. Sometimes, even the slightest stylistic feature can work effectively as a rhetorical
strategy. What is the effect of the alliterative phrase “freshet and frost and fire” in
paragraph 7?
12. In the concluding paragraph, Thoreau develops two metaphors regarding time
and the intellect. What are they? What is their effect?

Suggestions for Writing
1. In paragraph 5, Thoreau writes, “What news! how much more important to know
what that is which was never old!” Write an essay in which you evaluate Thoreau’s
own writing according to this thought. Consider how this essay appeals to two
audiences: Thoreau’s contemporaries and today’s readers.
2. In this essay, Thoreau extols the virtues of individualism and self-sufficiency. Discuss how living according to these virtues can jeopardize the community; consider
specific circumstances when such jeopardy might occur.
3. Write a response to Thoreau, telling him how modern technology has influenced
how we communicate. Acknowledge how he did or did not anticipate our modern
condition.
4. Using the reflective style of Thoreau, write your own philosophical essay entitled
“Where I Live, and What I Live For” (note present tense).

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 302

6/18/12 3:11 PM

Aria
A Memoir of a Bilingual Childhood

Richard Rodriguez
richard rodriguez is a literary scholar, memoirist, essayist, journalist, and television commentator known for his controversial positions — especially his stands
against bilingual education and affirmative action. Born in 1944 in San Francisco
to Mexican immigrants, he grew up in Sacramento, California. rodriguez received
a BA from Stanford University and an MA from Columbia University, and he studied for his doctorate at the University of California at Berkeley. He is best known
for his autobiography, Hunger​ of​ Memory:​The​ Education​ of​ Richard​ Rodriguez
(1982). He is also the author of Days​of​Obligation:​An​Argument​with​My​Mexican​ Father (1992), which was a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize, and Brown:​ The​
Last​Discovery​of​America (2002). The following selection from a chapter in Hunger​of​Memory (originally an essay for The​American​Scholar), contrasts the public world of rodriguez’s Catholic grammar school with the private world of his
family.

1
I remember to start with that day in Sacramento — a California now nearly thirty
years past — when I first entered a classroom, able to understand some fifty stray
English words.
The third of four children, I had been preceded to a neighborhood Roman
Catholic school by an older brother and sister. But neither of them had revealed
very much about their classroom experiences. Each afternoon they returned, as
they left in the morning, always together, speaking in Spanish as they climbed the
five steps of the porch. And their mysterious books, wrapped in shopping-bag
paper, remained on the table next to the door, closed firmly behind them.
An accident of geography sent me to a school where all my classmates were
white, many the children of doctors and lawyers and business executives. All my
classmates certainly must have been uneasy on that first day of school — as most
children are uneasy — to find themselves apart from their families in the first
institution of their lives. But I was astonished.
The nun said, in a friendly but oddly impersonal voice, “Boys and girls, this
is Richard Rodriguez.” (I heard her sound out: Rich-heard Road-ree-guess.) It
was the first time I had heard anyone name me in English. “Richard,” the nun
repeated more slowly, writing my name down in her black leather book. Quickly
I turned to see my mother’s face dissolve in a watery blur behind the pebbled
glass door.

303

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 303

6/18/12 3:11 PM

304

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

*
*
*
Many years later there is something called bilingual education — a scheme proposed in the late 1960s by Hispanic-American social activists, later endorsed by a
congressional vote. It is a program that seeks to permit non-English-speaking
children, many from lower-class homes, to use their family language as the language of school. (Such is the goal its supporters announce.) I hear them and
am forced to say no: It is not possible for a child — any child — ever to use his
family’s language in school. Not to understand this is to misunderstand the public uses of schooling and to trivialize the nature of intimate life — a family’s
“language.”
Memory teaches me what I know of these matters; the boy reminds the adult.
I was a bilingual child, a certain kind — socially disadvantaged — the son of
working-class parents, both Mexican immigrants.
In the early years of my boyhood, my parents coped very well in America. My
father had steady work. My mother managed at home. They were nobody’s victims. Optimism and ambition led them to a house (our home) many blocks from
the Mexican south side of town. We lived among gringos and only a block from
the biggest, whitest houses. It never occurred to my parents that they couldn’t live
wherever they chose. Nor was the Sacramento of the fifties bent on teaching them
a contrary lesson. My mother and father were more annoyed than intimidated by
those two or three neighbors who tried initially to make us unwelcome. (“Keep
your brats away from my sidewalk!”) But despite all they achieved, perhaps
because they had so much to achieve, any deep feeling of ease, the confidence of
“belonging” in public was withheld from them both. They regarded the people at
work, the faces in crowds, as very distant from us. They were the others, los gringos. That term was interchangeable in their speech with another, even more telling, los americanos.
I grew up in a house where the only regular guests were my relations. For
one day, enormous families of relatives would visit and there would be so many
people that the noise and the bodies would spill out to the backyard and front
porch. Then, for weeks no one came by. (It was usually a salesman who rang the
door bell.) Our house stood apart. A gaudy yellow in a row of white bungalows.
We were the people with the noisy dog. The people who raised pigeons and chickens. We were the foreigners on the block. A few neighbors smiled and waved. We
waved back. But no one in the family knew the names of the old couple who lived
next door; until I was seven years old, I did not know the names of the kids who
lived across the street.
In public, my father and mother spoke a hesitant, accented, not always grammatical English. And they would have to strain — their bodies tense — to catch
the sense of what was rapidly said by los gringos. At home they spoke Spanish. The
language of their Mexican past sounded in counterpoint to the English of public
society. The words would come quickly, with ease. Conveyed through those
sounds was the pleasing, soothing, consoling reminder of being at home.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 304

5

6/18/12 3:11 PM

roDrIGUEz • ArIA

305

During those years when I was first conscious of hearing, my mother and
father addressed me only in Spanish; in Spanish I learned to reply. By contrast,
English (inglés), rarely heard in the house, was the language I came to associate
with gringos. I learned my first words of English overhearing my parents speak to
strangers. At five years of age, I knew just enough English for my mother to trust
me on errands to stores one block away. No more.
I was a listening child, careful to hear the very different sounds of Spanish
and English. Wide-eyed with hearing, I’d listen to sounds more than words. First,
there were English (gringo) sounds. So many words were still unknown that when
the butcher or the lady at the drugstore said something to me, exotic polysyllabic
sounds would bloom in the midst of their sentences. Often, the speech of people
in public seemed to me very loud, booming with confidence. The man behind the
counter would literally ask, “What can I do for you?” But by being so firm and so
clear, the sound of his voice said that he was a gringo; he belonged in public
society.
I would also hear then the high nasal notes of middle-class American speech.
The air stirred with sound. Sometimes, even now, when I have been traveling
abroad for several weeks, I will hear what I heard as a boy. In hotel lobbies or
airports, in Turkey or Brazil, some Americans will pass, and suddenly I will hear
it again — the high sound of American voices. For a few seconds I will hear it with
pleasure, for it is now the sound of my society — a reminder of home. But inevitably — already on the flight headed for home — the sound fades with repetition.
I will be unable to hear it anymore.
When I was a boy, things were different. The accent of los gringos was never
pleasing nor was it hard to hear. Crowds at Safeway or at bus stops would be noisy
with sound. And I would be forced to edge away from the chirping chatter
above me.
I was unable to hear my own sounds, but I knew very well that I spoke English poorly. My words could not stretch far enough to form complete thoughts.
And the words I did speak I didn’t know well enough to make into distinct sounds.
(Listeners would usually lower their heads, better to hear what I was trying to
say.) But it was one thing for me to speak English with difficulty. It was more
troubling for me to hear my parents speak in public: their high-whining vowels
and guttural consonants; their sentences that got stuck with “eh” and “ah” sounds;
the confused syntax; the hesitant rhythm of sounds so different from the way
gringos spoke. I’d notice, moreover, that my parents’ voices were softer than those
of gringos we’d meet.
I am tempted now to say that none of this mattered. In adulthood I am
embarrassed by childhood fears. And, in a way, it didn’t matter very much that
my parents could not speak English with ease. Their linguistic difficulties had no
serious consequences. My mother and father made themselves understood at the
county hospital clinic and at government offices. And yet, in another way, it mattered very much — it was unsettling to hear my parents struggle with English.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 305

10

15

6/18/12 3:11 PM

306

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

Hearing them, I’d grow nervous, my clutching trust in their protection and power
weakened.
There were many times like the night at a brightly lit gasoline station (a blaring white memory) when I stood uneasily, hearing my father. He was talking to a
teenaged attendant. I do not recall what they were saying, but I cannot forget the
sounds my father made as he spoke. At one point his words slid together to form
one word — sounds as confused as the threads of blue and green oil in the puddle
next to my shoes. His voice rushed through what he had left to say. And, toward
the end, reached falsetto notes, appealing to his listener’s understanding. I looked
away to the lights of passing automobiles. I tried not to hear anymore. But I heard
only too well the calm, easy tones in the attendant’s reply. Shortly afterward,
walking toward home with my father, I shivered when he put his hand on my
shoulder. The very first chance that I got, I evaded his grasp and ran on ahead into
the dark, skipping with feigned boyish exuberance.
But then there was Spanish. Español: my family’s language. Español: the language that seemed to me a private language. I’d hear strangers on the radio and
in the Mexican Catholic church across town speaking in Spanish, but I couldn’t
really believe that Spanish was a public language, like English. Spanish speakers,
rather, seemed related to me, for I sensed that we shared — through our language — the experience of feeling apart from los gringos. It was thus a ghetto
Spanish that I heard and I spoke. Like those whose lives are bound by a barrio, I
was reminded by Spanish of my separateness from los otros, los gringos in power.
But more intensely than for most barrio children — because I did not live in a
barrio — Spanish seemed to me the language of home. (Most days it was only at
home that I’d hear it.) It became the language of joyful return.
A family member would say something to me and I would feel myself specially recognized. My parents would say something to me and I would feel
embraced by the sounds of their words. Those sounds said: I am speaking with
ease in Spanish. I am addressing you in words I never use with los gringos, I recognize you as someone special, close, like no one outside. You belong with us. In the
family.
(Ricardo.)
At the age of five, six, well past the time when most other children no longer
easily notice the difference between sounds uttered at home and words spoken in
public, I had a different experience. I lived in a world magically compounded of
sounds. I remained a child longer than most; I lingered too long, poised at the
edge of language — often frightened by the sounds of los gringos, delighted by the
sounds of Spanish at home. I shared with my family a language that was startlingly different from that used in the great city around us.
For me there were none of the gradations between public and private society
so normal to a maturing child. Outside the house was public society; inside the
house was private. Just opening or closing the screen door behind me was an
important experience. I’d rarely leave home all alone or without reluctance.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 306

20

6/18/12 3:11 PM

roDrIGUEz • ArIA

307

Walking down the sidewalk, under the canopy of tall trees, I’d warily notice
the — suddenly — silent neighborhood kids who stood warily watching me. Nervously, I’d arrive at the grocery store to hear there the sounds of the gringo —
foreign to me — reminding me that in this world so big, I was a foreigner. But
then I’d return. Walking back toward our house, climbing the steps from the sidewalk, when the front door was open in summer, I’d hear voices beyond the screen
door talking in Spanish. For a second or two, I’d stay, linger there, listening. Smiling, I’d hear my mother call out, saying in Spanish (words): “Is that you, Richard?”
All the while her sounds would assure me: You are home now; come closer; inside.
With us.
“Sí,” I’d reply.
Once more inside the house I would resume (assume) my place in the family.
The sounds would dim, grow harder to hear. Once more at home, I would grow
less aware of that fact. It required, however, no more than the blurt of the doorbell to alert me to listen to sounds all over again. The house would turn instantly
still while my mother went to the door. I’d hear her hard English sounds. I’d wait
to hear her voice return to soft-sounding Spanish, which assured me, as surely as
did the clicking tongue of the lock on the door, that the stranger was gone.
Plainly, it is not healthy to hear such sounds so often. It is not healthy to distinguish public words from private sounds so easily. I remained cloistered by
sounds, timid and shy in public, too dependent on voices at home. And yet it
needs to be emphasized: I was an extremely happy child at home. I remember
many nights when my father would come back from work, and I’d hear him call
out to my mother in Spanish, sounding relieved. In Spanish, he’d sound light and
free notes he never could manage in English. Some nights I’d jump up just at
hearing his voice. With mis hermanos I would come running into the room where
he was with my mother. Our laughing (so deep was the pleasure!) became screaming. Like others who know the pain of public alienation, we transformed the
knowledge of our public separateness and made it consoling — the reminder of
intimacy. Excited, we joined our voices in a celebration of sounds. We are speaking
now the way we never speak out in public. We are alone — together, voices sounded,
surrounded to tell me. Some nights, no one seemed willing to loosen the hold
sounds had on us. At dinner, we invented new words. (Ours sounded Spanish, but
made sense only to us.) We pieced together new words by taking, say, an English
verb and giving it Spanish endings. My mother’s instructions at bedtime would
be lacquered with mock-urgent tones. Or a word like sí would become, in several
notes, able to convey added measures of feeling. Tongues explored the edges of
words, especially the fat vowels. And we happily sounded that military drum roll,
the twirling roar of the Spanish r. Family language: my family’s sounds. The
voices of my parents and sisters and brother. Their voices insisting: You belong
here. We are family members. Related. Special to one another. Listen! Voices singing
and sighing, rising, straining, then surging, teeming with pleasure that burst syllables into fragments of laughter. At times it seemed there was steady quiet only

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 307

6/18/12 3:11 PM

308

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

when, from another room, the rustling whispers of my parents faded and I moved
closer to sleep.

2
Supporters of bilingual education today imply that students like me miss a great
deal by not being taught in their family’s language. What they seem not to recognize is that, as a socially disadvantaged child, I considered Spanish to be a private
language. What I needed to learn in school was that I had the right — and the
obligation — to speak the public language of los gringos. The odd truth is that my
first-grade classmates could have become bilingual, in the conventional sense of
that word, more easily than I. Had they been taught (as upper-middle-class children are often taught early) a second language like Spanish or French, they could
have regarded it simply as that: another public language. In my case such bilingualism could not have been so quickly achieved. What I did not believe was that
I could speak a single public language.
Without question, it would have pleased me to hear my teachers address me
in Spanish when I entered the classroom. I would have felt much less afraid. I
would have trusted them and responded with ease. But I would have delayed —
for how long postponed? — having to learn the language of public society. I
would have evaded — and for how long could I have afforded to delay? — learning
the great lesson of school, that I had a public identity.
Fortunately, my teachers were unsentimental about their responsibility. What
they understood was that I needed to speak a public language. So their voices
would search me out, asking me questions. Each time I’d hear them, I’d look up
in surprise to see a nun’s face frowning at me. I’d mumble, not really meaning to
answer. The nun would persist, “Richard, stand up. Don’t look at the floor. Speak
up. Speak to the entire class, not just to me!” But I couldn’t believe that the English language was mine to use. (In part, I did not want to believe it.) I continued
to mumble. I resisted the teacher’s demands. (Did I somehow suspect that once I
learned public language my pleasing family life would be changed?) Silent, waiting for the bell to sound, I remained dazed, diffident, afraid.
Because I wrongly imagined that English was intrinsically a public language and
Spanish an intrinsically private one, I easily noted the difference between classroom language and the language of home. At school, words were directed to a
general audience of listeners. (“Boys and girls.”) Words were meaningfully ordered.
And the point was not self-expression alone but to make oneself understood by
many others. The teacher quizzed: “Boys and girls, why do we use that word in
this sentence? Could we think of a better word to use there? Would the sentence
change its meaning if the words were differently arranged? And wasn’t there a
better way of saying much the same thing?” (I couldn’t say. I wouldn’t try to say.)
Three months. Five. Half a year passed. Unsmiling, ever watchful, my teachers noted my silence. They began to connect my behavior with the difficult prog-

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 308

25

6/18/12 3:11 PM

roDrIGUEz • ArIA

309

ress my older sister and brother were making. Until one Saturday morning three
nuns arrived at the house to talk to our parents. Stiffly, they sat on the blue living
room sofa. From the doorway of another room, spying the visitors, I noted the
incongruity — the clash of two worlds, the faces and voices of school intruding
upon the familiar setting of home. I overheard one voice gently wondering, “Do
your children speak only Spanish at home, Mrs. Rodriguez?” While another voice
added, “That Richard especially seems so timid and shy.”
That Rich-heard!
With great tact the visitors continued, “Is it possible for you and your husband to encourage your children to practice their English when they are home?”
Of course, my parents complied. What would they not do for their children’s
well-being? And how could they have questioned the Church’s authority which
those women represented? In an instant, they agreed to give up the language (the
sounds) that had revealed and accentuated our family’s closeness. The moment
after the visitors left, the change was observed. “Ahora, speak to us en inglés,” my
father and mother united to tell us.
At first, it seemed a kind of game. After dinner each night, the family gathered to practice “our” English. (It was still then inglés, a language foreign to us, so
we felt drawn as strangers to it.) Laughing, we would try to define words we could
not pronounce. We played with strange English sounds, often over-anglicizing
our pronunciations. And we filled the smiling gaps of our sentences with familiar
Spanish sounds. But that was cheating, somebody shouted. Everyone laughed. In
school, meanwhile, like my brother and sister, I was required to attend a daily
tutoring session. I needed a full year of special attention. I also needed my teachers to keep my attention from straying in class by calling out, Rich-heard — their
English voices slowly prying loose my ties to my other name, its three notes,
Ri-car-do. Most of all I needed to hear my mother and father speak to me
in a moment of seriousness in broken — suddenly heartbreaking — English. The
scene was inevitable: One Saturday morning I entered the kitchen where my parents were talking in Spanish. I did not realize that they were talking in Spanish
however until, at the moment they saw me, I heard their voices change to speak
English. Those gringo sounds they uttered startled me. Pushed me away. In that
moment of trivial misunderstanding and profound insight, I felt my throat
twisted by unsounded grief. I turned quickly and left the room. But I had no place
to escape to with Spanish. (The spell was broken.) My brother and sisters were
speaking English in another part of the house.
Again and again in the days following, increasingly angry, I was obliged to
hear my mother and father: “Speak to us en inglés.” (Speak.) Only then did I determine to learn classroom English. Weeks after, it happened: One day in school I
raised my hand to volunteer an answer. I spoke out in a loud voice. And I did not
think it remarkable when the entire class understood. That day, I moved very far
from the disadvantaged child I had been only days earlier. The belief, the calming
assurance that I belonged in public, had at last taken hold.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 309

30

6/18/12 3:11 PM

310

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

Shortly after, I stopped hearing the high and loud sounds of los gringos. A
more and more confident speaker of English, I didn’t trouble to listen to how
strangers sounded, speaking to me. And there simply were too many Englishspeaking people in my day for me to hear American accents anymore. Conversations quickened. Listening to persons who sounded eccentrically pitched voices, I
usually noted their sounds for an initial few seconds before I concentrated on
what they were saying. Conversations became content-full. Transparent. Hearing
someone’s tone of voice — angry or questioning or sarcastic or happy or sad — I
didn’t distinguish it from the words it expressed. Sound and word were thus
tightly wedded. At the end of a day, I was often bemused, always relieved, to realize how “silent,” though crowded with words, my day in public had been. (This
public silence measured and quickened the change in my life.)
At last, seven years old, I came to believe what had been technically true since
my birth: I was an American citizen.
But the special feeling of closeness at home was diminished by then. Gone
was the desperate, urgent, intense feeling of being at home; rare was the experience of feeling myself individualized by family intimates. We remained a loving
family, but one greatly changed. No longer so close; no longer bound tight by the
pleasing and troubling knowledge of our public separateness. Neither my older
brother nor sister rushed home after school anymore. Nor did I. When I arrived
home there would often be neighborhood kids in the house. Or the house would
be empty of sounds.
Following the dramatic Americanization of their children, even my parents
grew more publicly confident. Especially my mother. She learned the names of all
the people on our block. And she decided we needed to have a telephone installed
in the house. My father continued to use the word gringo. But it was no longer
charged with the old bitterness or distrust. (Stripped of any emotional content,
the word simply became a name for those Americans not of Hispanic descent.)
Hearing him, sometimes, I wasn’t sure if he was pronouncing the Spanish word
gringo or saying gringo in English.
Matching the silence I started hearing in public was a new quiet at home. The
family’s quiet was partly due to the fact that, as we children learned more and
more English, we shared fewer and fewer words with our parents. Sentences
needed to be spoken slowly when a child addressed his mother or father. (Often
the parent wouldn’t understand.) The child would need to repeat himself. (Still
the parent misunderstood.) The young voice, frustrated, would end up saying,
“Never mind” — the subject was closed. Dinners would be noisy with the clinking
of knives and forks against dishes. My mother would smile softly between her
remarks; my father at the other end of the table would chew and chew at his food,
while he stared over the heads of his children.
My mother! My father! After English became my primary language, I no longer knew what words to use in addressing my parents. The old Spanish words
(those tender accents of sound) I had used earlier — mamá and papá — I couldn’t
use anymore. They would have been too painful reminders of how much had

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 310

35

6/18/12 3:11 PM

roDrIGUEz • ArIA

311

changed in my life. On the other hand, the words I heard neighborhood kids call
their parents seemed equally unsatisfactory. Mother and Father; Ma, Papa, Pa,
Dad, Pop (how I hated the all-American sound of that last word especially) — all
these terms I felt were unsuitable, not really terms of address for my parents. As a
result, I never used them at home. Whenever I’d speak to my parents, I would try
to get their attention with eye contact alone. In public conversations, I’d refer to
“my parents” or “my mother and father.”
My mother and father, for their part, responded differently, as their children
spoke to them less. She grew restless, seemed troubled and anxious at the scarcity
of words exchanged in the house. It was she who would question me about my
day when I came home from school. She smiled at small talk. She pried at the
edges of my sentences to get me to say something more. (What?) She’d join conversations she overheard, but her intrusions often stopped her children’s talking.
By contrast, my father seemed reconciled to the new quiet. Though his English
improved somewhat, he retired into silence. At dinner he spoke very little. One
night his children and even his wife helplessly giggled at his garbled English pronunciation of the Catholic Grace before Meals. Thereafter he made his wife recite
the prayer at the start of each meal, even on formal occasions, when there were
guests in the house. Hers became the public voice of the family. On official business, it was she, not my father, one would usually hear on the phone or in stores,
talking to strangers. His children grew so accustomed to his silence that, years
later, they would speak routinely of his shyness. (My mother would often try to
explain: Both his parents died when he was eight. He was raised by an uncle who
treated him like little more than a menial servant. He was never encouraged to
speak. He grew up alone. A man of few words.) But my father was not shy, I realized, when I’d watch him speaking Spanish with relatives. Using Spanish, he was
quickly effusive. Especially when talking with other men, his voice would spark,
flicker, flare alive with sounds. In Spanish, he expressed ideas and feelings he
rarely revealed in English. With firm Spanish sounds, he conveyed confidence
and authority English would never allow him.
The silence at home, however, was finally more than a literal silence. Fewer
words passed between parent and child, but more profound was the silence that
resulted from my inattention to sounds. At about the time I no longer bothered
to listen with care to the sounds of English in public, I grew careless about listening to the sounds family members made when they spoke. Most of the time I
heard someone speaking at home and didn’t distinguish his sounds from the
words people uttered in public. I didn’t even pay much attention to my parents’
accented and ungrammatical speech. At least not at home. Only when I was with
them in public would I grow alert to their accents. Though, even then, their
sounds caused me less and less concern. For I was increasingly confident of my
own public identity.
I would have been happier about my public success had I not sometimes
recalled what it had been like earlier, when my family had conveyed its intimacy
through a set of conveniently private sounds. Sometimes in public, hearing a

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 311

40

6/18/12 3:11 PM

312

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

stranger, I’d hark back to my past. A Mexican farmworker approached me downtown to ask directions to somewhere. “¿Hijito. . . ?” he said. And his voice summoned
deep longing. Another time, standing beside my mother in the visiting room of a
Carmelite convent, before the dense screen which rendered the nuns shadowy
figures, I heard several Spanish-speaking nuns — their busy, singsong overlapping
voices — assure us that yes, yes, we were remembered, all our family was remembered in their prayers. (Their voices echoed faraway family sounds.) Another day,
a dark-faced old woman — her hand light on my shoulder — steadied herself against
me as she boarded a bus. She murmured something I couldn’t quite comprehend.
Her Spanish voice came near, like the face of a never-before-seen relative in the
instant before I was kissed. Her voice, like so many of the Spanish voices I’d hear
in public, recalled the golden age of my youth. Hearing Spanish then, I continued
to be a careful, if sad, listener to sounds. Hearing a Spanish-speaking family walking behind me, I turned to look. I smiled for an instant, before my glance found
the Hispanic-looking faces of strangers in the crowd going by.
Today I hear bilingual educators say that children lose a degree of “individuality”
by becoming assimilated into public society. (Bilingual schooling was popularized in the seventies, that decade when middle-class ethnics began to resist the
process of assimilation — the American melting pot.) But the bilingualists simplistically scorn the value and necessity of assimilation. They do not seem to realize that there are two ways a person is individualized. So they do not realize that
while one suffers a diminished sense of private individuality by becoming assimilated into public society, such assimilation makes possible the achievement of
public individuality.
The bilingualists insist that a student should be reminded of his difference
from others in mass society, his heritage. But they equate mere separateness with
individuality. The fact is that only in private — with intimates — is separateness
from the crowd a prerequisite for individuality. (An intimate draws me apart, tells
me that I am unique, unlike all others.) In public, by contrast, full individuality is
achieved, paradoxically, by those who are able to consider themselves members of
the crowd. Thus it happened for me: Only when I was able to think of myself as
an American, no longer an alien in gringo society, could I seek the rights and
opportunities necessary for full public individuality. The social and political
advantages I enjoy as a man result from the day that I came to believe that my
name, indeed, is Rich-heard Road-ree-guess. It is true that my public society today
is often impersonal. (My public society is usually mass society.) Yet despite the
anonymity of the crowd and despite the fact that the individuality I achieve in
public is often tenuous — because it depends on my being one in a crowd — I
celebrate the day I acquired my new name. Those middle-class ethnics who scorn
assimilation seem to me filled with decadent self-pity, obsessed by the burden of
public life. Dangerously, they romanticize public separateness and they trivialize
the dilemma of the socially disadvantaged.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 312

6/18/12 3:11 PM

roDrIGUEz • ArIA

313

My awkward childhood does not prove the necessity of bilingual education.
My story discloses instead an essential myth of childhood — inevitable pain. If I
rehearse here the changes in my private life after my Americanization, it is finally
to emphasize the public gain. The loss implies the gain: The house I returned to
each afternoon was quiet. Intimate sounds no longer rushed to the door to greet
me. There were other noises inside. The telephone rang. Neighborhood kids ran
past the door of the bedroom where I was reading my schoolbooks — covered
with shopping-bag paper. Once I learned public language, it would never again be
easy for me to hear intimate family voices. More and more of my day was spent
hearing words. But that may only be a way of saying that the day I raised my hand
in class and spoke loudly to an entire roomful of faces, my childhood started to end.

45

Exploring the Text
1. According to Richard Rodriguez, how can language define community – both
negatively and positively?
2. What does Rodriguez mean in the following statement? “It is not possible for a
child — any child — ever to use his family’s language in school. Not to understand this is to misunderstand the public uses of schooling and to trivialize the
nature of intimate life — a family’s ‘language’” (para. 5). Write an essay defending, challenging, or modifying Rodriguez’s assertion. Support your argument
with evidence from your experience, observation, or reading.
3. What is an aria? Why do you think Rodriguez chose it for his title? Is it an appropriate title? Is it effective?
4. Explain how Rodriguez establishes his ethos in the opening four paragraphs.
5. What does Rodriguez mean when he says, “[I]n a way, it didn’t matter very much
that my parents could not speak English with ease. . . . And yet, in another way, it
mattered very much” (para. 15)?
6. Rodriguez admits, “Matching the silence I started hearing in public was a new
quiet at home” (para. 38). Later he says, “The silence at home, however, was
finally more than a literal silence” (para. 41). Does he convince you that this
change in family relationships is worthwhile in terms of his “dramatic Americanization” (para. 37)?
7. What does Rodriguez mean in the following statement: “[W]hile one suffers a
diminished sense of private individuality by becoming assimilated into public
society, such assimilation makes possible the achievement of public individuality”
(para. 43)?
8. In several sections, Rodriguez makes his point by narrative (such as the moment
in school when he first hears his name). How does narrative contribute to the
effectiveness of Rodriguez’s argument?
9. What major counterarguments does Rodriguez address? (He does not address
them all at once; identify specific passages.)

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 313

6/18/12 3:11 PM

314

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

10. Rodriguez develops his argument largely through his own experience and opinions, but without quantitative data from research or the views of experts. How
convincing is he? Do you think more formal evidence would have strengthened
his argument? Explain.
11. In this essay, Richard Rodriguez describes a clash of two communities — his private family community and his public community of both the school and
middle-class America as a whole. How do these competing communities impact
the development of his personal identity?
12. In a 1994 interview, Rodriguez made the following comment about multiculturalism: “Multiculturalism, as it is expressed in the platitudes of the American campus, is not multiculturalism. It is an idea about culture that has a specific genesis,
a specific history, and a specific politics. What people mean by multiculturalism
is different hues of themselves. They don’t mean Islamic fundamentalists or skinheads. They mean other brown and black students who share opinions like theirs.
It isn’t diversity. It’s a pretense to diversity.” Do you agree with Rodriguez?

The Family That Stretches (Together)
Ellen Goodman
Pulitzer Prize–winning journalist Ellen Goodman (b. 1941) was a syndicated columnist from 1976 until her retirement in 2010. She received her BA from radcliffe
College and later was a fellow at the nieman Foundation for Journalism at Harvard. She began her career as a researcher for Newsweek and was later a
reporter for the Detroit​Free​Press and the Boston​Globe. She published her first
book, Turning​Points, in 1979 and then collections of her columns, including Making​Sense (1989), Value​Judgments (1993), and Paper​Trail:​Common​Sense​in​
Uncommon​Times (2004). She is co-author of I​Know​Just​What​You​Mean:​The​
Power​of​Friendship​in​Women’s​Lives (2000). In 1994, Goodman was the first
Lorry I. Lokey visiting Professor of Professional Journalism at Stanford University.
The following essay originally appeared in the Boston​Globe in 1983.

T

he girl is spending the summer with her extended family. She doesn’t put
it this way. But as we talk on the beach, the ten-year-old lists the people
who are sharing the same house this month with the careful attention of a genealogist.
First of all there is her father — visitation rights awarded him the month of
August. Second of all there is her father’s second wife and two children by her first
marriage. All that seems perfectly clear. A stepmother and two stepbrothers.
Then there are the others, she slowly explains. There is her stepmother’s sister
for example. The girl isn’t entirely sure whether this makes the woman a stepaunt,

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 314

6/18/12 3:11 PM

GooDMAn • THE FAMILy THAT STrETCHES (ToGETHEr)

315

or whether her baby is a stepcousin. Beyond that, the real puzzle is whether her
stepaunt’s husband’s children by his first marriage have any sort of official relationship to her at all. It does, we both agree, seem a bit fuzzy.
Nevertheless, she concludes, with a certainty that can only be mustered by
the sort of a ten-year-old who keeps track of her own Frequent Flier coupons,
“We are in the same family.” With that she closes the subject and focuses instead
on her peanut butter and jelly.
I am left to my thoughts. My companion, in her own unselfconscious way, is
a fine researcher. She grasps the wide new family configurations that are neglected
by census data takers and social scientists.
After all, those of us who grew up in traditional settings remember families
which extended into elaborate circles of aunts, uncles, and cousins. There were
sides to this family, names and titles to be memorized. But they fit together in a
biological pattern.
Now, as my young friend can attest, we have fewer children and more divorces.
We know that as many as 50 percent of recent marriages may end. About
75 percent of divorced women and 83 percent of divorced men then remarry. Of
those remarriages, 59 percent include a child from a former marriage.
So, our families often extend along lines that are determined by decrees, rather
than genes. If the nucleus is broken, there are still links forged in different directions.
The son of a friend was asked to produce a family tree for his sixth-grade
class. But he was dissatisfied with his oak. There was no room on it for his stepgrandfather, though the man had married his widowed grandmother years ago.
More to the point, the boy had to create an offshoot for his new baby halfbrother that seemed too distant. He couldn’t find a proper place for the uncle —
the ex-uncle to be precise — whom he visited last summer with his cousin.
A family tree just doesn’t work, he complained. He would have preferred to
draw family bushes.
The reality is that divorce has created kinship ties that rival the most complex
tribe. These are not always easy relationships. The children and even the adults
whose family lives have been disrupted by divorce and remarriage learn that
people they love do not necessarily love each other. This extended family does not
gather for reunions and Thanksgivings.
But when it works, it can provide a support system of sorts. I have seen the
nieces, nephews — even the dogs — of one marriage welcomed as guests into
another. There are all sorts of relationships that survive the marital ones, though
there are no names for these kinfolk, no nomenclature for this extending family.
Not long ago, when living together first became a common pattern, people
couldn’t figure out what to call each other. It was impossible to introduce the man
you lived with as a “spouse equivalent.” It was harder to refer to the woman your
son lived with as his lover, mistress, housemate.
It’s equally difficult to describe the peculiar membership of this new lineage.
Does your first husband’s mother become a mother-out-law? Is the woman no

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 315

5

10

15

6/18/12 3:11 PM

316

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

longer married to your uncle an ex-aunt? We have nieces and nephews left dangling like participles from other lives and stepfamilies entirely off the family tree.
Our reality is more flexible and our relationships more supportive than our
language. But for the moment, my ten-year-old researcher is right. However accidentally, however uneasily, “We are in the same family.”

Exploring the Text
1. Ellen Goodman begins her column by establishing that she is taking a walk on the
beach, where she meets a ten-year-old who prompts her to reflect on the nature of
family. What are the benefits and liabilities of Goodman making herself a character in her own column?
2. Do you agree that the ten-year-old, “in her own unselfconscious way, is a fine
researcher” (para. 5)? Why or why not? What effect does Goodman achieve by
letting the girl provide the subject and viewpoint rather than raising it on
her own?
3. Examine Goodman’s use of evidence. What actual facts and figures does she call
on in her essay? Would having more, along with expert testimony from academic
researchers, psychologists, and the like, have strengthened her viewpoint? Explain.
4. Overall, what is Goodman’s attitude toward a society where the norm has become
families that “are determined by decrees, rather than genes” (para. 8)? Cite specific
passages to support your response.
5. What does Goodman mean by this statement: “Our reality is more flexible and our
relationships more supportive than our language” (para. 16)? What are some
examples outside of family connections that might illustrate this point?
6. How would you describe the tone of this essay? Is Goodman tolerant, critical, optimistic, skeptical, reflective — or a combination of these or other descriptors?
7. Goodman wrote this essay in 1983. To what extent do you think that it remains
true today?
8. Elsewhere, Goodman has written that she is interested in exploring the importance “for all of us to make links between our personal lives and public issues.” In
what ways does this essay encourage us to make those links?

Walking the Path between Worlds
Lori Arviso Alvord
The first navajo woman surgeon, Lori Arviso Alvord (b. 1958) is currently the
associate dean of student and minority affairs and assistant professor of surgery at
Dartmouth Medical School. She received her BA from Dartmouth College and her

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 316

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ALvorD • WALKInG THE PATH BETWEEn WorLDS

317

MD from Stanford University. At the start of her career, she served as a general
surgeon in the Indian Health Service in her native new Mexico. She has been
honored with numerous awards, including the Governor’s Award for outstanding
Women from the State of new Mexico (1992) and the outstanding Women in
Medicine Award from the University of Missouri–Kansas City School of Medicine (2001). Her autobiography, The​Scalpel​and​the​Silver​Bear (1999), describes
her efforts to combine navajo healing practices with Western medicine. The following passage from that book focuses on her journey from the reservation to
Dartmouth.

T

oday Navajo children are still standing on the playgrounds where I stood,
facing the critical decision I would face after I graduated from high
school: to leave the rez, or to stay and cleave to traditional ways. To let the desert
live inside them, or to try to wash it away. They too hear the voice of the wind and
the desert, smell the strong smells of our people, and feel the ways we came from.
“Decide,” the world whispers to them, “you must choose.”
I chose to leave and get an education, following the path of the books I loved
so much. But leaving Dinetah was a frightening prospect. Navajo people believe
we are safe within the four sacred mountains that bound the Navajo reservation — Mount Taylor, San Francisco Peak, Blanca Peak, and the La Plata Range. In
our creation stories it is the place of our origins, of our emergence to the surface
of the earth from other worlds below, the place where Changing Woman and
First Man, Coyote, the Twins, and the monsters in our legends roamed. These
mountains are central to everything in our lives. To leave this place is to invite
imbalance, to break our precious link with the tribe, to leave the Walk of Beauty,
and to court danger. It was a dangerous step, that into the unknown, unguarded
world.
In our song called the Mountain Chant, each of the sacred mountains is honored. The words describe each mountain and its special qualities.
The mountain to the east is Sisna’jin
It is standing out.
The strong White Bead is standing out
A living mountain is standing out . . .
The mountain to the south is Tsoodził
It is standing out.
The strong turquoise is standing out
A living mountain is standing out . . .
The mountain to the west is Dook’o’oosłííd.
It is standing out.
The strong white shell is standing out.
A living mountain is standing out . . .
The mountain to the north is Dibé Ntsaa.
It is standing out.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 317

5

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

318

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

The strong jet is standing out.
A living mountain is standing out . . .1

15

If I left, I would leave the enclosed and sacred world within the strong mountains,
standing out.
I made good grades in high school, but I had received a very marginal education. I had a few good teachers, but teachers were difficult to recruit to our schools
and they often didn’t stay long. Funding was often inadequate. I spent many
hours in classrooms where, I now see, very little was being taught. Nevertheless
my parents always assumed, quite optimistically, that all their children would go
to college. I don’t remember any lectures from my father on the importance of
higher education — just the quiet assurance that he and my mother and Grandmother all believed in us.
My college plans were modest; I assumed I would attend a nearby state
school. But then I happened to meet another Navajo student who was attending
Princeton. I had heard of Princeton but had no idea where it was. I asked him
how many Indians were there. He replied, “Five.” I couldn’t even imagine a place
with only five Indians, since our town was 98 percent Indian. Then he mentioned
Dartmouth, which had about fifty Indians on campus, and I felt a little better. Ivy
League was a term I had heard, but I had no concept of its meaning. No one from
my high school had ever attended an Ivy League college.
At my request, my high school counselor gave me the applications for all the
Ivy League schools, but I only completed Dartmouth’s because I knew there were
fifty Indians there.
I waited anxiously, and one day the letter came. I was accepted, early decision. I was only sixteen years old. As I was only half Navajo in blood, I wondered if this meant it would be only half as dangerous to me to leave Dinetah, the
place between the sacred mountains. Half of me belonged in Dinetah, but the
other half of me belonged in that other world too, I figured. Still, in my heart I
was all Navajo, and I instinctively felt afraid of the move. I had seen those who
went away and came back: the Vietnam veterans, broken and lost, who aimlessly
wandered the streets of Gallup, the others who came back but had forgotten
Navajo ways.
My memories of my arrival in Hanover, New Hampshire, are mostly of the
color green. Green cloaked the hillsides, crawled up the ivied walls, and was
reflected in the river where the Dartmouth crew students sculled. For a girl who
had never been far from Crownpoint, New Mexico, the green felt incredibly juicy,
lush, beautiful, and threatening. Crownpoint had had vast acreage of sky and
sand, but aside from the pastel scrub brush, mesquite, and chamiso, practically
the only growing things there were the tiny stunted pines called piñon trees. Yet it
is beautiful; you can see the edges and contours of red earth stretching all the way

5

1Aileen O’Bryan, Navajo Indian Myths (New York: Dover, 1994).

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 318

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ALvorD • WALKInG THE PATH BETWEEn WorLDS

319

to the box-shaped faraway cliffs and the horizon. No horizon was in sight in
Hanover, only trees. I felt claustrophobic.
If the physical contrasts were striking, the cultural ones were even more so.
Although I felt lucky to be there, I was in complete culture shock. I thought
people talked too much, laughed too loud, asked too many personal questions,
and had no respect for privacy. They seemed overly competitive and put a higher
value on material wealth than I was used to. Navajos placed much more emphasis
on a person’s relations to family, clan, tribe, and the other inhabitants of the earth,
both human and nonhuman, than on possessions. Everyone at home followed
unwritten codes for behavior. We were taught to be humble and not to draw
attention to ourselves, to favor cooperation over competition (so as not to make
ourselves “look better” at another’s expense or hurt someone’s feelings), to value
silence over words, to respect our elders, and to reserve our opinions until they
were asked for.
Understanding the culture of Dartmouth was like taking a course in itself. I
didn’t know the meaning of fraternities or the class system (divided into the haves
and the have-nots) which were so important there at first. Had the parents of my
fellow students taught them survival skills through camping, tracking, and hunting? Did I have any interest in making four-story-high sculptures out of ice for
Winter Carnival? Did they respect their elders, their parents? Did I know which
fork to use at a formal dinner? What sort of ceremonies did their “tribes” practice? While they pondered such burning questions as the opening day of ski season, I was struggling just to stay warm during the frozen New Hampshire winter
and not slip on the ice!
Indian reservations and pueblos could almost be seen as tiny Third World
countries, lacking as they did electricity, indoor plumbing, and paved roads.
When the Native American students arrived at Dartmouth, one of the first things
we were told was that we could attend high tea at Sanborn Hall at four o’clock
daily. I walked around the campus in awe, like a peasant visiting the castle of a
great king.
The very stately, beautiful, and affluent campus could be intimidating and alienating. The college’s unofficial mascot was the “Dartmouth Indian,” a tomahawkwielding red man whose presence was everywhere on the campus, in spite of the
Native community’s protests. He was like those TV Indians we had watched when
we were little and thought so alien. Imagine young Native students seeing white
students wearing loincloths and paint on their faces, jumping around with
toy tomahawks. Like the rest of the Native community, I was shocked by this
caricature.
I remember, distinctly, feeling alienated while walking around Dartmouth’s
campus that first year. By my sophomore year I understood what it meant to be
invisible. People looked right through me — I moved around the campus as
unseen as the air. Outside of my freshman roommate, Anne, I never made a close
non-Indian friend. I wonder if other students of color felt the same way.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 319

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

320

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

I was very homesick, wishing I didn’t have to miss so many familiar events:
the Navajo tribal fairs, the Zuni Shalako, the Laguna feast days, the Santa Fe
Indian market, the Gallup ceremonial. Everyone at home was having a great time
eating wonderful food — roasted corn from the Shiprock market, posole, red
chile stew, venison jerky — and I was stuck in a library far away. I missed watching
the Apache Devil Dancers and the Pueblo Buffalo Dancers. I missed the sight of
Navajo traditional clothing, emblazoned with silver and turquoise, and the pinkand-purple-splashed sunsets of New Mexico. I missed that smell — that smell we
had tried to wash away at our laundromat so long ago — the smell of wildness,
the desert, and the Navajo world.
Sometimes I wondered: If I’d had a kinaałdá ceremony, could I have been
stronger, more independent, better able to face this loneliness and alienation, less
unassured. The kinaałdá is part of the Blessing Way set of ceremonies performed
for girls when they reach puberty. Blessing Way tells the story of Changing
Woman (a central Navajo deity), and the kinaałdá celebrates her coming into
womanhood. The family and community gather around her, she is sung to, and
her female relatives massage her from head to toe, giving her the power and
strength of womanhood. A large corn cake is baked underground in a corn husk–
lined pit, and the girl sprinkles cornmeal over the top. Each day for four days, she
runs for a mile toward the new sun, toward her new life. It gives a young woman
strength and power, confidence and security, as she goes through menses for the
first time. She takes that strength and those “good thoughts” with her into the
world. I could have used that assurance. Because my family was less traditional,
my sisters and I did not have kinaałdá ceremonies, although we attended those of
our cousins. Nevertheless, since the Navajo culture is matriarchal, I think I was
better prepared as a woman in a “man’s world” than many white women I met.
A few things at Dartmouth, however, were comforting and did make me feel
at home. For one thing, dogs roamed the campus freely. They didn’t belong to
anybody in particular but to everybody and were fed and cared for by the entire campus. Muttlike, wily, always after something to eat, they reminded me
naturally of rez dogs. And everywhere I looked playful squirrels ran around, reminding me of the prairie dogs who run around their prairie dog cities on the
mesas and sit up on their hind legs to watch the cars drive by.
Academically, due to my strong reading background, I held my own in classes
like literature and social sciences, but I was totally unprepared for the physical
and life sciences. After receiving the only D of my entire life in calculus, I retreated
from the sciences altogether. The high school at Crownpoint had not prepared
me adequately to compete with the Ivy Leaguers. Furthermore, I had an additional problem. As I mentioned earlier, Navajos are taught from the youngest age
never to draw attention to ourselves. So Navajo children do not raise their hands
in class. At a school like Dartmouth, the lack of participation was seen as a sign
not of humility but lack of interest and a disengaged attitude. My Navajo humility
was combined with a deep feeling of academic inferiority; it was hard to compete

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 320

15

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ALvorD • WALKInG THE PATH BETWEEn WorLDS

321

with students who had taken calculus and read Chaucer in high school. I sat in
the back and tried not to reveal my ignorance.
This sense of being torn between worlds was reflected even in my studies: I
chose a double major, psychology and sociology, modified with Native American
studies. I received honors in my freshman seminar as well as in two Native American studies courses that stressed writing. As a result, I found myself thinking of
teaching Native American studies as a career, and perhaps also becoming a writer.
In fact, I loved Dartmouth’s Native American program. It had the tough job
of recruiting students like us, who were very high risk. We frequently had had
only marginal high school preparation; many were reluctant to come to school so
far from home; and like skittish wild horses, some would turn tail and run home
at the least provocation. We found great comfort in one another, for although we
came from many different tribes, our experiences at Dartmouth were similar: We
all felt disconnected from the mainstream student body. For the women, it was
even worse. At the time I arrived on the scene, Dartmouth had only recently
changed from an all-male to a coed student body, and many of the men resented
the presence of women on campus. Referred to as cohogs instead of coeds, women
were shunned for dates; instead girls were bused in from nearby women’s colleges
on weekends. Social life was dominated by the fraternities, and, if we went to their
parties at all, we were often ignored.
For all these reasons, the few Native American students at Dartmouth
coalesced into a solid community who did almost everything together. Our group
was made up of Paiutes, Sioux, Cherokees, Chippewas, Navajos, Pueblos, and
many other tribes. We were friends, lovers, rivals, enemies. I have been a part of
many other groups since then, but nothing compared in intensity to the experience of being a member of that Native American student group.
Though we often felt as though we didn’t belong at Dartmouth, the ironic
truth is that we did belong, or rather, we were entitled to be there. Eleazar
Wheelock, the Connecticut minister who founded Dartmouth College in 1769,
did so with funds that came from King George II, who wished to establish a place
to “educate the savages.” The college flourished, but for literally hundreds of years
its original founding purpose was not honored. “Educating savages” was not on
the real agenda; it had simply been a way to get land and money. Before the 1960s
fewer than twenty Native students graduated from Dartmouth. Then in the 1970s
the Native American studies program was developed by college president John
Kemeny and writer Michael Dorris, and Dartmouth began to take its mission in
earnest.
We Indian students all knew why we were there. Without the vision of Kemeny
and Dorris, we would never have had an opportunity to set foot on the grounds
of such an institution, let alone actually enroll. We were there because of the generous scholarships the college had given us, and the money from our tribes.
Some years later, reflecting back on my college experiences, I realized something else. The outside, non-Indian world is tribeless, full of wandering singular

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 321

20

6/18/12 3:11 PM

322

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

souls, seeking connection through societies, clubs, and other groups. White
people know what it is to be a family, but to be a tribe is something of an altogether different sort. It provides a feeling of inclusion in something larger, of
having a set place in the universe where one always belongs. It provides connectedness and a blueprint for how to live.
At Dartmouth the fraternities and sororities seemed to be attempts to claim
or create tribes. Their wild and crazy parties that often involved drugs and sex
seemed to me to be unconscious re-creations of rituals and initiation ceremonies.
But the fraternities emphasized exclusion as much as inclusion, and their rituals
involved alcohol and hazing initiations. Although they developed from a natural
urge for community, they lacked much that a real tribe has.
I began to honor and cherish my tribal membership, and in the years that
followed I came to understand that such membership is central to mental health,
to spiritual health, to physical health. A tribe is a community of people connected
by blood or heart, by geography and tradition, who help one another and share a
belief system. Community and tribe not only reduce the alienation people feel
but in doing so stave off illness. In a sense they are a form of preventive medicine.
Most Americans have lost their tribal identities, although at one time, most likely,
everyone belonged to a tribe. One way to remedy this is to find and establish
groups of people who can nurture and support one another. The Native American students at Dartmouth had become such a group.
Our new “tribe” had its ceremonies. Each year, in a primitive outdoor amphitheater called the Bema where concerts and plays were sometimes put on, we held
a campus powwow. Feathered fancy dancers and women in “jingle dresses” or in
beaded and brightly colored fabric would spin and step to the drums of Plains
Indians or to songs from an invited singer from a pueblo. The women would
whirl, their shawls swirling and twisting into corkscrew shapes around them.
They’d dance to two big hide-stretched drums, encircled by the men, who struck
the drums rhythmically and sang. Their voices wove and resonated, rose and fell
above the steady heartbeat of the drums. This ceremony was a chance for the
Native and non-Native communities to come together as one. I felt then, briefly,
that I belonged.
In the evening after the powwow the singing and drumming would continue
at a party called a “49” — but here the ancient rhythms were mixed with modern
English lyrics. The songs we sang could be romantic, funny, or political; they
could be about reservation life and pickup trucks or the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
They always sounded the same though, with a blend of voices rising around a
drumbeat, and a melody that pulled out our memories of childhood songs.
Dartmouth was good for me. Singing with the other students melted some of
my historical grief and anger into a larger powerful force, a force I would take
with me into the world. I gained a new kind of family and tribe, with new songs
that held us together. Once again, songs had the power to heal.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 322

25

6/18/12 3:11 PM

PUTnAM • HEALTH AnD HAPPInESS

323

Exploring the Text
1. What different views of community did Lori Arviso Alvord experience as she
moved from her home in New Mexico to college at Dartmouth?
2. What is Alvord’s primary method of organization in this essay?
3. What is the effect of including the Mountain Chant?
4. What impact does the physical landscape in Hanover have on Alvord? Why does
she describe the landscape of both Hanover and New Mexico in such detail?
5. Which details of life on the reservation does Alvord recall in paragraph 15? Cite
specific ones, and explain their importance. Why is the kinaałdá ceremony especially significant?
6. Describe Alvord’s tone in the two paragraphs on the history of Dartmouth and
its Native American studies program (paras. 21–22). Cite specific language and
examples to support your response.
7. What is the distinction Alvord makes between a family and a tribe? To what extent
do you agree with her?
8. Ultimately, what is Alvord’s attitude toward Dartmouth? Cite specific paragraphs
to support your response.
9. What does Alvord mean in the concluding paragraph by “my historical grief and
anger”?

Health and Happiness
Robert D. Putnam
robert D. Putnam (b. 1941) is the Peter and Isabel Malkin Professor of Public Policy at Harvard University, former dean of the John F. Kennedy School of Government, and founder of the Saguaro Seminar, a program dedicated to fostering civic
engagement in America. He received his undergraduate degree from Swarthmore
College, won a Fulbright Fellowship to Balliol College at oxford University, and
received both his MA and PhD from yale University. He was the 2006 recipient of
the Skytte Prize, the most prestigious international award for scholarly achievement
in political science. Among the ten books Putnam has authored or co-authored,
three are considered his most influential: Bowling​Alone:​The​Collapse​and​Revival​
of​American​Community (1995), Better​Together:​Restoring​the​American​Community (2003), and American​Grace (2010), a study of religion and public life. Bowling​Alone argues that civic, social, associational, and political connections — what
is called “social capital” — have decreased dramatically during the latter half of
the twentieth century. Following is a chapter analyzing the impact of social connectedness on physical and psychological health. Based on extensive research,
this enormously popular book introduced a wide audience to Putnam’s groundbreaking ideas.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 323

6/18/12 3:11 PM

324

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

O

f all the domains in which I have traced the consequences of social capital, in none is the importance of social connectedness so well established as in the case of health and well-being. Scientific studies of the effects of
social cohesion on physical and mental health can be traced to the seminal work
of the nineteenth-century sociologist Émile Durkheim, Suicide. Self-destruction
is not merely a personal tragedy, he found, but a sociologically predictable consequence of the degree to which one is integrated into society — rarer among married people, rarer in more tightly knit religious communities, rarer in times of
national unity, and more frequent when rapid social change disrupts the social
fabric. Social connectedness matters to our lives in the most profound way.
In recent decades public health researchers have extended this initial insight
to virtually all aspects of health, physical as well as psychological. Dozens of
painstaking studies from Alameda (California) to Tecumseh (Michigan) have
established beyond reasonable doubt that social connectedness is one of the most
powerful determinants of our well-being. The more integrated we are with our
community, the less likely we are to experience colds, heart attacks, strokes, cancer, depression, and premature death of all sorts. Such protective effects have
been confirmed for close family ties, for friendship networks, for participation in
social events, and even for simple affiliation with religious and other civic associations. In other words, both machers* and schmoozers enjoy these remarkable
health benefits.
After reviewing dozens of scientific studies, sociologist James House and his
colleagues have concluded that the positive contributions to health made by social
integration and social support rival in strength the detrimental contributions of
well-established biomedical risk factors like cigarette smoking, obesity, elevated
blood pressure, and physical inactivity. Statistically speaking, the evidence for the
health consequences of social connectedness is as strong today as was the evidence for the health consequences of smoking at the time of the first surgeon
general’s report on smoking. If the trends in social disconnection are as pervasive
as I argued in section II, then “bowling alone” represents one of the nation’s most
serious public health challenges.1
Although researchers aren’t entirely sure why social cohesion matters for
health, they have a number of plausible theories. First, social networks furnish
tangible assistance, such as money, convalescent care, and transportation, which
reduces psychic and physical stress and provides a safety net. If you go to church
regularly, and then you slip in the bathtub and miss a Sunday, someone is more
likely to notice. Social networks also may reinforce healthy norms — socially isolated people are more likely to smoke, drink, overeat, and engage in other healthdamaging behaviors. And socially cohesive communities are best able to organize
politically to ensure first-rate medical services.2
Finally, and most intriguingly, social capital might actually serve as a physiological triggering mechanism, stimulating people’s immune systems to fight dis-

5

*Yiddish: ambitious person, big shot, schemer. — Eds.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 324

6/18/12 3:11 PM

PUTnAM • HEALTH AnD HAPPInESS

325

ease and buffer stress. Research now under way suggests that social isolation has
measurable biochemical effects on the body. Animals who have been isolated
develop more extensive atherosclerosis (hardening of the arteries) than less isolated animals, and among both animals and humans loneliness appears to
decrease the immune response and increase blood pressure. Lisa Berkman, one
of the leading researchers in the field, has speculated that social isolation is
“a chronically stressful condition to which the organism respond[s] by aging
faster.”3
Some studies have documented the strong correlation between connectedness and health at the community level. Others have zeroed in on individuals,
both in natural settings and in experimental conditions. These studies are for the
most part careful to account for confounding factors — the panoply of other
physiological, economic, institutional, behavioral, and demographic forces that
might also affect an individual’s health. In many cases these studies are longitudinal: they check on people over many years to get a better understanding of what
lifestyle changes might have caused people’s health to improve or decline. Thus
researchers have been able to show that social isolation precedes illness to rule out
the possibility that the isolation was caused by illness. Over the last twenty years
more than a dozen large studies of this sort in the United States, Scandinavia, and
Japan have shown that people who are socially disconnected are between two and
five times more likely to die from all causes, compared with matched individuals who
have close ties with family, friends, and the community.4
A recent study by researchers at the Harvard School of Public Health provides an excellent overview of the link between social capital and physical health
across the United States.5 Using survey data from nearly 170,000 individuals in all
fifty states, these researchers found, as expected, that people who are African
American, lack health insurance, are overweight, smoke, have a low income,
or lack a college education are at greater risk for illness than are more socioeconomically advantaged individuals. But these researchers also found an astonishingly strong relationship between poor health and low social capital. States
whose residents were most likely to report fair or poor health were the same states
in which residents were most likely to distrust others.6 Moving from a state with
a wealth of social capital to a state with very little social capital (low trust, low
voluntary group membership) increased one’s chances of poor to middling health
by roughly 40–70 percent. When the researchers accounted for individual residents’ risk factors, the relationship between social capital and individual health
remained. Indeed, the researchers concluded that if one wanted to improve one’s
health, moving to a high-social-capital state would do almost as much good as
quitting smoking. These authors’ conclusion is complemented by our own analysis. We found a strong positive relationship between a comprehensive index of
public health and the Social Capital Index, along with a strong negative correlation between the Social Capital Index and all-cause mortality rates.7 (See table 1
for the measure of public health and health care and figure 1 for the correlations
of public health and mortality with social capital.)

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 325

6/18/12 3:11 PM

326

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

TablE 1: Which STaTE haS ThE bEST hEalTh anD hEalTh caRE?
MoRgan-QuiTno hEalThiEST STaTE RankingS (1993–1998):

1. Births of low birth weight as a percent of
all births (–)
2. Births to teenage mothers as a percent of
live births (–)
3. Percent of mothers receiving late or no
prenatal care (–)
4. Death rate (–)
5. Infant mortality rate (–)
6. Estimated age adjusted death rate by
cancer (–)
7. Death rate by suicide (–)
8. Percent of population not covered by
health insurance (–)
9. Change in percent of population
uninsured (–)
10. Health care expenditures as a percent of
gross state product (–)
11. Per capita personal health
expenditures (–)

12. Estimate rate of new cancer cases (–)
13. AIDS rate (–)
14. Sexually transmitted disease rate (–)
15. Percent of population lacking access to
primary care (–)
16. Percent of adults who are binge
drinkers (–)
17. Percent of adults who smoke (–)
18. Percent of adults overweight (–)
19. Days in past month when physical
health was “not good” (–)
20. Community hospitals per 1,000 square
miles (+)
21. Beds in community hospitals per
100,000 population (+)
22. Percent of children aged 19–35 months
fully immunized (+)
23. Safety belt usage rate (+)

The state-level findings are suggestive, but far more definitive evidence of the
benefits of community cohesion is provided by a wealth of studies that examine
individual health as a function of individual social-capital resources. Nowhere is
the connection better illustrated than in Roseto, Pennsylvania.8 This small Italian
American community has been the subject of nearly forty years of in-depth study,
beginning in the 1950s when medical researchers noticed a happy but puzzling
phenomenon. Compared with residents of neighboring towns, Rosetans just
didn’t die of heart attacks. Their (age-adjusted) heart attack rate was less than
half that of their neighbors; over a seven-year period not a single Roseto resident
under forty-seven had died of a heart attack. The researchers looked for the usual
explanations: diet, exercise, weight, smoking, genetic predisposition, and so forth.
But none of these explanations held the answer — indeed, Rosetans were actually
more likely to have some of these risk factors than were people in neighboring
towns. The researchers then began to explore Roseto’s social dynamics. The town
had been founded in the nineteenth century by people from the same southern
Italian village. Through local leadership these immigrants had created a mutual
aid society, churches, sports clubs, a labor union, a newspaper, Scout troops, and
a park and athletic field. The residents had also developed a tight-knit community where conspicuous displays of wealth were scorned and family values and
good behaviors reinforced. Rosetans learned to draw on one another for financial,

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 326

6/18/12 3:11 PM

High

Public health is better in high-social-capital states
H1HEAD
UT
CT

WA

Healthy State Index (1993–98)

CO

NJ

SD
ND

WI
ME OR

RI

NM
NC

WY

MA

CA

NE
IA
MT

KS

VA
MD

MN
VT

NH

ID

327

IL

NY
OH

TX

GA

AZ

OK MI
PA IN
SC
KY
NV

MS

DE

TN
WV

AL

Low

MO

FL

LA

AR

Low

High

Social Capital Index

High

Mortality is lower in high-social-capital states
LA
MS
AL
GA

Healthy State Index (1993–98)

NV

SC
WV
TN KY
AR
NC

MD

DE

NY IL OK
VA OH MI
IN
PA
MO
TX NJ

ME

CA

FL

NM

VT

ORWYNH

RI
AZ

MA

WI
KS

ID

CT CO

MT

WA

NE
IA

Low

MN

ND
SD

UT

Low

Social Capital Index

High

FiguRE 1: Health Is Better in High-Social-Capital States

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 327

6/18/12 3:11 PM

328

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

emotional, and other forms of support. By day they congregated on front porches
to watch the comings and goings, and by night they gravitated to local social
clubs. In the 1960s the researchers began to suspect that social capital (though
they didn’t use the term) was the key to Rosetans’ healthy hearts. And the researchers worried that as socially mobile young people began to reject the tight-knit
Italian folkways, the heart attack rate would begin to rise. Sure enough, by the
1980s Roseto’s new generation of adults had a heart attack rate above that of their
neighbors in a nearby and demographically similar town.
The Roseto story is a particularly vivid and compelling one, but numerous
other studies have supported the medical researchers’ intuition that social cohesion matters, not just in preventing premature death, but also in preventing disease and speeding recovery. For example, a long-term study in California found
that people with the fewest social ties have the highest risk of dying from heart
disease, circulatory problems, and cancer (in women), even after accounting for
individual health status, socioeconomic factors, and use of preventive health
care.9 Other studies have linked lower death rates with membership in voluntary
groups and engagement in cultural activities;10 church attendance;11 phone calls
and visits with friends and relatives;12 and general sociability such as holding parties at home, attending union meetings, visiting friends, participating in organized sports, or being members of highly cohesive military units.13 The connection
with social capital persisted even when the studies examined other factors that
might influence mortality, such as social class, race, gender, smoking and drinking, obesity, lack of exercise, and (significantly) health problems. In other words,
it is not simply that healthy, health-conscious, privileged people (who might happen also to be more socially engaged) tend to live longer. The broad range of illnesses shown to be affected by social support and the fact that the link is even
tighter with death than with sickness tend to suggest that the effect operates at a
quite fundamental level of general bodily resistance. What these studies tell us
is that social engagement actually has an independent influence on how long
we live.
Social networks help you stay healthy. The finding by a team of researchers at
Carnegie Mellon University that people with more diverse social ties get fewer
colds is by no means unique.14 For example, stroke victims who had strong support networks functioned better after the stroke, and recovered more physical
capacities, than did stroke victims with thin social networks.15 Older people who
are involved with clubs, volunteer work, and local politics consider themselves to
be in better general health than do uninvolved people, even after accounting for
socioeconomic status, demographics, level of medical care use, and years in
retirement.16
The bottom line from this multitude of studies: As a rough rule of thumb, if
you belong to no groups but decide to join one, you cut your risk of dying over
the next year in half. If you smoke and belong to no groups, it’s a toss-up statistically whether you should stop smoking or start joining. These findings are in

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 328

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

PUTnAM • HEALTH AnD HAPPInESS

329

some ways heartening: it’s easier to join a group than to lose weight, exercise
regularly, or quit smoking.
But the findings are sobering, too. As we saw in section II, there has been a
general decline in social participation over the past twenty-five years. Figure 2
shows that this same period witnessed a significant decline in self-reported health,
despite tremendous gains in medical diagnosis and treatment. Of course, by
many objective measures, including life expectancy, Americans are healthier than
ever before, but these self-reports indicate that we are feeling worse.17 These selfreports are in turn closely linked to social connectedness, in the sense that it is
precisely less connected Americans who are feeling worse. These facts alone do
not prove that we are suffering physically from our growing disconnectedness,
but taken in conjunction with the more systematic evidence of the health effects
of social capital, this evidence is another link in the argument that the erosion of
social capital has measurable ill effects.
We observed in chapter 14 the remarkable coincidence that during the same
years that social connectedness has been declining, depression and even suicide
have been increasing. We also noted that this coincidence has deep generational
roots, in the sense that the generations most disconnected socially also suffer

90%

Agree “I Am in Good Physical Condition”

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

FiguRE 2: Americans Don’t Feel As Healthy As We Used To

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 329

6/18/12 3:11 PM

330

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

most from what some public health experts call “Agent Blue.” In any given year
10 percent of Americans now suffer from major depression, and depression imposes
the fourth largest total burden of any disease on Americans overall. Much research
has shown that social connections inhibit depression. Low levels of social support
directly predict depression, even controlling for other risk factors, and high levels
of social support lessen the severity of symptoms and speed recovery. Social support buffers us from the stresses of daily life. Face-to-face ties seem to be more
therapeutic than ties that are geographically distant. In short, even within the
single domain of depression, we pay a very high price for our slackening social
connectedness.18
Countless studies document the link between society and psyche: people
who have close friends and confidants, friendly neighbors, and supportive coworkers are less likely to experience sadness, loneliness, low self-esteem, and
problems with eating and sleeping. Married people are consistently happier than
people who are unattached, all else being equal. These findings will hardly surprise most Americans, for in study after study people themselves report that good
relationships with family members, friends, or romantic partners — far more
than money or fame — are prerequisites for their happiness.19 The single most
common finding from a half century’s research on the correlates of life satisfaction, not only in the United States but around the world, is that happiness is best
predicted by the breadth and depth of one’s social connections.20
We can see how social capital ranks as a producer of warm, fuzzy feelings by
examining a number of questions from the DDB Needham Life Style survey
archives:

15

“I wish I could leave my present life and do something entirely different.”
“I am very satisfied with the way things are going in my life these days.”
“If I had my life to live over, I would sure do things differently.”
“I am much happier now than I ever was before.”

Responses to these items are strongly intercorrelated, so I combined them
into a single index of happiness with life. Happiness in this sense is correlated
with material well-being. Generally speaking, as one rises up the income hierarchy, life contentment increases. So money can buy happiness after all. But not as
much as marriage. Controlling for education, age, gender, marital status, income,
and civic engagement, the marginal “effect” of marriage on life contentment is
equivalent to moving roughly seventy percentiles up the income hierarchy —
say, from the fifteenth percentile to the eighty-fifty percentile.21 In round numbers, getting married is the “happiness equivalent” of quadrupling your annual
income.22
What about education and contentment? Education has important indirect
links to happiness through increased earning power, but controlling for income
(as well as age, gender, and the rest), what is the marginal correlation of education
itself with life satisfaction? In round numbers the answer is that four additional

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 330

6/18/12 3:11 PM

Putnam • HealtH and HaPPiness

331

years of education — attending college, for example — is the “happiness equivalent” of roughly doubling your annual income.
Having assessed in rough-and-ready terms the correlations of financial
capital (income), human capital (education), and one form of social capital
(marriage) with life contentment, we can now ask equivalent questions about
the correlations between happiness and various forms of social interaction. Let
us ask about regular club members (those who attend monthly), regular volunteers (those who do so monthly), people who entertain regularly at home (say,
monthly), and regular (say, biweekly) churchgoers. The differences are astonishingly large. Regular club attendance, volunteering, entertaining, or church attendance is the happiness equivalent of getting a college degree or more than
doubling your income. Civic connections rival marriage and affluence as predictors of life happiness.23
If monthly club meetings are good, are daily club meetings thirty times better? The answer is no. Figure 3 shows what economists might call the “declining
marginal productivity” of social interaction with respect to happiness. The biggest happiness returns to volunteering, clubgoing, and entertaining at home
appear to come between “never” and “once a month.” There is very little gain in
happiness after about one club meeting (or party or volunteer effort) every three
weeks. After fortnightly encounters, the marginal correlation of additional social
interaction with happiness is actually negative — another finding that is consistent with common experience! Churchgoing, on the other hand, is somewhat
different, in that at least up through weekly attendance, the more the merrier.
This analysis is, of course, phrased intentionally in round numbers, for the
underlying calculations are rough and ready. Moreover the direction of causation

20

Volunteered

Index of Happiness with Life

Attended
Club
Meetings
Entertained
at Home
Attended
Church

National Average Happiness

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Times per Year
Figure 3: social Connectedness (at least in moderation) Fosters Happiness

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 331

6/18/12 5:12 PM

332

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

remains ambiguous. Perhaps happy people are more likely than unhappy people
to get married, win raises at work, continue in school, attend church, join clubs,
host parties, and so on. My present purpose is merely to illustrate that social connections have profound links with psychological well-being. The Beatles got it
right: we all “get by with a little help from our friends.”
In the decades since the Fab Four topped the charts, life satisfaction among
adult Americans has declined steadily. Roughly half the decline in contentment is
associated with financial worries, and half is associated with declines in social
capital: lower marriage rates and decreasing connectedness to friends and community. Not all segments of the population are equally gloomy. Survey data show
that the slump has been greatest among young and middle-aged adults (twenty to
fifty-five). People over fifty-five — our familiar friends from the long civic generation — are actually happier than were people their age a generation ago.24
Some of the generational discrepancy is due to money worries: despite rising
prosperity, young and middle-aged people feel less secure financially. But some of
the disparity is also due to social connectedness. Young and middle-aged adults
today are simply less likely to have friends over, attend church, or go to club meetings than were earlier generations. Psychologist Martin Seligman argues that
more of us are feeling down because modern society encourages a belief in personal control and autonomy more than a commitment to duty and common
enterprise. This transformation heightens our expectations about what we can
achieve through choice and grit and leaves us unprepared to deal with life’s inevitable failures. Where once we could fall back on social capital — families,
churches, friends — these no longer are strong enough to cushion our fall.25 In
our personal lives as well as in our collective life, the evidence of this chapter suggests, we are paying a significant price for a quarter century’s disengagement
from one another.

notes
1. For comprehensive overviews of the massive literature on health and social connectedness, see James S. House, Karl R. Landis, and Debra Umberson, “Social Relationships and Health,” Science 241 (1988): 540–545; Lisa F. Berkman, “The Role of Social
Relations in Health Promotion,” Psychosomatic Medicine 57 (1995): 245–254; and
Teresa E. Seeman, “Social Ties and Health: The Benefits of Social Integration,” Annual
of Epidemiology 6 (1996): 442–451. Other useful recent overviews include Benjamin
C. Amick III, Sol Levine, Alvin R. Tarlov, and Diana Chapman Walsh, eds., Society and
Health (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995), esp. Donald L. Patrick and Thomas
M. Wickizer, “Community and Health,” 46–92; Richard G. Wilkinson, Unhealthy Societies: From Inequality to Well-Being (New York: Routledge, 1996); Linda K. George,
“Social Factors and Illness,” in Handbook of Aging and the Social Sciences, 4th ed.,
Robert H. Binstock and Linda K. George, eds. (New York: Academic Press, 1996),
229–252; Frank W. Young and Nina Glasgow, “Voluntary Social Participation and

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 332

6/18/12 3:11 PM

PUTnAM • HEALTH AnD HAPPInESS

333

Health,” Research on Aging 20 (1998): 339–362; Sherman A. James, Amy J. Schulz, and
Juliana van Olphen, “Social Capital, Poverty, and Community Health: An Exploration
of Linkages,” in Using Social Capital, Saegert, Thompson, and Warren, eds.
2. B. H. Kaplan, J. C. Cassel, and S. Gore, “Social Support and Health,” Medical Care
(supp.) 15, no. 5 (1977): 47–58; L. F. Berkman, “The Relationship of Social Networks
and Social Support to Morbidity and Mortality,” in S. Cohen and S. L. Syme, eds.,
Social Support and Health (Orlando, Fla.: Academic Press, 1985), 241–262; J. S. House,
D. Umberson, and K. R. Landis, “Structures and Processes of Social Support,” Annual
Review of Sociology 14 (1988): 293–318; Ichiro Kawachi, Bruce P. Kennedy, and
Roberta Glass, “Social Capital and Self-Rated Health: A Contextual Analysis,” American Journal of Public Health 89 (1999): 1187–1193.
3. Lisa Berkman, “The Changing and Heterogeneous Nature of Aging and Longevity: A
Social and Biomedical Perspective,” Annual Review of Gerontology and Geriatrics 8
(1988): 37–68; Lisa Berkman and Thomas Glass, “Social Integration, Social Networks,
Social Support, and Health,” in Social Epidemiology, Lisa F. Berkman and Ichiro
Kawachi, eds. (New York, Oxford University Press, 2000), 137–174; T. E. Seeman,
L. F. Berkman, and D. Blazer, et al., “Social Ties and Support and Neuroendocrine
Function: The MacArthur Studies of Successful Aging,” Annals of Behavioral Medicine
16 (1994): 95–106; Sheldon Cohen, “Health Psychology: Psychological Factors and
Physical Disease from the Perspective of Human Psychoneuroimmunology,” Annual
Review of Psychology 47 (1996): 113–142.
4. Berkman and Glass, “Social Integration, Social Networks, Social Support, and Health.”
5. Kawachi et al., “Social Capital and Self-Rated Health.”
6. The Pearson’s r coefficient between the fraction reporting they were in fair or poor
health and the (demographically weighted) state mistrust ranking (low, medium, high)
was 0.71; the r coefficient between fraction of population in fair/poor health and the
(demographically weighted) state “helpfulness” ranking (low, medium, high) was -0.66.
7. The Pearson’s r coefficient between the Social Capital Index and the Morgan-Quitno
health index (1991–98) across the fifty states equals 0.78, which is strong by conventional social science standards; the comparable correlation between the Social Capital
Index and the age-adjusted all-cause mortality rate is -.81. Thanks to Ichiro Kawachi
for providing this measure of death rates.
8. Thanks to Kimberly Lochner for bringing the history of Roseto to my attention and
for introducing me to the literature on the health effects of social connectedness. The
key studies of Roseto are J. G. Bruhn and S. Wolf, The Roseto Story: An Anatomy of
Health (Norman, Okla.: University of Oklahoma Press, 1979); S. Wolf and J. G. Bruhn,
The Power of Clan: The Influence of Human Relationships on Heart Disease (New
Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Publishers, 1993); B. Egolf, J. Lasker, S. Wolf, and L.
Potvin, “The Roseto Effect: A Fifty-Year Comparison of Mortality Rates,” American
Journal of Epidemiology 125, no. 6 (1992): 1089–1092.
9. L. F. Berkman and S. L. Syme, “Social Networks, Host Resistance and Mortality: A
Nine Year Follow-up of Alameda County Residents,” American Journal of Epidemiology 109 (1979): 186–204.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 333

6/18/12 3:11 PM

334

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

10. J. House, C. Robbins, and H. Metzner, “The Association of Social Relationships and
Activities with Mortality: Prospective Evidence from the Tecumseh Community
Health Study,” American Journal of Epidemiology 116, no. 1 (1982): 123–140. This
finding held for men only.
11. House, Robbins, and Metzner (1982); this finding held for women only. T. E. Seeman,
G. A. Kaplan, L. Knudsen, R. Cohen, and J. Guralnik, “Social Network Ties and Mortality among the Elderly in the Alameda County Study,” American Journal of Epidemiology 126, no. 4 (1987): 714–723; this study found that social isolation predicted
mortality only in people over sixty.
12. D. Blazer, “Social Support and Mortality in an Elderly Community Population,”
American Journal of Epidemiology 115, no. 5 (1982): 684–694; K. Orth-Gomer and
J. V. Johnson, “Social Network Interaction and Mortality,” Journal of Chronic Diseases
40, no. 10 (1987): 949–957.
13. L. Welin, G. Tibblin, K. Svardsudd, B. Tibblin, S. Ander-Peciva, B. Larsson, and
L. Wilhelmsen, “Prospective Study of Social Influences on Mortality,” The Lancet,
April 20, 1985, 915–918; Frederick J. Manning and Terrence D. Fullerton, “Health and
Well-Being in Highly Cohesive Units of the U.S. Army,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology 18 (1988): 503–519.
14. Sheldon Cohen et al., “Social Ties and Susceptibility to the Common Cold,” Journal of
the American Medical Association 277 (June 25, 1997): 1940–1944.
15. A. Colantonio, S. V. Kasl, A. M. Ostfeld, and L. Berkman, “Psychosocial Predictors of
Stroke Outcomes in an Elderly Population,” Journal of Gerontology 48, no. 5 (1993):
S261–S268.
16. Young and Glasgow, “Voluntary Social Participation and Health.”
17. Angus Deaton and C. H. Paxson, “Aging and Inequality in Income and Health,” American Economic Review 88 (1998): 252, report “there has been no improvement, and
possibly some deterioration, in health status across cohorts born after 1945, and there
were larger improvements across those born before 1945.”
18. R. C. Kessler et al., “Lifetime and 12-Month Prevalence of DSM-III-R Psychiatric
Disorders in the United States,” Archives of General Psychiatry 51 (1994): 8–19; C. J.
Murray and A. D. Lopez, “Evidence-Based Health Policy — Lessons from the Global
Burden of Disease Study,” Science 274 (1996): 740–743; L. I. Pearlin et al., “The Stress
Process”; G. A. Kaplan et al., “Psychosocial Predictors of Depression”; A. G. Billings
and R. H. Moos, “Life Stressors and Social Resources Affect Posttreatment Outcomes
among Depressed Patients,” Journal of Abnormal Psychiatry 94 (1985): 140–153; C. D.
Sherbourne, R. D. Hays, and K. B. Wells, “Personal and Psychosocial Risk Factors for
Physical and Mental Health Outcomes and Course of Depression among Depressed
Patients,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 63 (1995): 345–355; T. E. Seeman
and L. F. Berkman, “Structural Characteristics of Social Networks and Their Relationship with Social Support in the Elderly: Who Provides Support,” Social Science and
Medicine 26 (1988): 737–749. I am indebted to Julie Donahue for her fine work on
this topic.
19. L. I. Pearlin, M. A. Lieberman, E. G. Menaghan, and J. T. Mullan, “The Stress Process,”
Journal of Health and Social Behavior 22, no. 4 (1981): 337–356; A. Billings and R. Moos,

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 334

6/18/12 3:11 PM

PUTnAM • HEALTH AnD HAPPInESS

335

“Social Support and Functioning among Community and Clinical Groups: A Panel
Model,” Journal of Behavioral Medicine 5, no. 3 (1982): 295–311; G. A. Kaplan,
R. E. Roberts, T. C. Camacho, and J. C. Coyne, “Psychosocial Predictors of Depression,” American Journal of Epidemiology 125, no. 2 (1987), 206–220; P. Cohen, E. L.
Struening, G. L. Muhlin, L. E. Genevie, S. R. Kaplan, and H. B. Peck, “Community
Stressors, Mediating Conditions and Well-being in Urban Neighborhoods,” Journal of
Community Psychology 10 (1982): 377–391; David G. Myers, “Close Relationships and
Quality of Life,” in D. Kahneman, E. Diener, and N. Schwartz, eds., Well-being: The
Foundation of Hedonic Psychology (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1999).
20. Michael Argyle, The Psychology of Happiness (London: Methuen, 1987); Ed Diener,
“Subjective Well-being,” Psychological Bulletin 95 (1984): 542–575; Ed Deiner, “Assessing Subjective Well-being,” Social Indicators Research, 31 (1994): 103–175; David G.
Myers and Ed Deiner, “Who Is Happy?” Psychological Science 6 (1995): 10–19; Ruut
Veenhoven, “Developments in Satisfaction-Research,” Social Indicators Research, 37
(1996): 1–46; and works cited there.
21. In these data and in most studies the effect of marriage on life happiness is essentially
identical among men and women, contrary to some reports that marriage has a more
positive effect on happiness among men.
22. Income in successive Life Style surveys is measured in terms of income brackets,
defined in dollars of annual income. To enhance comparability over time, we have
translated each of these brackets in each annual survey into its mean percentile ranking in that year’s income distribution. The effect of income measured in percentiles
on contentment is not linear, but that is offset by the fact that the translation of
income in dollars to income percentiles is also not linear. Thus the “happiness equivalent” of any particular change in income is accurate in its order of magnitude, but
not in detail.
23. The results here are based on multiple regression analyses on the DDB Needham Life
Style sample, including age, gender, education, income, marital status, as well as our
various measures of civic engagement. The results are essentially identical for men
and women, except that the effects of education and of social connections on happiness are slightly greater among women. Income, education, and social connections all
have a greater effect among single people than among married people. For example,
the effects of club meetings on the happiness of single people is twice as great as on
the happiness of married people. In other words, absent marriage, itself a powerful
booster of life contentment, other factors become more important. Conversely, even
among the poor, uneducated, and socially isolated, marriage provides a fundamental
buffer for contentment.
24. Author’s analysis of DDB Needham Life Style and Harris poll data.
25. Martin E. P. Seligman, “Boomer Blues,” Psychology Today, October 1988, 50–55.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 335

6/18/12 3:11 PM

336

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

Exploring the Text
1. Robert D. Putnam opens with consideration of suicide. Why does he use suicide,
perhaps the most profound expression of isolation, as a way to introduce an analysis of social connectedness?
2. What is the purpose of Note 1 from the perspective of both the audience and the
author?
3. What theories does Putnam review to explain the positive effects of social connectedness and the negative effects of its absence?
4. What evidence do the Notes present to support Putnam’s claim that Lisa Berkman is “one of the leading researchers in the field” (para. 5)?
5. What evidence does Putnam provide in his discussion of the “astonishingly
strong relationship between poor health and low social capital” (para. 7)?
6. Putnam discusses at length a classic study of the Italian American community in
Roseto, Pennsylvania (para. 8). What have researchers learned from this example?
7. In this chapter, Putnam uses several graphs and charts. Discuss how they function
in presenting his arguments — that is, do they add information that is not in the
written text, do they confirm it, do they expand on it? Consider each individually.
8. What is the causal relationship between marriage and happiness? Between education and happiness? Between money and happiness? Which, according to
Putnam, is strongest? What evidence does he provide?
9. Does Putnam’s allusion to the musical group the Beatles and his quotation from
one of their famous songs (para. 20) strike you as out of place or a welcome
lighter note? Is it effective or ineffective in the context of this essay?
10. Select three sequential paragraphs at random for analysis. Look at the syntax,
diction, and point of view. What rhetorical strategies does Putnam use to make
technical and specialized research accessible to a more general audience?
11. After looking over all of Putnam’s notes for this chapter, classify them into three
or four different purposes. Specifically, how do these notes complement the written and visual text in the chapter without interrupting the flow of the analysis?
12. Discuss why you agree or disagree with the position of psychologist Martin
Seligman, as described by Putnam: “more of us are feeling down because
modern society encourages a belief in personal control and autonomy more
than a commitment to duty and common enterprise” (para. 22).
13. If you were asked to develop a series of suggestions to the area where you live for
a “healthier environment” based on Putnam’s research, what would you recommend?
14. Identify one or two of the ways people establish social connectedness — for
example, by belonging to an organized religion, volunteering, participating in
associations, spending time with friends. What role(s) do you think social media
might play in increasing social capital?

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 336

6/18/12 3:11 PM

MEnGESTU • HoME AT LAST

337

Home at Last
Dinaw Mengestu
Dinaw Mengestu, born in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, in 1978, immigrated to the
United States in 1980. He received a BA from Georgetown University and an MFA
from Columbia University. His first novel, The​Beautiful​Things​That​Heaven​Bears
(2007), was named a New​York​Times notable Book. He published his second
novel, How​to​Read​the​Air, in 2010, the year he was also named one of the New​
Yorker’s “20 under 40” Writers to Watch. Mengestu was the Lannan visiting
Writer at Georgetown University in 2007. After having spent a number of years in
new york, he currently lives with his wife and son in Paris. The following essay was
included in Brooklyn​ Was​ Mine (2008), a collection of essays about living in
Brooklyn, new york.

A

t twenty-one I moved to Brooklyn hoping that it would be the last move
I would ever make — that it would, with the gradual accumulation of
time, memory, and possessions, become that place I instinctively reverted back to
when asked, “So, where are you from?” I was born in Ethiopia like my parents and
their parents before them, but it would be a lie to say I was from Ethiopia, having
left the country when I was only two years old following a military coup and civil
war, losing in the process the language and any direct memory of the family and
culture I had been born into. I simply am Ethiopian, without the necessary “from”
that serves as the final assurance of our identity and origin.
Since leaving Addis Ababa in 1980, I’ve lived in Peoria, Illinois; in a suburb of
Chicago; and then finally, before moving to Brooklyn, in Washington, D.C., the
de facto capital of the Ethiopian immigrant. Others, I know, have moved much
more often and across much greater distances. I’ve only known a few people,
however, that have grown up with the oddly permanent feeling of having lost
and abandoned a home that you never, in fact, really knew, a feeling that has
nothing to do with apartments, houses, or miles, but rather the sense that no
matter how far you travel, or how long you stay still, there is no place that you
can always return to, no place where you fully belong. My parents, for all that they
had given up by leaving Ethiopia, at least had the certainty that they had come
from some place. They knew the country’s language and culture, had met outside of coffee shops along Addis’s main boulevard in the early days of their
relationship, and as a result, regardless of how mangled by violence Ethiopia
later became, it was irrevocably and ultimately theirs. Growing up, one of my
father’s favorite sayings was, “Remember, you are Ethiopian,” even though, of
course, there was nothing for me to remember apart from the bits of nostalgia
and culture my parents had imparted. What remained had less to do with the
idea that I was from Ethiopia and more to do with the fact that I was not from
America.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 337

6/18/12 3:11 PM

338

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

I can’t say when exactly I first became aware of that feeling — that I was
always going to and never from — but surely I must have felt it during those first
years in Peoria, with my parents, sister, and me always sitting on the edge of whatever context we were now supposed to be a part of, whether it was the all-white
Southern Baptist Church we went to every weekend, or the nearly all-white Catholic schools my sister and I attended first in Peoria and then again in Chicago at
my parents’ insistence. By that point my father, haunted by the death of his
brother during the revolution and the ensuing loss of the country he had always
assumed he would live and die in, had taken to long evening walks that he eventually let me accompany him on. Back then he had a habit of sometimes whispering
his brother’s name as he walked (“Shibrew,” he would mutter) or whistling the
tunes of Amharic songs that I had never known. He always walked with both
hands firmly clasped behind his back, as if his grief, transformed into something
real and physical, could be grasped and secured in the palms of his hands. That
was where I first learned what it meant to lose and be alone. The lesson would be
reinforced over the years whenever I caught sight of my mother sitting by herself
on a Sunday afternoon, staring silently out of our living room’s picture window,
recalling, perhaps, her father who had died after she left, or her mother, four sisters, and one brother in Ethiopia — or else recalling nothing at all because there
was no one to visit her, no one to call or see. We had been stripped bare here in
America, our lives confined to small towns and urban suburbs. We had sacrificed
precisely those things that can never be compensated for or repaid — parents,
siblings, culture, a memory to a place that dates back more than half a generation.
It’s easy to see now how even as a family we were isolated from one another — my
parents tied and lost to their past; my sister and I irrevocably assimilated. For
years we were strangers even among ourselves.

Y
By the time I arrived in Brooklyn I had little interest in where I actually landed.
I had just graduated college and had had enough of the fights and arguments
about not being “black” enough, as well as the earlier fights in high school hallways and street corners that were fought for simply being black. Now it was
enough, I wanted to believe, to simply be, to say I was in Brooklyn and Brooklyn
was home. It wasn’t until after I had signed the lease on my apartment that I
even learned the name of the neighborhood I had moved into: Kensington, a
distinctly regal name at a price that I could afford; it was perfect, in other words,
for an eager and poor writer with inflated ambitions and no sense of where he
belonged.
After less than a month of living in Kensington I had covered almost all of the
neighborhood’s streets, deliberately committing their layouts and routines to
memory in a first attempt at assimilation. There was an obvious and deliberate
echo to my walks, a self-conscious reenactment of my father’s routine that I
adopted to stave off some of my own emptiness. It wasn’t just that I didn’t have
any deep personal relationships here, it was that I had chosen this city as the place

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 338

5

6/18/12 3:11 PM

MEnGESTU • HoME AT LAST

339

to redefine, to ground, to secure my place in the world. If I could bind myself to
Kensington physically, if I could memorize and mentally reproduce in accurate
detail the various shades of the houses on a particular block, then I could stake
my own claim to it, and in doing so, no one could tell me who I was or that I
didn’t belong.
On my early-morning walks to the F train I passed in succession a Latin
American restaurant and grocery store, a Chinese fish market, a Halal butcher
shop, followed by a series of Pakistani and Bangladeshi takeout restaurants. This
cluster of restaurants on the corner of Church and McDonald, I later learned,
sold five-dollar plates of lamb and chicken biryani in portions large enough to
hold me over for a day, and in more financially desperate times, two days. Similarly, I learned that the butcher and fish shop delivery trucks arrived on most days
just as I was making my way to the train. If I had time, I found it hard not to stand
and stare at the refrigerated trucks with their calf and sheep carcasses dangling
from hooks, or at the tanks of newly arrived bass and catfish flapping around in
a shallow pool of water just deep enough to keep them alive.
It didn’t take long for me to develop a fierce loyalty to Kensington, to think
of the neighborhood and my place in it as emblematic of a grander immigrant
narrative. In response to that loyalty, I promised to host a “Kensington night” for
the handful of new friends that I eventually made in the city, an evening that
would have been comprised of five-dollar lamb biryani followed by two-dollar
Budweisers at Denny’s, the neighborhood’s only full-fledged bar — a defunct Irish
pub complete with terribly dim lighting and wooden booths. I never hosted a
Kensington night, however, no doubt in part because I had established my own
private relationship to the neighborhood, one that could never be shared with
others in a single evening of cheap South Asian food and beer. I knew the hours
of the call of the muezzin that rang from the mosque a block away from my
apartment. I heard it in my bedroom every morning, afternoon, and evening, and
if I was writing when it called out, I learned that it was better to simply stop and
admire it. My landlord’s father, an old gray-haired Chinese immigrant who spoke
no English, gradually smiled at me as I came and went, just as I learned to say
hello, as politely as possible, in Mandarin every time I saw him. The men behind
the counters of the Bangladeshi takeout places now knew me by sight. A few, on
occasion, slipped an extra dollop of vegetables or rice into my to-go container,
perhaps because they worried that I wasn’t eating enough. One in particular, who
was roughly my age, spoke little English, and smiled wholeheartedly whenever I
came in, gave me presweetened tea and free bread, a gesture that I took to be an
acknowledgment that, at least for him, I had earned my own, albeit marginal,
place here.
And so instead of sitting with friends in a brightly lit fluorescent restaurant
with cafeteria-style service, I found myself night after night quietly walking
around the neighborhood in between sporadic fits of writing. Kensington was no
more beautiful by night than by day, and perhaps this very absence of grandeur
allowed me to feel more at ease wandering its streets at night. The haphazard

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 339

6/18/12 3:11 PM

340

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

gathering of immigrants in Kensington had turned it into a place that even someone like me, haunted and conscious of race and identity at every turn, could slip
and blend into.
Inevitably on my way home I returned to the corner of Church and McDonald with its glut of identical restaurants. On warm nights, I had found it was the
perfect spot to stand and admire not only what Kensington had become with the
most recent wave of migration, but what any close-knit community — whether
its people came here one hundred years ago from Europe or a decade ago from
Africa, Asia, or the Caribbean — has provided throughout Brooklyn’s history: a
second home. There, on that corner, made up of five competing South Asian restaurants of roughly equal quality, dozens of Pakistani and Bangladeshi men gathered one night after another to drink chai out of paper cups. The men stood there
talking for hours, huddled in factions built in part, I imagine, around restaurant
loyalties. Some nights I sat in one of the restaurants and watched from a corner
table with a book in hand as an artificial prop. A few of the men always stared,
curious no doubt as to what I was doing there. Even though I lived in Kensington,
when it came to evening gatherings like this, I was the foreigner and tourist. On
other nights I ordered my own cup of tea and stood a few feet away on the edge
of the sidewalk, near the subway entrance or at the bus stop, and silently stared. I
had seen communal scenes like this before, especially while living in Washington,
D.C., where there always seemed to be a cluster of Ethiopians, my age or older,
gathered together outside coffee shops and bars all over the city, talking in Amharic
with an ease and fluency that I admired and envied. They told jokes that didn’t
require explanation and debated arguments that were decades in the making. All
of this was coupled with the familiarity and comfort of speaking in our native
tongue. At any given moment, they could have told you without hesitancy where
they were from. And so I had watched, hardly understanding a word, hoping
somehow that the simple act of association and observation was enough to draw
me into the fold.
Here, then, was a similar scene, this one played out on a Brooklyn corner with
a culture and history different from the one I had been born into, but familiar to
me nonetheless. The men on that corner in Kensington, just like the people I had
known throughout my life, were immigrants in the most complete sense of the
word — their loyalties still firmly attached to the countries they had left one, five,
or twenty years earlier. If there was one thing I admired most about them, it was
that they had succeeded, at least partly, in re-creating in Brooklyn some of what
they had lost when they left their countries of origin. Unlike the solitary and private
walks my father and I took, each of us buried deep in thoughts that had nowhere
to go, this nightly gathering of Pakistani and Bangladeshi men was a makeshift
reenactment of home. Farther down the road from where they stood were the
few remaining remnants of the neighborhood’s older Jewish community — one
synagogue, a kosher deli — proof, if one was ever needed, that Brooklyn is always
reinventing itself, that there is room here for us all.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 340

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

MEnGESTU • HoME AT LAST

341

While the men stood outside on the corner, their numbers gradually increasing until they spilled out into the street as they talked loudly among themselves, I
once again played my own familiar role of quiet, jealous observer and secret
admirer. I have no idea what those men talked about, if they discussed politics,
sex, or petty complaints about work. It never mattered anyway. The substance of
the conversation belonged to them, and I couldn’t have cared less. What I had
wanted and found in them, what I admired and adored about Kensington, was
the assertion that we can rebuild and remake ourselves and our communities
over and over again, in no small part because there have always been corners in
Brooklyn to do so on. I stood on that corner night after night for the most obvious of reasons — to be reminded of a way of life that persists regardless of context; to feel, however foolishly, that I too was attached to something.

Exploring the Text
1. Dinaw Mengestu opens the essay with a paragraph of commentary before he
provides a more chronological account of his early life. What is the effect on you
as a reader? What do you know about the narrator from this paragraph? How do
you interpret the final sentence?
2. How does the form of the following sentence, taken from paragraph 2, reinforce
its meaning?
I’ve only known a few people, however, that have grown up with the oddly permanent feeling of having lost and abandoned a home that you never, in fact, really
knew, a feeling that has nothing to do with apartments, houses, or miles, but rather
the sense that no matter how far you travel, or how long you stay still, there is no
place that you can always return to, no place where you fully belong.

3. One of the themes that Mengestu develops in this essay is isolation. What are the
different ways that isolation manifests itself in different people and settings in the
communities he describes?
4. What does Mengestu do to make his “first attempt at assimilation” (para. 5)? How
does his new, chosen identity as a “poor writer with inflated ambitions” (para. 4)
contribute to this attempt?
5. What does he mean when he writes that he begins to think of himself as “emblematic of a grander immigrant narrative” (para. 7)?
6. What are the qualities about Kensington, Brooklyn, that appeal to Mengestu and
draw him in? In what ways does he interact with his neighborhood?
7. In what ways has Brooklyn served as “a second home” (para. 9) to different
groups over the years, as explained in this essay?
8. Mengestu describes himself in various ways: for example, “haunted and conscious
of race and identity at every turn” (para. 8), “foreigner and tourist” (para. 9),
“quiet, jealous observer” (para. 11). Who is he by the end of the essay — one of

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 341

6/18/12 3:11 PM

342

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

these, a combination of them, or something else entirely? Consider what he
means by the qualifying phrase “however foolishly” in the final line of the essay.
9. Discuss the role of walking, taking walks, or being a walker in this essay. What
different ways of walking and motivations for it does Mengestu describe? In what
ways does walking take on metaphoric meaning?
10. According to this essay, how does Mengestu define “community”? What does the
concept mean to him? Is it the same as “home”?

Facebook Friendonomics
Scott Brown
Scott Brown (b. 1976) became New​York magazine’s theater critic in the fall of
2010. After graduating from Harvard, he was a senior writer for Entertainment​
Weekly and a columnist for Wired magazine, where the following essay appeared
in 2008. He is the co-author (with Anthony King) of the off-Broadway comedy
Gutenberg!​The​Musical!

H

ey, want to be my friend? It’s more than possible; it’s probable. Hell,
we may already be friends — I haven’t checked my email in a few minutes. And once we are, we will be, as they say, 4-eva. A perusal of my Facebook
Friend roster reveals that I, a medium-social individual of only middling lifetime popularity, have never lost a friend. They’re all there: elementary school
friends, high school friends, college friends, work friends, friends of friends,
friends of ex-girlfriends — the constellation of familiar faces crowds my Friendbox like medals on Mussolini’s chest. I’m Friend-rich — at least onscreen. I’ve
never lost touch with anyone, it seems. What I’ve lost is the right to lose touch.
This says less about my innate lovability, I think, than about the current inflated
state of Friendonomics.
Think of it as the Long Tail of Friendship — in the age of queue-able social
priorities, Twitter-able status updates, and amaranthine cloud memory, keeping
friends requires almost no effort at all. We have achieved Infinite Friendspace,
which means we need never drift from old pals nor feel the poignant tug of passive friend-loss. It also means that even the flimsiest of attachments — the chance
convention buddy, the cube-mate from the ’90s, the bar-napkin hookup — will
be preserved, in perpetuity, under the flattering, flattening banner of “Friend.”
(Sure, you can rank and categorize them to your heart’s content, but who’d be
callous enough to actually categorize a hookup under “Hookup”?)
It has been argued that this Infinite Friendspace is an unalloyed good. But
while this plays nicely into our sentimental ideal of lifelong friendship, it’s having
at least three catastrophic effects. First, it encourages hoarding. We squirrel away
Friends the way our grandparents used to save nickels — obsessively, desperately,

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 342

6/18/12 3:11 PM

BroWn • FACEBooK FrIEnDonoMICS

343

as if we’ll run out of them some day. (Of course, they lived through the Depression. And we lived through — what, exactly? Middle school? 90210? The Electric
Slide?) Humans are natural pack rats, and given the chance we’ll stockpile anything of nominal value. Friends are the currency of the socially networked world;
therefore, it follows that more equals better. But the more Friends you have, the
less they’re worth — and, more to the point, the less human they are. People
become mere collectibles, like Garbage Pail Kids. And call me a buzz kill, but I
don’t want to be anyone’s Potty Scotty.
Second, Friending has subsumed the ol’ Rolodex. Granted, it’s often convenient to have all of your contacts under one roof. But the great thing about the
Rolodex was that it never talked back, it didn’t throw virtual octopi or make you
take movie quizzes, and it never, ever poked you. The Rolodex just sat there. It
was all business.
Third, and most grave, we’ve lost our right to lose touch. “A friend may well
be reckoned the masterpiece of Nature,” Emerson wrote, not bothering to add,
“and like most things natural, friendship is biodegradable.” We scrawl “Friends
Forever” in yearbooks, but we quietly realize, with relief, that some bonds are
meant to be shed, like snakeskin or a Showtime subscription. It’s nature’s way of
allowing you to change, adapt, evolve, or devolve as you wish — and freeing you
from the exhaustion of multifront friend maintenance. Fine, you can “Remove
Friend,” but what kind of monster actually does that? Deletion is scary — and,
we’re told, unnecessary in the Petabyte Age. That’s what made good old-fashioned
losing touch so wonderful — friendships, like long-forgotten photos and mixtapes, would distort and slowly whistle into oblivion, quite naturally, nothing
personal. It was sweet and sad and, though you’d rarely admit it, necessary.
And maybe that’s the answer: A Facebook app we’ll call the Fade Utility.
Untended Friends would gradually display a sepia cast on the picture, a blurring
of the neglected profile — perhaps a coffee stain might appear on it or an unrelated phone number or grocery list. The individual’s status updates might fade
and get smaller. The user may then choose to notice and reach out to the person
in some meaningful way — no pokes! Or they might pretend not to notice. Without making a choice, they could simply let that person go. Would that really be so
awful?
I realize that I may lose a few Friends by saying this. I invite them to remove
me. Though I think they’ll find it harder than they imagine. I’ve never lost a
Friend, you see, and I’m starting to worry I never will.

5

Exploring the Text
1. The title “Facebook Friendonomics” is a play on Freakonomics, the title of a bestselling book by Stephen J. Dubner and Steven D. Levitt that looks at the economics
of everyday phenomena (see p. 342). Knowing this allusion, explain whether you
think this is a good title for Scott Brown’s article.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 343

6/18/12 3:11 PM

344

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

2. What is Brown’s main point? Is he arguing against Facebook and social networks
in general? What are the major points of his argument? Do you find one particularly strong or weak? Explain.
3. Where does Brown address the counterargument? Do you think that he fleshes it
out sufficiently or glosses over it?
4. Brown proposes one solution to the problem he defines: “A Facebook app we’ll call
the Fade Utility” (para. 6). Is he serious? Does his facetious or sarcastic tone undermine his argument?
5. How does Brown use humor to make his point? Analyze two specific examples.
How would you characterize the humor? Is it gentle ribbing, stinging sarcasm, or
bitter irony?
6. Explain why Brown’s use of humor is appropriate to his subject and his audience,
the readers of Wired magazine. Cite specific words and phrases to support your
analysis.
7. Explain why you agree or disagree with the following assertion that Brown makes:
“Friends are the currency of the socially networked world; therefore, it follows that
more equals better. But the more Friends you have, the less they’re worth — and,
more to the point, the less human they are. People become mere collectibles . . .”
(para. 3).

Small Change
Why the Revolution Will Not Be Tweeted

Malcolm Gladwell
Author of four best-selling books, Malcolm Gladwell (b. 1963) grew up in ontario,
Canada, the son of an English university professor father and a Jamaican therapist
mother. He has been a staff writer with the​New​Yorker​magazine since 1996, and
in 2005 he was named one of Time magazine’s 100 Most Influential People. His
books include The​Tipping​Point:​How​Little​Things​Make​a​Big​Difference (2000),
Blink:​The​Power​of​Thinking​without​Thinking (2005), and Outliers:​The​Story​of​
Success (2008). Gladwell’s What​the​Dog​Saw (2009) is a compilation of articles
published in the New​Yorker. His writing often explores the implications of research
in the social sciences and psychology. The following article, which appeared in the
New​ Yorker in 2010, compares the intricate network of activists who brought
about the civil rights movement with the social media networks that have sprung up
on the Internet.

A

t four-thirty in the afternoon on Monday, February 1, 1960, four college
students sat down at the lunch counter at the Woolworth’s in downtown
Greensboro, North Carolina. They were freshmen at North Carolina A. & T., a
black college a mile or so away.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 344

6/18/12 3:11 PM

GLADWELL • SMALL CHAnGE

345

“I’d like a cup of coffee, please,” one of the four, Ezell Blair, said to the waitress.
“We don’t serve Negroes here,” she replied.
The Woolworth’s lunch counter was a long L-shaped bar that could seat
sixty-six people, with a standup snack bar at one end. The seats were for whites.
The snack bar was for blacks. Another employee, a black woman who worked at
the steam table, approached the students and tried to warn them away. “You’re
acting stupid, ignorant!” she said. They didn’t move. Around five-thirty, the front
doors to the store were locked. The four still didn’t move. Finally, they left by a
side door. Outside, a small crowd had gathered, including a photographer from
the Greensboro Record. “I’ll be back tomorrow with A. & T. College,” one of the
students said.
By next morning, the protest had grown to twenty-seven men and four
women, most from the same dormitory as the original four. The men were
dressed in suits and ties. The students had brought their schoolwork, and studied
as they sat at the counter. On Wednesday, students from Greensboro’s “Negro”
secondary school, Dudley High, joined in, and the number of protesters swelled
to eighty. By Thursday, the protesters numbered three hundred, including three
white women, from the Greensboro campus of the University of North Carolina.
By Saturday, the sit-in had reached six hundred. People spilled out onto the street.
White teenagers waved Confederate flags. Someone threw a firecracker. At noon,
the A. & T. football team arrived. “Here comes the wrecking crew,” one of the
white students shouted.
By the following Monday, sit-ins had spread to Winston-Salem, twenty-five
miles away, and Durham, fifty miles away. The day after that, students at Fayetteville State Teachers College and at Johnson C. Smith College, in Charlotte, joined
in, followed on Wednesday by students at St. Augustine’s College and Shaw University, in Raleigh. On Thursday and Friday, the protest crossed state lines, surfacing in Hampton and Portsmouth, Virginia, in Rock Hill, South Carolina, and in
Chattanooga, Tennessee. By the end of the month, there were sit-ins throughout
the South, as far west as Texas. “I asked every student I met what the first day of
the sitdowns had been like on his campus,” the political theorist Michael Walzer
wrote in Dissent. “The answer was always the same: ‘It was like a fever. Everyone
wanted to go.’ ” Some seventy thousand students eventually took part. Thousands
were arrested and untold thousands more radicalized. These events in the early
sixties became a civil-rights war that engulfed the South for the rest of the
decade — and it happened without e-mail, texting, Facebook, or Twitter.

5

Y
The world, we are told, is in the midst of a revolution. The new tools of social
media have reinvented social activism. With Facebook and Twitter and the like,
the traditional relationship between political authority and popular will has
been upended, making it easier for the powerless to collaborate, coördinate, and
give voice to their concerns. When ten thousand protesters took to the streets in
Moldova in the spring of 2009 to protest against their country’s Communist

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 345

6/18/12 3:11 PM

346

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

government, the action was dubbed the Twitter Revolution, because of the means
by which the demonstrators had been brought together. A few months after that,
when student protests rocked Tehran, the State Department took the unusual
step of asking Twitter to suspend scheduled maintenance of its Web site, because
the Administration didn’t want such a critical organizing tool out of service at the
height of the demonstrations. “Without Twitter the people of Iran would not
have felt empowered and confident to stand up for freedom and democracy,”
Mark Pfeifle, a former national-security adviser, later wrote, calling for Twitter to
be nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize. Where activists were once defined by
their causes, they are now defined by their tools. Facebook warriors go online to
push for change. “You are the best hope for us all,” James K. Glassman, a former
senior State Department official, told a crowd of cyber activists at a recent conference sponsored by Facebook, A. T. & T., Howcast, MTV, and Google. Sites like
Facebook, Glassman said, “give the U.S. a significant competitive advantage over
terrorists. Some time ago, I said that Al Qaeda was ‘eating our lunch on the Internet.’ That is no longer the case. Al Qaeda is stuck in Web 1.0. The Internet is now
about interactivity and conversation.”
These are strong, and puzzling, claims. Why does it matter who is eating
whose lunch on the Internet? Are people who log on to their Facebook page really
the best hope for us all? As for Moldova’s so-called Twitter Revolution, Evgeny
Morozov, a scholar at Stanford who has been the most persistent of digital evangelism’s critics, points out that Twitter has scant internal significance in Moldova,
a country where very few Twitter accounts exist. Nor does it seem to have been a
revolution, not least because the protests — as Anne Applebaum suggested in the
Washington Post — may well have been a bit of stagecraft cooked up by the government. (In a country paranoid about Romanian revanchism, the protesters
flew a Romanian flag over the Parliament building.) In the Iranian case, meanwhile, the people tweeting about the demonstrations were almost all in the West.
“It is time to get Twitter’s role in the events in Iran right,” Golnaz Esfandiari
wrote, this past summer, in Foreign Policy. “Simply put: There was no Twitter
Revolution inside Iran.” The cadre of prominent bloggers, like Andrew Sullivan,
who championed the role of social media in Iran, Esfandiari continued, misunderstood the situation. “Western journalists who couldn’t reach — or didn’t
bother reaching? — people on the ground in Iran simply scrolled through the
English-language tweets post with tag #iranelection,” she wrote. “Through it all,
no one seemed to wonder why people trying to coordinate protests in Iran would
be writing in any language other than Farsi.”
Some of this grandiosity is to be expected. Innovators tend to be solipsists.
They often want to cram every stray fact and experience into their new model. As
the historian Robert Darnton has written, “The marvels of communication technology in the present have produced a false consciousness about the past — even
a sense that communication has no history, or had nothing of importance to
consider before the days of television and the Internet.” But there is something

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 346

6/18/12 3:11 PM

GLADWELL • SMALL CHAnGE

347

else at work here, in the outsized enthusiasm for social media. Fifty years after one
of the most extraordinary episodes of social upheaval in American history, we
seem to have forgotten what activism is.

Y
Greensboro in the early nineteen-sixties was the kind of place where racial insubordination was routinely met with violence. The four students who first sat down
at the lunch counter were terrified. “I suppose if anyone had come up behind me
and yelled ‘Boo,’ I think I would have fallen off my seat,” one of them said later.
On the first day, the store manager notified the police chief, who immediately
sent two officers to the store. On the third day, a gang of white toughs showed up
at the lunch counter and stood ostentatiously behind the protesters, ominously
muttering epithets such as “burr-head nigger.” A local Ku Klux Klan leader made
an appearance. On Saturday, as tensions grew, someone called in a bomb threat,
and the entire store had to be evacuated.
The dangers were even clearer in the Mississippi Freedom Summer Project
of 1964, another of the sentinel campaigns of the civil-rights movement. The
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee recruited hundreds of Northern,
largely white unpaid volunteers to run Freedom Schools, register black voters,
and raise civil-rights awareness in the Deep South. “No one should go anywhere
alone, but certainly not in an automobile and certainly not at night,” they were
instructed. Within days of arriving in Mississippi, three volunteers — Michael
Schwerner, James Chaney, and Andrew Goodman — were kidnapped and killed,
and, during the rest of the summer, thirty-seven black churches were set on fire and
dozens of safe houses were bombed; volunteers were beaten, shot at, arrested,
and trailed by pickup trucks full of armed men. A quarter of those in the program
dropped out. Activism that challenges the status quo — that attacks deeply rooted
problems — is not for the faint of heart.
What makes people capable of this kind of activism? The Stanford sociologist Doug McAdam compared the Freedom Summer dropouts with the participants who stayed, and discovered that the key difference wasn’t, as might be
expected, ideological fervor. “All of the applicants — participants and withdrawals alike — emerge as highly committed, articulate supporters of the goals and
values of the summer program,” he concluded. What mattered more was an
applicant’s degree of personal connection to the civil-rights movement. All the
volunteers were required to provide a list of personal contacts — the people they
wanted kept apprised of their activities — and participants were far more likely
than dropouts to have close friends who were also going to Mississippi. High-risk
activism, McAdam concluded, is a “strong-tie” phenomenon.
This pattern shows up again and again. One study of the Red Brigades, the
Italian terrorist group of the nineteen-seventies, found that seventy per cent of
recruits had at least one good friend already in the organization. The same is true
of the men who joined the mujahideen in Afghanistan. Even revolutionary

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 347

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

348

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

actions that look spontaneous, like the demonstrations in East Germany that led
to the fall of the Berlin Wall, are, at core, strong-tie phenomena. The opposition
movement in East Germany consisted of several hundred groups, each with
roughly a dozen members. Each group was in limited contact with the others: at
the time, only thirteen per cent of East Germans even had a phone. All they knew
was that on Monday nights, outside St. Nicholas Church in downtown Leipzig,
people gathered to voice their anger at the state. And the primary determinant of
who showed up was “critical friends” — the more friends you had who were critical of the regime, the more likely you were to join the protest.
So one crucial fact about the four freshmen at the Greensboro lunch counter — David Richmond, Franklin McCain, Ezell Blair, and Joseph McNeil — was
their relationship with one another. McNeil was a roommate of Blair’s in A. & T.’s
Scott Hall dormitory. Richmond roomed with McCain one floor up, and Blair,
Richmond, and McCain had all gone to Dudley High School. The four would
smuggle beer into the dorm and talk late into the night in Blair and McNeil’s
room. They would all have remembered the murder of Emmett Till in 1955, the
Montgomery bus boycott that same year, and the showdown in Little Rock in
1957. It was McNeil who brought up the idea of a sit-in at Woolworth’s. They’d
discussed it for nearly a month. Then McNeil came into the dorm room and
asked the others if they were ready. There was a pause, and McCain said, in a way
that works only with people who talk late into the night with one another, “Are
you guys chicken or not?” Ezell Blair worked up the courage the next day to ask
for a cup of coffee because he was flanked by his roommate and two good friends
from high school.

Y
The kind of activism associated with social media isn’t like this at all. The platforms of social media are built around weak ties. Twitter is a way of following (or
being followed by) people you may never have met. Facebook is a tool for efficiently managing your acquaintances, for keeping up with the people you would
not otherwise be able to stay in touch with. That’s why you can have a thousand
“friends” on Facebook, as you never could in real life.
This is in many ways a wonderful thing. There is strength in weak ties, as
the sociologist Mark Granovetter has observed. Our acquaintances — not our
friends — are our greatest source of new ideas and information. The Internet lets
us exploit the power of these kinds of distant connections with marvelous efficiency. It’s terrific at the diffusion of innovation, interdisciplinary collaboration,
seamlessly matching up buyers and sellers, and the logistical functions of the dating world. But weak ties seldom lead to high-risk activism.
In a new book called The Dragonfly Effect: Quick, Effective, and Powerful Ways
to Use Social Media to Drive Social Change, the business consultant Andy Smith
and the Stanford Business School professor Jennifer Aaker tell the story of Sameer
Bhatia, a young Silicon Valley entrepreneur who came down with acute myelo-

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 348

15

6/18/12 3:11 PM

GLADWELL • SMALL CHAnGE

349

genous leukemia. It’s a perfect illustration of social media’s strengths. Bhatia
needed a bone-marrow transplant, but he could not find a match among his relatives and friends. The odds were best with a donor of his ethnicity, and there were
few South Asians in the national bone-marrow database. So Bhatia’s business
partner sent out an e-mail explaining Bhatia’s plight to more than four hundred
of their acquaintances, who forwarded the e-mail to their personal contacts;
Facebook pages and YouTube videos were devoted to the Help Sameer campaign.
Eventually, nearly twenty-five thousand new people were registered in the bonemarrow database, and Bhatia found a match.
But how did the campaign get so many people to sign up? By not asking too
much of them. That’s the only way you can get someone you don’t really know to
do something on your behalf. You can get thousands of people to sign up for a
donor registry, because doing so is pretty easy. You have to send in a cheek swab
and — in the highly unlikely event that your bone marrow is a good match for
someone in need — spend a few hours at the hospital. Donating bone marrow
isn’t a trivial matter. But it doesn’t involve financial or personal risk; it doesn’t
mean spending a summer being chased by armed men in pickup trucks. It doesn’t
require that you confront socially entrenched norms and practices. In fact, it’s the
kind of commitment that will bring only social acknowledgment and praise.
The evangelists of social media don’t understand this distinction; they seem
to believe that a Facebook friend is the same as a real friend and that signing up
for a donor registry in Silicon Valley today is activism in the same sense as sitting
at a segregated lunch counter in Greensboro in 1960. “Social networks are particularly effective at increasing motivation,” Aaker and Smith write. But that’s not
true. Social networks are effective at increasing participation — by lessening the
level of motivation that participation requires. The Facebook page of the Save
Darfur Coalition has 1,282,339 members, who have donated an average of nine
cents apiece. The next biggest Darfur charity on Facebook has 22,073 members,
who have donated an average of thirty-five cents. Help Save Darfur has 2,797
members, who have given, on average, fifteen cents. A spokesperson for the Save
Darfur Coalition told Newsweek, “We wouldn’t necessarily gauge someone’s value
to the advocacy movement based on what they’ve given. This is a powerful mechanism to engage this critical population. They inform their community, attend
events, volunteer. It’s not something you can measure by looking at a ledger.” In
other words, Facebook activism succeeds not by motivating people to make a real
sacrifice but by motivating them to do the things that people do when they are
not motivated enough to make a real sacrifice. We are a long way from the lunch
counters of Greensboro.

Y
The students who joined the sit-ins across the South during the winter of 1960
described the movement as a “fever.” But the civil-rights movement was more like
a military campaign than like a contagion. In the late nineteen-fifties, there had

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 349

20

6/18/12 3:11 PM

350

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

been sixteen sit-ins in various cities throughout the South, fifteen of which were
formally organized by civil-rights organizations like the N.A.A.C.P. and CORE.
Possible locations for activism were scouted. Plans were drawn up. Movement
activists held training sessions and retreats for would-be protesters. The Greensboro Four were a product of this groundwork: all were members of the N.A.A.C.P.
Youth Council. They had close ties with the head of the local N.A.A.C.P. chapter.
They had been briefed on the earlier wave of sit-ins in Durham, and had been
part of a series of movement meetings in activist churches. When the sit-in movement spread from Greensboro throughout the South, it did not spread indiscriminately. It spread to those cities which had preexisting “movement centers” — a
core of dedicated and trained activists ready to turn the “fever” into action.
The civil-rights movement was high-risk activism. It was also, crucially,
strategic activism: a challenge to the establishment mounted with precision and
discipline. The N.A.A.C.P. was a centralized organization, run from New York
according to highly formalized operating procedures. At the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference, Martin Luther King, Jr., was the unquestioned authority.
At the center of the movement was the black church, which had, as Aldon D.
Morris points out in his superb 1984 study, The Origins of the Civil Rights Movement, a carefully demarcated division of labor, with various standing committees
and disciplined groups. “Each group was task-oriented and coordinated its activities through authority structures,” Morris writes. “Individuals were held accountable for their assigned duties, and important conflicts were resolved by the
minister, who usually exercised ultimate authority over the congregation.”
This is the second crucial distinction between traditional activism and its
online variant: social media are not about this kind of hierarchical organization.
Facebook and the like are tools for building networks, which are the opposite, in
structure and character, of hierarchies. Unlike hierarchies, with their rules and
procedures, networks aren’t controlled by a single central authority. Decisions are
made through consensus, and the ties that bind people to the group are loose.
This structure makes networks enormously resilient and adaptable in lowrisk situations. Wikipedia is a perfect example. It doesn’t have an editor, sitting in
New York, who directs and corrects each entry. The effort of putting together
each entry is self-organized. If every entry in Wikipedia were to be erased tomorrow, the content would swiftly be restored, because that’s what happens when a
network of thousands spontaneously devote their time to a task.
There are many things, though, that networks don’t do well. Car companies
sensibly use a network to organize their hundreds of suppliers, but not to design
their cars. No one believes that the articulation of a coherent design philosophy is
best handled by a sprawling, leaderless organizational system. Because networks
don’t have a centralized leadership structure and clear lines of authority, they
have real difficulty reaching consensus and setting goals. They can’t think strategically; they are chronically prone to conflict and error. How do you make difficult choices about tactics or strategy or philosophical direction when everyone
has an equal say?

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 350

6/18/12 3:11 PM

GLADWELL • SMALL CHAnGE

351

The Palestine Liberation Organization originated as a network, and the
international-relations scholars Mette Eilstrup-Sangiovanni and Calvert Jones
argue in a recent essay in International Security that this is why it ran into such
trouble as it grew: “Structural features typical of networks — the absence of
central authority, the unchecked autonomy of rival groups, and the inability to
arbitrate quarrels through formal mechanisms — made the P.L.O. excessively vulnerable to outside manipulation and internal strife.”
In Germany in the nineteen-seventies, they go on, “the far more unified and
successful left-wing terrorists tended to organize hierarchically, with professional
management and clear divisions of labor. They were concentrated geographically
in universities, where they could establish central leadership, trust, and camaraderie through regular, face-to-face meetings.” They seldom betrayed their comrades in arms during police interrogations. Their counterparts on the right were
organized as decentralized networks, and had no such discipline. These groups
were regularly infiltrated, and members, once arrested, easily gave up their comrades. Similarly, Al Qaeda was most dangerous when it was a unified hierarchy.
Now that it has dissipated into a network, it has proved far less effective.
The drawbacks of networks scarcely matter if the network isn’t interested in
systemic change — if it just wants to frighten or humiliate or make a splash — or
if it doesn’t need to think strategically. But if you’re taking on a powerful and
organized establishment you have to be a hierarchy. The Montgomery bus boycott required the participation of tens of thousands of people who depended on
public transit to get to and from work each day. It lasted a year. In order to persuade those people to stay true to the cause, the boycott’s organizers tasked each
local black church with maintaining morale, and put together a free alternative
private carpool service, with forty-eight dispatchers and forty-two pickup stations. Even the White Citizens Council, King later said, conceded that the carpool
system moved with “military precision.” By the time King came to Birmingham,
for the climactic showdown with Police Commissioner Eugene (Bull) Connor,
he had a budget of a million dollars, and a hundred full-time staff members
on the ground, divided into operational units. The operation itself was divided
into steadily escalating phases, mapped out in advance. Support was maintained
through consecutive mass meetings rotating from church to church around
the city.
Boycotts and sit-ins and nonviolent confrontations — which were the weapons of choice for the civil-rights movement — are high-risk strategies. They leave
little room for conflict and error. The moment even one protester deviates from
the script and responds to provocation, the moral legitimacy of the entire protest
is compromised. Enthusiasts for social media would no doubt have us believe
that King’s task in Birmingham would have been made infinitely easier had he
been able to communicate with his followers through Facebook, and contented
himself with tweets from a Birmingham jail. But networks are messy: think of the
ceaseless pattern of correction and revision, amendment and debate, that characterizes Wikipedia. If Martin Luther King, Jr., had tried to do a wiki-boycott in

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 351

25

6/18/12 3:11 PM

352

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

Montgomery, he would have been steamrollered by the white power structure.
And of what use would a digital communication tool be in a town where ninetyeight per cent of the black community could be reached every Sunday morning at church? The things that King needed in Birmingham — discipline and
strategy — were things that online social media cannot provide.

Y
The bible of the social-media movement is Clay Shirky’s Here Comes Everybody.
Shirky, who teaches at New York University, sets out to demonstrate the organizing power of the Internet, and he begins with the story of Evan, who worked on
Wall Street, and his friend Ivanna, after she left her smart phone, an expensive
Sidekick, on the back seat of a New York City taxicab. The telephone company
transferred the data on Ivanna’s lost phone to a new phone, whereupon she and
Evan discovered that the Sidekick was now in the hands of a teen-ager from
Queens, who was using it to take photographs of herself and her friends.
When Evan e-mailed the teen-ager, Sasha, asking for the phone back, she
replied that his “white ass” didn’t deserve to have it back. Miffed, he set up a Web
page with her picture and a description of what had happened. He forwarded the
link to his friends, and they forwarded it to their friends. Someone found the
MySpace page of Sasha’s boyfriend, and a link to it found its way onto the site.
Someone found her address online and took a video of her home while driving
by; Evan posted the video on the site. The story was picked up by the news filter
Digg. Evan was now up to ten e-mails a minute. He created a bulletin board for
his readers to share their stories, but it crashed under the weight of responses.
Evan and Ivanna went to the police, but the police filed the report under “lost,”
rather than “stolen,” which essentially closed the case. “By this point millions of
readers were watching,” Shirky writes, “and dozens of mainstream news outlets
had covered the story.” Bowing to the pressure, the N.Y.P.D. reclassified the item
as “stolen.” Sasha was arrested, and Evan got his friend’s Sidekick back.
Shirky’s argument is that this is the kind of thing that could never have happened in the pre-Internet age — and he’s right. Evan could never have tracked
down Sasha. The story of the Sidekick would never have been publicized. An
army of people could never have been assembled to wage this fight. The police
wouldn’t have bowed to the pressure of a lone person who had misplaced something as trivial as a cell phone. The story, to Shirky, illustrates “the ease and speed
with which a group can be mobilized for the right kind of cause” in the Internet age.
Shirky considers this model of activism an upgrade. But it is simply a form of
organizing which favors the weak-tie connections that give us access to information over the strong-tie connections that help us persevere in the face of danger.
It shifts our energies from organizations that promote strategic and disciplined
activity and toward those which promote resilience and adaptability. It makes it
easier for activists to express themselves, and harder for that expression to have
any impact. The instruments of social media are well suited to making the exist-

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 352

30

6/18/12 3:11 PM

GLADWELL • SMALL CHAnGE

353

ing social order more efficient. They are not a natural enemy of the status quo. If
you are of the opinion that all the world needs is a little buffing around the edges,
this should not trouble you. But if you think that there are still lunch counters out
there that need integrating, it ought to give you pause.
Shirky ends his story of the Sidekick by asking, portentously, “What happens
next?” — no doubt imagining future waves of digital protesters. But he has already
answered the question. What happens next is more of the same. A networked,
weak-tie world is good at things like helping Wall Streeters get phones back from
teen-age girls. Viva la revolución.

Exploring the Text
1. Most of Malcolm Gladwell’s readers are familiar with the lunch counter event at
Woolworth’s in Greensboro, North Carolina, that catalyzed the civil rights movement. Why, then, does he begin by retelling it and providing such detail in the
opening section? How does this serve as a foundation for the argument he develops? Consider both what he tells and how he tells it.
2. What does he mean when he writes, “Where activists were once defined by their
causes, they are now defined by their tools” (para. 7)? Do you agree or disagree
with this idea? Explain why.
3. What is the key point Gladwell makes in the paragraph beginning, “Some of this
grandiosity is to be expected” (para. 9)? How does he connect his statement
“Innovators tend to be solipsists” with the assertion that ends the paragraph, that
“we seem to have forgotten what activism is.”
4. How does Gladwell define “high-risk activism” (paras. 11–12)? Why does he believe
that activism based on today’s social media cannot qualify as “high risk”? Consider the contrast between “weak ties” and “strong ties” as part of your definition.
5. What is the purpose of the example of Sameer Bhatia, who found a bone marrow
donor through social networking (para. 17)? Do you find it persuasive, or is it too
exceptional?
6. What is the distinction between increasing motivation and increasing participation that Gladwell makes (para. 19)? Why is this distinction important to his
argument?
7. Throughout this essay, Gladwell relies heavily on expert testimony. He cites
scholars and researchers as well as business analysts and State Department officials and security advisors. Choose two examples, and discuss how Gladwell uses
one to support his argument and the other to examine a counterargument.
8. In order to make his argument against the belief that the “new tools of social
media have reinvented social activism” (para. 7), Gladwell must delineate precisely the central qualities of social activism. What are they? Refer to specific passages in the text to support your analysis.
9. Gladwell does not entirely discount the power of social media. What benefits or
positive impacts does he grant to social media? Do you find his term “digital

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 353

6/18/12 3:11 PM

354

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

evangelism” (para. 8) a critical description, a particularly apt one, or simply a
colorful one? Why?
10. Gladwell uses many examples from fairly recent history, such as the fall of the
Berlin Wall and protests in Moldova and Tehran, yet he repeatedly returns to the
civil rights movement of the 1960s. Why? Does doing so strengthen his argument
by adding coherence and depth, or weaken it by over-relying on a single example?
Explain your viewpoint.
11. Compare the opening example at the lunch counter with that of the closing one
about Evan and Ivanna in terms of such rhetorical strategies as narrative pacing,
sensory detail, setting, dialogue, and point of view. Are they more similar or different? In what ways?
12. At key junctures in the essay, Gladwell makes sharp personal comments. In
fact, his ending “Viva la revolución” could be read as downright sarcastic. What
others do you notice? Do these editorial comments add vitality and voice to the
essay, or do they undercut the argument with a mocking tone? Explain your
response.
13. Choose one of the following assertions that Gladwell makes, and challenge it by
referring to an example of social activism in the United States or abroad during
the past five years:
• “Our acquaintances — not our friends — are our greatest source of new ideas
and information” (para. 16).
• Networks “can’t think strategically; they are chronically prone to conflict and
error” (para. 24).
• “The things that King needed in Birmingham — discipline and strategy — were
things that online social media cannot provide” (para. 28).
• “The instruments of social media are well suited to making the existing social
order more efficient. They are not a natural enemy of the status quo” (para. 32).

Child of the Americas
Aurora Levins Morales
Daughter of a Puerto rican mother and a Jewish father, Aurora Levins Morales
(b. 1954) lived in Puerto rico until she was thirteen, when her family moved to
Chicago. She received her undergraduate degree from Franconia University in
new Hampshire and her MA and PhD from the Union Institute in ohio. She coauthored with her mother Getting​Home​Alive (1986), a collection of short stories,
essays, and poetry. In 1999, she published Medicine​Stories:​History,​Culture,​and​
the​Politics​of​Integrity, followed by Remedios:​Stories​of​Earth​and​Iron​from​the​
History​ of​ Puertorriqueñas in 2001. An activist and writer, Morales currently
divides her time between the San Francisco Bay Area and Minneapolis. In the
poem that follows, she celebrates her mixed heritage.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 354

6/18/12 3:11 PM

MorALES • CHILD oF THE AMErICAS

355

I am a child of the Americas,
a light-skinned mestiza of the Caribbean,
a child of many diaspora, born into this continent at a crossroads.
I am a U.S. Puerto Rican Jew,
a product of the ghettos of New York I have never known.
An immigrant and the daughter and granddaughter of immigrants.
I speak English with passion: it’s the tongue of my consciousness,
a flashing knife blade of crystal, my tool, my craft.
I am Caribeña, island grown. Spanish is in my flesh,
ripples from my tongue, lodges in my hips:
the language of garlic and mangoes,
the singing in my poetry, the flying gestures of my hands.
I am of Latinoamerica, rooted in the history of my continent:
I speak from that body.
I am not africa. Africa is in me, but I cannot return.
I am not taína. Taíno is in me, but there is no way back.
I am not european. Europe lives in me, but I have no home there.
I am new. History made me. My first language was spanglish.
I was born at the crossroads
and I am whole.

5

10

15

20

Exploring the Text
1. How does the speaker describe herself? What characteristics does she emphasize?
2. Why does Aurora Levins Morales introduce those characteristics in the order that
she does? That is, why does she choose not to open with her Jewish or African
heritage, for instance?
3. What examples of parallel structure do you find? What is their effect?
4. How do you interpret the line “Europe lives in me, but I have no home there”
(l. 17)?
5. What is the tone of the poem? Is the speaker defiant, hopeful, angry, confused,
ambivalent, proud? Cite specific words and phrases to support your response.
6. Which of the following descriptions of the United States do you think the speaker
would prefer: melting pot, salad bowl, mosaic? Why? To which community or
communities would the speaker say she belongs?
7. What is the argument that Morales makes? Try explaining it in terms of induction
and deduction.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 355

6/18/12 3:11 PM

356

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

Freedom from Want
Norman Rockwell
norman rockwell (1894 –1978) was a popular American painter and illustrator
best known for his depictions of everyday life and positive American values. His
first cover for the Saturday​Evening​Post appeared in 1916, and over three hundred followed during the next forty-seven years. In the early 1960s, he began
working for Look magazine, where he turned to more political concerns such as
civil rights and space exploration. In 1977, rockwell received the nation’s highest
civilian honor, the Presidential Medal. The 1943 painting shown on the following
page appeared in the​Saturday​Evening​Post as part of rockwell’s Four Freedoms
series. These illustrations depict the “four essential human freedoms” delineated in
President Franklin Delano roosevelt’s Message to Congress on January 6, 1941:
freedom of speech and expression, freedom of every person to worship God in
his own way, freedom from want, and freedom from fear. The Thanksgiving scene
shows rockwell’s interpretation of freedom from want, which, in roosevelt’s words,
“means economic understandings which will secure to every nation a healthy peacetime life for its inhabitants — everywhere in the world.” This painting appeared in
the magazine with the headline, “ours . . . to fight for.”

Exploring the Text
1. What is the perspective of the viewer? Where are the participants in the painting
looking? As a viewer, do you feel you are an observer or a participant in the community depicted in the painting? Why?
2. How does the painting embody the descriptors Roosevelt used — “healthy” and
“peacetime”?
3. In the 1940s, who would likely have felt included in the world shown in this
painting? Who might have felt excluded? How does the composition of the image
contribute to your thinking on this issue?
4. Was Rockwell successful in depicting Roosevelt’s vision of “economic understandings which will secure to every nation a healthy peacetime life for its inhabitants —
everywhere in the world”? Explain.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 356

6/18/12 3:11 PM

roCKWELL • FrEEDoM FroM WAnT

357

Freedom​from​Want (1943, oil on canvas, 45.75” x 35.5”). (See insert for color
version.)

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 357

6/18/12 3:11 PM

358

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

The Last Thanksgiving
Roz Chast
roz Chast (b. 1954) grew up in Brooklyn, the child of two schoolteachers, and
received a BFA from the rhode Island School of Design, where she studied graphic
design and painting. After she graduated, as she says on her Web site, she
“reverted to type and began drawing cartoons once again.” More than a thousand of her cartoons have been published in the New​ Yorker magazine since
1978. A collection of twenty-five years of her work was published in Theories​of​
Everything (2006). She collaborated with comedian and novelist Steve Martin on
the children’s book The​Alphabet​from​A​to​Y​with​a​Bonus​Letter​Z! (2007); she has
also written the children’s book Too​Busy​Marco (2010) and a collection of cartoons entitled What​I​Hate:​From​A​–​Z (2011). She has won numerous awards and
received an Honorary Doctorate of Fine Arts from Pratt Institute and the Art Institute
of Boston. This cartoon appeared as the cover of the New​Yorker in 2010.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 358

6/18/12 3:11 PM

nISSAn MoTor CoMPAny • THE BLACK ExPErIEnCE IS EvEryWHErE

359

Exploring the Text
1. Thanksgiving is a holiday that inspires both delight and dread: many see it as their
favorite since it has no religious affiliation but is simply a celebration of bounty
and fellowship; others recall or anticipate gatherings that abound with conflict
and misunderstanding. On the surface, it seems that Roz Chast focuses on only
one of these views, but in fact a case can be made that she captures both. What
specifics can you cite to make that case?
2. Clearly, Chast’s imaginary dinner guests are quite different from those in Rockwell’s painting. Yet in what ways does Chast’s depiction of Thanksgiving reflect the
same American values that Rockwell’s does?
3. What do you think is Chast’s purpose in this cartoon? Is it simply to amuse? To
ridicule? To provoke reflection? Explain.
4. What is Chast’s argument in this cartoon? Is Chast making a point about Thanksgiving in general or the nature of community in the twenty-first century in particular? Or both? Cite specific details in the cartoon to support your response.

The Black Experience Is Everywhere
Nissan Motor Company
The following advertisement from the nissan Motor Company appeared in Vibe
magazine in March 2007.

(See insert for color version.)

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 359

6/18/12 3:11 PM

360

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

Exploring the Text
1. This ad claims that “the black experience is everywhere.” Do you think that that is
true, or is that a fiction concocted for this ad? Do you think that the scene in this
ad is believable? Consider the meaning of the barbershop in African American
culture. Explain.
2. The ultimate purpose of any advertisement is to sell more products, but modern
advertising often is more sly than that. Imagine that you are the creator of this ad,
but it has not yet been approved by your boss. Write up a brief explanation of the
rationale behind this ad and its benefit to the company. Be sure to answer the
question: how will this sell more cars?
3. Do you find this advertisement flattering, offensive, inspiring, exploitive, or simply
provocative? Why? Notice that the company motto is “SHIFT_respect.” How does
that affect your reading?
4. Using the Toulmin method described in Chapter 3, examine the argument put
forth in this ad.
5. What does this ad have to say about the meaning of community in the twenty-first
century?

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 360

6/18/12 3:11 PM

Conversation
The Individual’s Responsibility to the
Community
Each of the following texts presents a view of the individual’s responsibility to the
community.

Sources
1. Andrew Carnegie, from The Gospel of Wealth
2. Bertrand Russell, The Happy Life
3. Garrett Hardin, from Lifeboat Ethics
4. Peter Singer, from The Singer Solution to World Poverty
5. Zapiro (Jonathan Shapiro), World Economic Forum (cartoon)
6. Christian Science Monitor Editorial Board, Warren Buffett, Bill Gates,
and the Billionaire Challenge
7. Der Spiegel Online, Negative Reaction to Charity Campaign
After using the questions to discuss individual selections, synthesize the pieces
through one of the suggested assignments on page 379.

1. from The Gospel of Wealth
Andrew Carnegie
Following is a selection from The​ Gospel​ of​ Wealth, an extended essay
written by American industrialist Andrew Carnegie in 1889. It outlines his
belief that the rich have a responsibility to use their wealth to create a better
society.

Those who would administer wisely must, indeed, be wise, for one of the serious obstacles to the improvement of our race is indiscriminate charity. It were
better for mankind that the millions of the rich were thrown into the sea than
so spent as to encourage the slothful, the drunken, the unworthy. Of every
thousand dollars spent in so-called charity to-day, it is probable that $950 is
unwisely spent; so spent, indeed, as to produce the very evils which it proposes
to mitigate or cure. A well-known writer of philosophic books admitted the
other day that he had given a quarter of a dollar to a man who approached him
as he was coming to visit the house of his friend. He knew nothing of the habits of this beggar; knew not the use that would be made of this money, although
he had every reason to suspect that it would be spent improperly. This man

361

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 361

6/18/12 3:11 PM

362

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

professed to be a disciple of Herbert Spencer;1 yet the quarter-dollar given that
night will probably work more injury than all the money which its thoughtless donor will ever be able to give in true charity will do good. He only gratified
his own feelings, saved himself from annoyance, — and this was probably one of
the most selfish and very worst actions of his life, for in all respects he is most
worthy.
In bestowing charity, the main consideration should be to help those who
will help themselves; to provide part of the means by which those who desire to
improve may do so; to give those who desire to rise the aids by which they may
rise; to assist, but rarely or never to do all. Neither the individual nor the race is
improved by alms-giving. Those worthy of assistance, except in rare cases, seldom
require assistance. The really valuable men of the race never do, except in cases of
accident or sudden change. Every one has, of course, cases of individuals brought
to his own knowledge where temporary assistance can do genuine good, and
these he will not overlook. But the amount which can be wisely given by the individual for individuals is necessarily limited by his lack of knowledge of the circumstances connected with each. He is the only true reformer who is as careful
and as anxious not to aid the unworthy as he is to aid the worthy, and, perhaps,
even more so, for in alms-giving more injury is probably done by rewarding vice
than by relieving virtue.
The rich man is thus almost restricted to following the examples of Peter
Cooper, Enoch Pratt of Baltimore, Mr. Pratt of Brooklyn, Senator Stanford, and
others, who know that the best means of benefiting the community is to place
within its reach the ladders upon which the aspiring can rise — parks, and means
of recreation, by which men are helped in body and mind; works of art, certain to
give pleasure and improve the public taste; and public institutions of various
kinds, which will improve the general condition of the people; — in this manner
returning their surplus wealth to the mass of their fellows in the forms best calculated to do them lasting good.
Thus is the problem of Rich and Poor to be solved. The laws of accumulation
will be left free; the laws of distribution free. Individualism will continue, but the
millionaire will be but a trustee for the poor; intrusted for a season with a great
part of the increased wealth of the community, but administering it for the community far better than it could or would have done for itself. The best minds will
thus have reached a stage in the development of the race in which it is clearly seen
that there is no mode of disposing of surplus wealth creditable to thoughtful and
1
British philosopher and scientist Herbert Spencer (1820–1903) was an early proponent of
evolution and coined the term “survival of the fittest.” He is notorious for the concept of social
Darwinism, which tried to apply the notion of “survival of the fittest” to human civilization.
The logical conclusion was that the poor were less “fit” for survival, so helping them was counterproductive for society as a whole. Social Darwinism was also used to justify racism, eugenics,
and Nazism. — Eds.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 362

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ConvErSATIon

363

earnest men into whose hands it flows save by using it year by year for the general good. This day already dawns. Men may die without incurring the pity of
their fellows, still sharers in great business enterprises from which their capital cannot be or has not been withdrawn, and is left chiefly at death for public uses, yet the man who dies leaving behind him millions of available wealth,
which was his to administer during life, will pass away “unwept, unhonored, and
unsung,” no matter to what uses he leaves the dross which he cannot take with
him. Of such as these public verdict will then be: “The man who dies thus rich
dies disgraced.”
Such, in my opinion, is the true Gospel concerning Wealth, obedience to
which is destined some day to solve the problem of the Rich and the Poor, and to
bring “Peace on earth, among men Good-Will.”

5

Questions
1. If Andrew Carnegie believes that “in alms-giving more injury is probably done by
rewarding vice than by relieving virtue” (para. 2), then what is his recommendation for “the best means of benefiting the community” (para. 3)? Do you agree or
disagree with his analysis?
2. Carnegie claims that the best way to improve the situation of the poor “is to place
within its reach the ladders upon which the aspiring can rise.” The “ladders” he
mentions are “parks, and means of recreation, by which men are helped in body
and mind” (para. 3). Do you think that this is an effective plan? Explain. What
assumption(s) about the relationship between rich and poor does this viewpoint
suggest?
3. When Carnegie claims that “the millionaire will be but a trustee for the poor”
(para. 4), what assumption about the relationship between the rich and the poor
is he making?
4. What overall responsibility does wealth confer, according to Carnegie’s assertion that “the man who dies leaving behind him millions of available wealth, which
was his to administer during life, will pass away ‘unwept, unhonored, and unsung,’
no matter to what uses he leaves the dross which he cannot take with him”
(para. 4)?
5. What attitude toward money and wealth is suggested by Carnegie’s title, “The
Gospel of Wealth”? To what extent do you think that his philosophy is consistent
with the spirit of the title?

2. The Happy Life
Bertrand Russell
In the following selection from his book The​Conquest​of​Happiness (1930),
British philosopher Bertrand russell reflects on the meaning of happiness.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 363

6/18/12 3:11 PM

364

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

The happy life is to an extraordinary extent the same as the good life. Professional
moralists have made too much of self-denial, and in so doing have put the emphasis in the wrong place. Conscious self-denial leaves a man self-absorbed and vividly aware of what he has sacrificed; in consequence it fails often of its immediate
object and almost always of its ultimate purpose. What is needed is not selfdenial, but that kind of direction of interest outward which will lead spontaneously and naturally to the same acts that a person absorbed in the pursuit of his
own virtue could only perform by means of conscious self-denial. I have written
in this book [The Conquest of Happiness] as a hedonist, that is to say, as one who
regards happiness as the good, but the acts to be recommended from the point of
view of the hedonist are on the whole the same as those to be recommended by
the sane moralist. The moralist, however, is too apt, though this is not, of course,
universally true, to stress the act rather than the state of mind. The effects of an
act upon the agent will be widely different according to his state of mind at the
moment. If you see a child drowning and save it as the result of a direct impulse
to bring help, you will emerge none the worse morally. If, on the other hand, you
say to yourself, “It is the part of virtue to succor the helpless, and I wish to be a
virtuous man, therefore I must save this child,” you will be an even worse man
afterwards than you were before. What applies in this extreme case, applies in
many other instances that are less obvious.
There is another difference, somewhat more subtle, between the attitude
towards life that I have been recommending and that which is recommended by
the traditional moralists. The traditional moralist, for example, will say that love
should be unselfish. In a certain sense he is right, that is to say, it should not be
selfish beyond a point, but it should undoubtedly be of such a nature that one’s
own happiness is bound up in its success. If a man were to invite a lady to marry
him on the ground that he ardently desired her happiness and at the same time
considered that she would afford ideal opportunities of self-abnegation, I think
it may be doubted whether she would be altogether pleased. Undoubtedly we
should desire the happiness of those whom we love, but not as an alternative to
our own. In fact, the whole antithesis between self and the rest of the world,
which is implied in the doctrine of self-denial, disappears as soon as we have any
genuine interest in persons or things outside ourselves. Through such interests a
man comes to feel himself part of the stream of life, not a hard separate entity like
a billiard ball, which can have no relation with other such entities except that of
collision. All unhappiness depends upon some kind of disintegration or lack of
integration; there is disintegration within the self through lack of coordination
between the conscious and the unconscious mind; there is lack of integration
between the self and society, where the two are not knit together by the force of
objective interests and affections. The happy man is the man who does not suffer
from either of these failures of unity, whose personality is neither divided against
itself nor pitted against the world. Such a man feels himself a citizen of the universe; enjoying freely the spectacle that it offers and the joys that it affords,

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 364

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ConvErSATIon

365

untroubled by the thought of death because he feels himself not really separate
from those who will come after him. It is in such profound instinctive union with
the stream of life that the greatest joy is to be found.

Questions
1. In the opening paragraph, Bertrand Russell says, “The happy life is to an extraordinary extent the same as the good life.” What does he mean? Is this statement
paradoxical?
2. According to Russell, what would the traditional moralist say about the belief that
“love should be unselfish” (para. 2)?
3. What does Russell mean by his claim that “the whole antithesis between self and
the rest of the world . . . disappears as soon as we have any genuine interest in
persons or things outside ourselves” (para. 2)?
4. In the second paragraph, how does Russell construct his argument?
5. Do you find Russell’s simile of the billiard ball effective or ineffective? Explain why.
6. What does Russell mean by “a citizen of the universe” (para. 2)?

3. from Lifeboat Ethics
Garrett Hardin
In the following selection from his 1974 Psychology​ Today article, human
ecologist Garrett Hardin presents a classic argument on the implications of
population growth.

Environmentalists use the metaphor of the earth as a “spaceship” in trying to persuade countries, industries, and people to stop wasting and polluting our natural
resources. Since we all share life on this planet, they argue, no single person or institution has the right to destroy, waste, or use more than a fair share of its resources.
But does everyone on earth have an equal right to an equal share of its
resources? The spaceship metaphor can be dangerous when used by misguided
idealists to justify suicidal policies for sharing our resources through uncontrolled immigration and foreign aid. In their enthusiastic but unrealistic generosity, they confuse the ethics of a spaceship with those of a lifeboat.
A true spaceship would have to be under the control of a captain, since no
ship could possibly survive if its course were determined by committee. Spaceship Earth certainly has no captain; the United Nations is merely a toothless tiger,
with little power to enforce any policy upon its bickering members.
If we divide the world crudely into rich nations and poor nations, two thirds
of them are desperately poor, and only one third comparatively rich, with the
United States the wealthiest of all. Metaphorically each rich nation can be seen as
a lifeboat full of comparatively rich people. In the ocean outside each lifeboat

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 365

6/18/12 3:11 PM

366

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

swim the poor of the world, who would like to get in, or at least to share some of
the wealth. What should the lifeboat passengers do?
First, we must recognize the limited capacity of any lifeboat. For example, a
nation’s land has a limited capacity to support a population and as the current
[1974] energy crisis has shown us, in some ways we have already exceeded the
carrying capacity of our land.

5

Adrift in a Moral Sea
So here we sit, say 50 people in our lifeboat. To be generous, let us assume it has
room for 10 more, making a total capacity of 60. Suppose the 50 of us in the lifeboat see 100 others swimming in the water outside, begging for admission to our
boat or for handouts. We have several options: we may be tempted to try to live
by the Christian ideal of being “our brother’s keeper,” or by the Marxist ideal of
“to each according to his needs.” Since the needs of all in the water are the same,
and since they can all be seen as “our brothers,” we could take them all into our
boat, making a total of 150 in a boat designed for 60. The boat swamps, everyone
drowns. Complete justice, complete catastrophe.
Since the boat has an unused excess capacity of 10 more passengers, we
could admit just 10 more to it. But which 10 do we let in? How do we choose? Do
we pick the best 10, “first come, first served”? And what do we say to the 90
we exclude? If we do let an extra 10 into our lifeboat, we will have lost our
“safety factor,” an engineering principle of critical importance. For example, if
we don’t leave room for excess capacity as a safety factor in our country’s agriculture, a new plant disease or a bad change in the weather could have disastrous
consequences.
Suppose we decide to preserve our small safety factor and admit no more to
the lifeboat. Our survival is then possible although we shall have to be constantly
on guard against boarding parties.
While this last solution clearly offers the only means of our survival, it is
morally abhorrent to many people. Some say they feel guilty about their good
luck. My reply is simple: “Get out and yield your place to others.” This may solve
the problem of the guilt-ridden person’s conscience, but it does not change the
ethics of the lifeboat. The needy person to whom the guilt-ridden person yields
his place will not himself feel guilty about his good luck. If he did, he would not
climb aboard. The net result of conscience-stricken people giving up their unjustly held seats is the elimination of that sort of conscience from the lifeboat.
This is the basic metaphor within which we must work out our solutions. Let us
now enrich the image, step by step, with substantive additions from the real world,
a world that must solve real and pressing problems of overpopulation and hunger.
The harsh ethics of the lifeboat become even harsher when we consider the
reproductive differences between the rich nations and the poor nations. The
people inside the lifeboats are doubling in numbers every 87 years; those swimming

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 366

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ConvErSATIon

367

around outside are doubling, on the average, every 35 years, more than twice as
fast as the rich. And since the world’s resources are dwindling, the difference in
prosperity between the rich and the poor can only increase.
As of 1973, the U.S. had a population of 210 million people, who were
increasing by 0.8 percent per year. Outside our lifeboat, let us imagine another
210 million people (say the combined populations of Colombia, Ecuador, Venezuela, Morocco, Pakistan, Thailand and the Philippines) who are increasing at a
rate of 3.3 percent per year. Put differently, the doubling time for this aggregate
population is 21 years, compared to 87 years for the U.S.
The harsh ethics of the lifeboat become harsher when we consider the reproductive differences between rich and poor.

Multiplying the Rich and the Poor
Now suppose the U.S. agreed to pool its resources with those seven countries,
with everyone receiving an equal share. Initially the ratio of Americans to nonAmericans in this model would be one-to-one. But consider what the ratio would
be after 87 years, by which time the Americans would have doubled to a population of 420 million. By then, doubling every 21 years, the other group would have
swollen to 354 billion. Each American would have to share the available resources
with more than eight people.
But, one could argue, this discussion assumes that current population trends
will continue, and they may not. Quite so. Most likely the rate of population
increase will decline much faster in the U.S. than it will in the other countries, and
there does not seem to be much we can do about it. In sharing with “each according to his needs,” we must recognize that needs are determined by population
size, which is determined by the rate of reproduction, which at present is regarded
as a sovereign right of every nation, poor or not. This being so, the philanthropic
load created by the sharing ethic of the spaceship can only increase.

15

The Tragedy of the Commons
The fundamental error of spaceship ethics, and the sharing it requires, is that it
leads to what I call “the tragedy of the commons.” Under a system of private property, the men who own property recognize their responsibility to care for it, for if
they don’t they will eventually suffer. A farmer, for instance, will allow no more
cattle in a pasture than its carrying capacity justifies. If he overloads it, erosion
sets in, weeds take over, and he loses the use of the pasture.
If a pasture becomes a commons open to all, the right of each to use it may
not be matched by a corresponding responsibility to protect it. Asking everyone
to use it with discretion will hardly do, for the considerate herdsman who refrains
from overloading the commons suffers more than a selfish one who says his needs
are greater. If everyone would restrain himself, all would be well; but it takes only
one less than everyone to ruin a system of voluntary restraint. In a crowded world

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 367

6/18/12 3:11 PM

368

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

of less than perfect human beings, mutual ruin is inevitable if there are no controls. This is the tragedy of the commons.
One of the major tasks of education today should be the creation of such an
acute awareness of the dangers of the commons that people will recognize its
many varieties. For example, the air and water have become polluted because
they are treated as commons. Further growth in the population or per-capita
conversion of natural resources into pollutants will only make the problem worse.
The same holds true for the fish of the oceans. Fishing fleets have nearly disappeared in many parts of the world, technological improvements in the art of
fishing are hastening the day of complete ruin. Only the replacement of the system of the commons with a responsible system of control will save the land, air,
water and oceanic fisheries.

Y
Pure Justice vs. Reality
Clearly, the concept of pure justice produces an infinite regression to absurdity.
Centuries ago, wise men invented statutes of limitations to justify the rejection of
such pure justice, in the interest of preventing continual disorder. The law zealously
defends property rights, but only relatively recent property rights. Drawing a line
after an arbitrary time has elapsed may be unjust, but the alternatives are worse.
We are all the descendants of thieves, and the world’s resources are inequitably distributed. But we must begin the journey to tomorrow from the point where
we are today. We cannot remake the past. We cannot safely divide the wealth equitably among all peoples so long as people reproduce at different rates. To do so
would guarantee that our grandchildren and everyone else’s grandchildren would
have only a ruined world to inhabit.
To be generous with one’s own possessions is quite different from being generous with those of posterity. We should call this point to the attention of those
who from a commendable love of justice and equality, would institute a system of
the commons, either in the form of a world food bank, or of unrestricted immigration. We must convince them if we wish to save at least some parts of the
world from environmental ruin.
Without a true world government to control reproduction and the use of
available resources, the sharing ethic of the spaceship is impossible. For the foreseeable future, our survival demands that we govern our actions by the ethics of
a lifeboat, harsh though they may be. Posterity will be satisfied with nothing less.

20

Questions
1. What are the implications of the two central metaphors — the spaceship and the
lifeboat — that Garrett Hardin uses for his argument? Is contrasting these two an
effective rhetorical strategy? Discuss your answer.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 368

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ConvErSATIon

369

2. Hardin uses population growth statistics to make projections to support his argument. Have these projections proven true? (You will need to do some research.)
3. What does Hardin mean by “the tragedy of the commons” (para. 16)?
4. Hardin relies mainly on the logic of his arguments, but he also uses strong
connotative language. How do expressions such as “toothless tiger” (para. 3) and
“conscience-stricken people” (para. 9) affect the reader?
5. What does Hardin mean by “pure justice” (para. 19)? Do you agree with his use of
the phrase? Why or why not?
6. Hardin’s essay was published in Psychology Today in 1974. To what extent do you
think his basic argument can apply to today’s world?

4. from The Singer Solution to World Poverty
Peter Singer
In the following selection first published in the New​York​Times​Magazine in
1999, bioethicist Peter Singer argues for the individual’s responsibility to the
world community.

In the Brazilian film Central Station, Dora is a retired schoolteacher who makes
ends meet by sitting at the station writing letters for illiterate people. Suddenly she has an opportunity to pocket $1,000. All she has to do is persuade a
homeless 9-year-old boy to follow her to an address she has been given. (She is
told he will be adopted by wealthy foreigners.) She delivers the boy, gets the
money, spends some of it on a television set and settles down to enjoy her new
acquisition. Her neighbor spoils the fun, however, by telling her that the boy
was too old to be adopted — he will be killed and his organs sold for transplantation. Perhaps Dora knew this all along, but after her neighbor’s plain speaking, she spends a troubled night. In the morning Dora resolves to take the
boy back.
Suppose Dora had told her neighbor that it is a tough world, other people
have nice new TV’s too, and if selling the kid is the only way she can get one, well,
he was only a street kid. She would then have become, in the eyes of the audience,
a monster. She redeems herself only by being prepared to bear considerable risks
to save the boy.
At the end of the movie, in cinemas in the affluent nations of the world,
people who would have been quick to condemn Dora if she had not rescued the
boy go home to places far more comfortable than her apartment. In fact, the average family in the United States spends almost one-third of its income on things
that are no more necessary to them than Dora’s new TV was to her. Going out to
nice restaurants, buying new clothes because the old ones are no longer stylish,
vacationing at beach resorts — so much of our income is spent on things not
essential to the preservation of our lives and health. Donated to one of a number

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 369

6/18/12 3:11 PM

370

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

of charitable agencies, that money could mean the difference between life and
death for children in need.
All of which raises a question: In the end, what is the ethical distinction between
a Brazilian who sells a homeless child to organ peddlers and an American who
already has a TV and upgrades to a better one — knowing that the money could
be donated to an organization that would use it to save the lives of kids in need?
Of course, there are several differences between the two situations that could
support different moral judgments about them. For one thing, to be able to consign a child to death when he is standing right in front of you takes a chilling kind
of heartlessness; it is much easier to ignore an appeal for money to help children
you will never meet. Yet for a utilitarian philosopher like myself — that is, one
who judges whether acts are right or wrong by their consequences — if the upshot
of the American’s failure to donate the money is that one more kid dies on the
streets of a Brazilian city, then it is, in some sense, just as bad as selling the kid to
the organ peddlers. But one doesn’t need to embrace my utilitarian ethic to see
that, at the very least, there is a troubling incongruity in being so quick to condemn Dora for taking the child to the organ peddlers while, at the same time, not
regarding the American consumer’s behavior as raising a serious moral issue.

5

Y
In his 1996 book, Living High and Letting Die, the New York University philosopher Peter Unger presented an ingenious series of imaginary examples designed
to probe our intuitions about whether it is wrong to live well without giving substantial amounts of money to help people who are hungry, malnourished or
dying from easily treatable illnesses like diarrhea. Here’s my paraphrase of one of
these examples:
Bob is close to retirement. He has invested most of his savings in a very rare
and valuable old car, a Bugatti, which he has not been able to insure. The Bugatti
is his pride and joy. In addition to the pleasure he gets from driving and caring for
his car, Bob knows that its rising market value means that he will always be able
to sell it and live comfortably after retirement. One day when Bob is out for a
drive, he parks the Bugatti near the end of a railway siding and goes for a walk up
the track. As he does so, he sees that a runaway train, with no one aboard, is running down the railway track. Looking farther down the track, he sees the small
figure of a child very likely to be killed by the runaway train. He can’t stop the
train and the child is too far away to warn of the danger, but he can throw a switch
that will divert the train down the siding where his Bugatti is parked. Then
nobody will be killed — but the train will destroy his Bugatti. Thinking of his joy
in owning the car and the financial security it represents, Bob decides not to
throw the switch. The child is killed. For many years to come, Bob enjoys owning
his Bugatti and the financial security it represents.
Bob’s conduct, most of us will immediately respond, was gravely wrong.
Unger agrees. But then he reminds us that we, too, have opportunities to save the

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 370

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ConvErSATIon

371

lives of children. We can give to organizations like UNICEF or Oxfam America.
How much would we have to give one of these organizations to have a high probability of saving the life of a child threatened by easily preventable diseases? (I do
not believe that children are more worth saving than adults, but since no one can
argue that children have brought their poverty on themselves, focusing on them
simplifies the issues.) Unger called up some experts and used the information
they provided to offer some plausible estimates that include the cost of raising
money, administrative expenses and the cost of delivering aid where it is most
needed. By his calculation, $200 in donations would help a sickly 2-year-old
transform into a healthy 6-year-old — offering safe passage through childhood’s
most dangerous years. To show how practical philosophical argument can be,
Unger even tells his readers that they can easily donate funds by using their credit
card and calling one of these toll-free numbers: (800) 367-5437 for Unicef; (800)
693-2687 for Oxfam America.
Now you, too, have the information you need to save a child’s life. How
should you judge yourself if you don’t do it? Think again about Bob and his
Bugatti. Unlike Dora, Bob did not have to look into the eyes of the child he was
sacrificing for his own material comfort. The child was a complete stranger to
him and too far away to relate to in an intimate, personal way. Unlike Dora, too,
he did not mislead the child or initiate the chain of events imperiling him. In all
these respects, Bob’s situation resembles that of people able but unwilling to
donate to overseas aid and differs from Dora’s situation.
If you still think that it was very wrong of Bob not to throw the switch that
would have diverted the train and saved the child’s life, then it is hard to see how
you could deny that it is also very wrong not to send money to one of the organizations listed above. Unless, that is, there is some morally important difference
between the two situations that I have overlooked.
Is it the practical uncertainties about whether aid will really reach the people
who need it? Nobody who knows the world of overseas aid can doubt that such
uncertainties exist. But Unger’s figure of $200 to save a child’s life was reached
after he had made conservative assumptions about the proportion of the money
donated that will actually reach its target.
One genuine difference between Bob and those who can afford to donate to
overseas aid organizations but don’t is that only Bob can save the child on the
tracks, whereas there are hundreds of millions of people who can give $200 to
overseas aid organizations. The problem is that most of them aren’t doing it.
Does this mean that it is all right for you not to do it?
Suppose that there were more owners of priceless vintage cars — Carol, Dave,
Emma, Fred and so on, down to Ziggy — all in exactly the same situation as Bob,
with their own siding and their own switch, all sacrificing the child in order to
preserve their own cherished car. Would that make it all right for Bob to do the
same? To answer this question affirmatively is to endorse follow-the-crowd
ethics — the kind of ethics that led many Germans to look away when the Nazi

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 371

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

372

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

atrocities were being committed. We do not excuse them because others were
behaving no better.
We seem to lack a sound basis for drawing a clear moral line between Bob’s
situation and that of any reader of this article with $200 to spare who does not
donate it to an overseas aid agency. These readers seem to be acting at least as
badly as Bob was acting when he chose to let the runaway train hurtle toward the
unsuspecting child. In the light of this conclusion, I trust that many readers will
reach for the phone and donate that $200. Perhaps you should do it before reading further.

Y
Now that you have distinguished yourself morally from people who put their
vintage cars ahead of a child’s life, how about treating yourself and your partner
to dinner at your favorite restaurant? But wait. The money you will spend at the
restaurant could also help save the lives of children overseas! True, you weren’t
planning to blow $200 tonight, but if you were to give up dining out just for one
month, you would easily save that amount. And what is one month’s dining out,
compared to a child’s life? There’s the rub. Since there are a lot of desperately
needy children in the world, there will always be another child whose life you
could save for another $200. Are you therefore obliged to keep giving until you
have nothing left? At what point can you stop?
Hypothetical examples can easily become farcical. Consider Bob. How far
past losing the Bugatti should he go? Imagine that Bob had got his foot stuck in
the track of the siding, and if he diverted the train, then before it rammed the car
it would also amputate his big toe. Should he still throw the switch? What if it
would amputate his foot? His entire leg?
As absurd as the Bugatti scenario gets when pushed to extremes, the point it
raises is a serious one: only when the sacrifices become very significant indeed
would most people be prepared to say that Bob does nothing wrong when he
decides not to throw the switch. Of course, most people could be wrong; we can’t
decide moral issues by taking opinion polls. But consider for yourself the level of
sacrifice that you would demand of Bob, and then think about how much money
you would have to give away in order to make a sacrifice that is roughly equal to
that. It’s almost certainly much, much more than $200. For most middle-class
Americans, it could easily be more like $200,000.
Isn’t it counterproductive to ask people to do so much? Don’t we run the risk
that many will shrug their shoulders and say that morality, so conceived, is fine
for saints but not for them? I accept that we are unlikely to see, in the near or even
medium-term future, a world in which it is normal for wealthy Americans to give
the bulk of their wealth to strangers. When it comes to praising or blaming people
for what they do, we tend to use a standard that is relative to some conception of
normal behavior. Comfortably off Americans who give, say, 10 percent of their
income to overseas aid organizations are so far ahead of most of their equally com-

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 372

15

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ConvErSATIon

373

fortable fellow citizens that I wouldn’t go out of my way to chastise them for not
doing more. Nevertheless, they should be doing much more, and they are in no
position to criticize Bob for failing to make the much greater sacrifice of his Bugatti.
At this point various objections may crop up. Someone may say: “If every
citizen living in the affluent nations contributed his or her share I wouldn’t have
to make such a drastic sacrifice, because long before such levels were reached, the
resources would have been there to save the lives of all those children dying from
lack of food or medical care. So why should I give more than my fair share?”
Another, related, objection is that the Government ought to increase its overseas
aid allocations, since that would spread the burden more equitably across all
taxpayers.
Yet the question of how much we ought to give is a matter to be decided in
the real world — and that, sadly, is a world in which we know that most people do
not, and in the immediate future will not, give substantial amounts to overseas
aid agencies. We know, too, that at least in the next year, the United States Government is not going to meet even the very modest United Nations–recommended
target of 0.7 percent of gross national product; at the moment it lags far below
that, at 0.09 percent, not even half of Japan’s 0.22 percent or a tenth of Denmark’s
0.97 percent. Thus, we know that the money we can give beyond that theoretical
“fair share” is still going to save lives that would otherwise be lost. While the idea
that no one need do more than his or her fair share is a powerful one, should it
prevail if we know that others are not doing their fair share and that children will
die preventable deaths unless we do more than our fair share? That would be taking fairness too far.
Thus, this ground for limiting how much we ought to give also fails. In the
world as it is now, I can see no escape from the conclusion that each one of us with
wealth surplus to his or her essential needs should be giving most of it to help
people suffering from poverty so dire as to be life-threatening. That’s right: I’m
saying that you shouldn’t buy that new car, take that cruise, redecorate the house
or get that pricey new suit. After all, a $1,000 suit could save five children’s lives.
So how does my philosophy break down in dollars and cents? An American household with an income of $50,000 spends around $30,000 annually on
necessities, according to the Conference Board, a nonprofit economic research
organization. Therefore, for a household bringing in $50,000 a year, donations to
help the world’s poor should be as close as possible to $20,000. The $30,000
required for necessities holds for higher incomes as well. So a household making $100,000 could cut a yearly check for $70,000. Again, the formula is simple:
whatever money you’re spending on luxuries, not necessities, should be given
away.
Now, evolutionary psychologists tell us that human nature just isn’t sufficiently altruistic to make it plausible that many people will sacrifice so much for
strangers. On the facts of human nature, they might be right, but they would be
wrong to draw a moral conclusion from those facts. If it is the case that we ought

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 373

20

6/18/12 3:11 PM

374

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

to do things that, predictably, most of us won’t do, then let’s face that fact headon. Then, if we value the life of a child more than going to fancy restaurants, the
next time we dine out we will know that we could have done something better
with our money. If that makes living a morally decent life extremely arduous,
well, then that is the way things are. If we don’t do it, then we should at least know
that we are failing to live a morally decent life — not because it is good to wallow
in guilt but because knowing where we should be going is the first step toward
heading in that direction.
When Bob first grasped the dilemma that faced him as he stood by that railway switch, he must have thought how extraordinarily unlucky he was to be
placed in a situation in which he must choose between the life of an innocent
child and the sacrifice of most of his savings. But he was not unlucky at all. We are
all in that situation.

Questions
1. Peter Singer opens his essay by describing a situation from a movie, yet it could be
argued that seeing movies is, in fact, a luxury that one advocating his position
should forgo. To what extent does this interpretation undermine Singer’s argument?
2. The example of Bob and his Bugatti is hypothetical. Is this a rhetorical strategy
that strengthens or weakens Singer’s argument? Explain your response.
3. Note the places where Singer addresses the counterargument. Where does he concede, and where does he refute?
4. When does Singer use the pronoun we? When does he use you? How does this shift
reflect and contribute to appeals to ethos and pathos?
5. This selection appeared in the New York Times Magazine (1999). What does that
fact tell you about the audience to whom Singer is appealing? To what extent do
you think he is effective in reaching them?

5. World Economic Forum
Zapiro
The following cartoon by South African cartoonist zapiro (Jonathan Shapiro)
takes as its context the World Economic Forum, a meeting of international
leaders from business, industry, government, and academia who meet annually in Davos, Switzerland, to explore solutions to a wide range of global
economic issues.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 374

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ConvErSATIon

375

Questions
1. How are the participants — both the two entering the room and those already
inside — depicted? Consider appearance and activity.
2. What does the setting illustrated resemble? Does it seem to be, for instance, a lecture hall?
3. What is a one-sentence summary of the argument that the cartoonist is making?

6. Warren Buffett, Bill Gates, and the Billionaire
Challenge
Chris­tian­Science­Monitor Editorial Board
This 2010 article from the Chris​tian​Science​Monitor describes the proposal of
two superwealthy philanthropists to their billionaire counterparts.

America’s superwealthy are being hit up hard for their money on two fronts this
year — for charity and for higher taxes. At the least, these new appeals may serve
as a reminder for everyone in how best to give back to society.
One front is a gentle arm-twisting campaign by Warren Buffett and Bill Gates
to persuade fellow billionaires to commit half of their wealth to good causes. In
just a few short weeks, the two men have won over 38 of those listed on the Forbes
400 list of wealthiest Americans to make that pledge.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 375

6/18/12 3:11 PM

376

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

About half of those asked have so far said yes, often saying they see their giving as an investment in society. Their names range from New York Mayor Michael
Bloomberg to eBay founder Pierre Omidyar. In all, they have a combined net
worth of more than $200 billion.
But money for charity isn’t the main point. As Mr. Buffett, head of Berkshire
Hathaway investments, said: “At its core, the Giving Pledge is about asking wealthy
families to have important conversations about their wealth and how it will
be used.”
Such family and peer pressure certainly has its uses if they encourage generosity. The Buffett-Gates campaign in particular may also help create useful publicity for a broad political discussion about government tax rates. In coming
weeks, Congress will decide whether to eliminate the Bush-era tax cuts for families earning more than $250,000 — the other proposal to wrest money for the
public good away from the rich.
High-profile philanthropy by this large number of super-rich is indeed a rare
display of heartfelt concern about others. It sets an example for those of more
modest means to make more donations. “By giving, we inspire others to give of
themselves, whether their money or their time,” says New York’s mayor, who
earned his wealth publishing financial news.
The Giving Pledge campaign may also help dampen the harsh rhetoric of
class warfare in the coming fight over the Bush tax cuts.
The willingness of both rich and poor to pay taxes — “the price of civilization,” as Justice Learned Hand called them — is critical to a functioning government. But the debate on Capitol Hill mostly centers on data and arguments from
economists about the effects of tax rates on private investments and the budget
deficit, or the tax burdens on each income group. Economics is not really a science, however, so it’s hard for either side to win those debates.
Rather, the setting of tax rates is a democratic exercise, even though for many
Americans the paying of taxes seems coercive — like an IRS agent citing jail time
if you don’t pay up. That’s why each elected official must give voice to their constituents’ willingness to be taxed, just as Buffett and Mr. Gates have quietly drawn
out the rich to say how much they would give to charity.
Sen. Barbara Boxer (D) of California is one lawmaker who says the rich are
ready to pony up more in taxes. “Those people who are making that kind of
money, they’ve told me that they feel fine contributing to this country,” she
says. Such statements are far better than the usual practice of demonizing the
wealthy.
But then Jon Kyl (R) of Arizona makes an opposing point by highlighting a
wealthy small-business man, Craig Fritsche, the owner of Tart Lumber in Virginia. “Do we need to raise taxes on people who create the jobs in our country?”
asks Mr. Kyl.
Congress sets the priorities for both government spending and taxes. Lawmakers must reflect the will of voters to contribute to the wider community, but

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 376

5

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ConvErSATIon

377

also persuade them to be taxed more — or on different types of income — when
that is needed.
It is the type of task that Gates and Buffett have learned well as they continue
to hold private dinners with more billionaires to ask them to make the Giving
Pledge. “We hope to come back in six months and surprise you more,” Buffett
said, “or at least surprise ourselves.”

Questions
1. What is the “Giving Pledge” proposed by Bill Gates and Warren Buffett to the
Forbes 400 wealthiest Americans?
2. Why do Gates and Buffett assert that “money for charity isn’t the main point”
(para. 4) of their proposal?
3. Why do they believe that their approach is better than imposing higher taxes on
those earning the highest incomes?

7. Negative Reaction to Charity Campaign
Der­Spiegel Online
The following article appeared in Der​Spiegel online, the English-language
version of a German news source. The interview is with Peter Krämer, a multimillionaire shipping magnate who criticizes the Giving Pledge.

Germany’s super-rich have rejected an invitation by Bill Gates and Warren
Buffett to join their “Giving Pledge” to give away most of their fortune. The
pledge has been criticized in Germany, with millionaires saying donations
shouldn’t replace duties that would be better carried out by the state.
Last week, Microsoft founder Bill Gates attempted to convince billionaires
around the world to agree to give away half their money to charity. But in Germany, the “Giving Pledge,” backed by 40 of the world’s wealthiest people, including Gates and Warren Buffett, has met with skepticism, SPIEGEL has learned.
“For most people that is too ostentatious,” said the asset manager of one of
the billionaires contacted by Gates, adding that many of the people contacted had
already transferred larger proportions of their assets than the Americans to charitable foundations.
Dietmar Hopp, the co-founder of the SAP business software company, has
transferred some €2.9 billion to a foundation. Klaus Tschira, another founder of
SAP, has handed more than half of his wealth to a foundation.
Peter Krämer, a Hamburg-based shipping magnate and multimillionaire,
has emerged as one of the strongest critics of the “Giving Pledge.” Krämer, who
donated millions of euros in 2005 to “Schools for Africa,” a program operated by
UNICEF, explained his opposition to the Gates initiative in a SPIEGEL interview.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 377

5

6/18/12 3:11 PM

378

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

Spiegel: Forty superwealthy Americans have just announced that they
would donate half of their assets, at the very latest after their deaths. As
a person who often likes to say that rich people should be asked to
contribute more to society, what were your first thoughts?
Krämer: I find the U.S. initiative highly problematic. You can write
donations off in your taxes to a large degree in the USA. So the rich make
a choice: Would I rather donate or pay taxes? The donors are taking the
place of the state. That’s unacceptable.
Spiegel: But doesn’t the money that is donated serve the common good?
Krämer: It is all just a bad transfer of power from the state to billionaires.
So it’s not the state that determines what is good for the people, but
rather the rich want to decide. That’s a development that I find really bad.
What legitimacy do these people have to decide where massive sums of
money will flow?
Spiegel: It is their money at the end of the day.
Krämer: In this case, 40 superwealthy people want to decide what their
money will be used for. That runs counter to the democratically
legitimate state. In the end the billionaires are indulging in hobbies
that might be in the common good, but are very personal.
Spiegel: Do the donations also have to do with the fact that the idea of
state and society is such a different one in the United States?
Krämer: Yes, one cannot forget that the U.S. has a desolate social system
and that alone is reason enough that donations are already a part of
everyday life there. But it would have been a greater deed on the part of
Mr. Gates or Mr. Buffett if they had given the money to small
communities in the U.S. so that they can fulfill public duties.
Spiegel: Should wealthy Germans also give up some of their money?
Krämer: No, not in this form. It would make more sense, for example, to
work with and donate to established organizations.

10

15

Questions
1. What is the primary reason Peter Krämer finds the premise of the Giving Pledge
“problematic” (para. 7)?
2. Do you agree or disagree with Krämer that “it would have been a greater deed on
the part of Mr. Gates or Mr. Buffett if they had given the money to small communities in the U.S. so that they can fulfill public duties” (para. 13)?

Making connections
1. What is the most basic difference between Peter Singer’s and Garrett Hardin’s

worldviews?

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 378

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ConvErSATIon

379

2. In what ways are the philosophies of Singer and Andrew Carnegie similar?
3. In what ways might Hardin object to Zapiro’s argument in the cartoon on the

World Economic Forum?
4. Is the viewpoint of Peter Krämer, the German multimillionaire, more similar

to that of Carnegie or Hardin? Explain.
5. How does Bertrand Russell’s concept of self-denial in the following quotation

reflect the assumptions that underlie Bill Gates’s and Warren Buffett’s Giving
Pledge: “the whole antithesis between self and the rest of the world, which is
implied in the doctrine of self-denial, disappears as soon as we have any genuine interest in persons or things outside ourselves”? (See Russell, para. 2.)

Entering the conversation
As you respond to the following prompts, support your argument with references to
at least three of the seven sources in this Conversation on the Individual’s Responsibility to the Community. For help using sources, see Chapter 4.
1. How can “the good life” be lived well? Explain your position, first by defining

the term and then by presenting your own view within the context of the
sources.
2. Write an essay explaining which of the seven perspectives represented in these

readings you find most compelling. Make sure you explain why you have come
to this conclusion.
3. Suppose that a proposal is made to vary college tuition according to the stu-

dent’s (or parents’) annual income. Essentially, tuition payment would be
determined according to criteria similar to that used to levy income tax, so
that those who earn the most will pay the most. Write an essay explaining why
you would support or oppose this proposal.
4. Pose a question on a controversial issue, such as “Should the United States

intervene in a conflict in another region?” or “Should individual citizens of
affluent countries contribute a portion of their income to fight AIDS in
Africa?” Then write a roundtable discussion that includes any five participants: Andrew Carnegie, Bertrand Russell, Peter Singer, Garrett Hardin, Bill
Gates, and Warren Buffett. You might do this assignment as a group, with different members role-playing the authors.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 379

6/18/12 3:11 PM

380

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

Student Writing
Synthesis: Incorporating Sources into a Revision
Following are two versions of an essay. The first is a draft that student Martin
Copeland wrote in response to this prompt:
Explain why you believe that fraternities, sororities, or both do or do not build
community or provide a positive community environment for their members.

The second essay is Martin’s revision after he researched the topic of fraternities
and sororities further. Using the questions following each version of the essay,
discuss specific ways in which the second is an improvement over the first, and
suggest ways for further improvement. (Note: Both the draft and the revision
were written outside class without time constraints.)

Draft
From the outside, it is very difficult to tell exactly what fraternities and
sororities do or don’t do for their members. What an outsider can do, however, is give
an honest opinion of his or her perception of fraternities and sororities, which I feel,
is very valuable to the organizations. It can allow members to understand how their
organizations are perceived, what are the misconceptions, and why they may or may not
be attracting new members.
Having established my outside perspective, I believe that the general idea and
philosophy of fraternities and sororities is to provide a positive community environment
for their members, and that in their purest form, fraternities and sororities can do just
that. Unfortunately, most fraternities and sororities are not in their “purest form,” and
have been corrupted by wayward members so that now, they do not provide a positive
community environment for their members.
It is important to understand the language of “positive community
environment.” Were the question only concerned with providing a community
environment for their members, my answer would have been an enthusiastic “yes.”
Fraternities and sororities are perhaps the closest groups on college campuses. On many
campuses, they live, study, and party together. The “rush” process alone is enough to
bring several wannabe members together as one cohesive unit. Often, within fraternities
and sororities, students make lifetime friends and professional contacts; they build a
support system away from home that for many students is the ship that keeps them
afloat in the vast ocean that is college.
The problem, however, lies in the fact that the question included the word
“positive.” For all of the great things fraternities and sororities do for their members, much

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 380

6/18/12 3:11 PM

STUDEnT WrITInG

381

of it, though pleasurable, does not seem positive. We have all heard stories of fraternities
and sororities placing their pledges in compromising and even dangerous situations all
for the sake of brotherhood or sisterhood. Such stories are more frequent than these
organizations would have the general public believe. The process that pledges have to
endure to make it to the positive community environment can often humiliate them,
bringing them down to the point that they feel that walking away from such a group
would make the person less than the others. Admittedly, that brings into question the
self-esteem of the pledge, but it also makes me question why an overwhelming number
of students with self-esteem issues are drawn to fraternities and sororities. Instead of
being uplifting societies focused on the growth and maturity of its members, the
community environment can often become a crutch, which is anything but positive.
In essence, my argument is not that fraternities and sororities are bad, because
without more specific definition of the terms analyzed, of course bad examples will run
rampant. My argument, however, is that as a whole, it seems that fraternities and
sororities have departed from their true purposes; they have lost touch with the
principles and values upon which they were founded. Finding those principles again and
rebuilding their lost legacies would be an amazing step toward becoming truly positive
community environments, and it would take work from all such groups in order to fix
the way outsiders perceive the groups as a whole.

Questions
1. The student has written in the first person, using both I and we. Is that decision
appropriate or inappropriate for this assignment and topic? Why?
2. The thesis statement is “closed,” with specification of the essay’s major points
clearly identified. As a reader, do you find this type of thesis helpful or limiting?
3. What effect does the figurative language (“the ship that keeps them afloat,” para. 3)
have on you as a reader?
4. What attempts does Martin make to develop a balanced tone and perspective?

Revision
After writing the draft, Martin did some reading and research on the topic. The
following revision shows his expanded view and use of sources.

Fraternities and Sororities
Martin Copeland
From the outside, it is very difficult to tell exactly what fraternities and
sororities do or don’t do for their members. What an outsider can do, however, is give an

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 381

6/18/12 3:11 PM

382

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

honest opinion of his or her perception to members to help them understand how their
organizations are perceived, what the misconceptions are, and why they may have
difficulty attracting new members. The general idea and philosophy of fraternities and
sororities is to provide a positive community environment for their members, and in
their purest form, they can do just that. Unfortunately, most fraternities and sororities
are not in their “purest form” and have been corrupted by what might be a minority of
highly visible members.
It is important to understand the language of “positive community
environment.” Were the question concerned only with sororities and fraternities
providing a community environment for their members, my answer would have been an
enthusiastic yes. Fraternities and sororities are perhaps the closest groups on college
campuses. On many campuses, they live, study, and party together. The “rush” process
alone is enough to bring several wannabe members together as one cohesive unit. Often,
within fraternities and sororities, students make lifetime friends and professional
contacts. In his explanation of why he is proud to be part of a fraternity, Douglas
Luetjen points out that “all but eight U.S. presidents since 1856 have been regular or
honorary members of a college fraternity. And . . . 85% of the Fortune 500 executives are
fraternity members.”
Furthermore, in a sorority or a fraternity, students can build a support system
away from home that for many is the ship that keeps them afloat in the vast ocean
that is college. Anne Remington begins her article for Parent Times, an online magazine
from the University of Iowa, with a story about a freshman who felt that no one
remembered her birthday until her Alpha Chi Omega sisters began singing to her:
“And in that instance, she knew she had found a new ‘home.’ ” Remington continues
to describe Greek-letter organizations that appeal to specific minorities and that
provide a “sense of belonging” for many students who are away from home for the
first time.
The problem, however, lies in the fact that the question included the word
“positive.” For all of the great things fraternities and sororities do for their members,
much of it, though pleasurable, does not always seem positive. We have all heard stories
of fraternities and sororities placing their pledges in compromising and even dangerous
situations all for the sake of brotherhood or sisterhood. Such stories are more frequent
than these organizations would have the general public believe. The process that pledges
have to endure to make it to the positive community environment can often humiliate
them, bringing them down to the point that they feel that walking away from such a
group would make them less than the others.
A major problem with fraternities and sororities is drinking and the negative
behaviors that accompany it. According to a study at the University of Washington, 85%
of those living in Greek houses drank at least one to two times per week, 37% three to
four times (Baer et al.). Another national study reported that sorority members are
nearly twice as likely to become binge drinkers than their nonsorority counterparts, and
75% of fraternity members were self-described binge drinkers (Wechsler). This study also

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 382

6/18/12 3:11 PM

STUDEnT WrITInG

383

reported higher incidences of missed classes and unprotected sex among fraternity and
sorority members.
In essence, my argument is not that fraternities and sororities are necessarily
a negative community environment, but they do promote negative and potentially
dangerous behaviors. As a whole, it seems that too many fraternities and sororities have
become “organized saloons” (Cross) and departed from the principles and values upon
which they were founded: “scholarship, relationships, leadership, and service” (Remington).
Finding those principles again and rebuilding their lost legacies will be a step toward
becoming truly positive community environments, though it will take the work of many
individuals to change the way outsiders perceive fraternities and sororities.

Works Cited
Baer, J.S., D. R. Kivlahan, and G.A. Marlatt. “High-Risk Drinking across the Transition from
High School to College.” Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research 19.1 (1995):
54–61.
Cross, Charles R. “Why I’m Proud I’m Not a Greek.” Columns: University of Washington Alumni
Magazine September 2001: XX. Web. 6 Mar. 2004. <http://www.washington.edu/
alumni/columns/sept01/greekdebate1.html>.
Luetjen, Douglas A. “Why I’m Proud I’m a Greek.” Columns: University of Washington Alumni
Magazine September 2001: XX. Web. 6 Mar. 2004. <http://www.washington.edu/
alumni/columns/sept01/greekdebate1.html>.
Remington, Anne. “It’s All Greek to Me.” Parent Times Online Winter 2004–2005:
n. pag. U of Iowa. Web. 15 Mar. 2004. <http://www.uiowa.edu/~ptimes/issues04-05/
winter04-05/greek.html>.
Wechsler, Henry. Binge Drinking on American College Campuses: A New Look at an
Old Problem. Harvard School of Public Health (1995). Web. 20 Mar. 2004. <http://
www.hsph.harvard.edu/cas/Documents/monograph_2000/cas_mono_2000.pdf>.

Questions
1. Cite three changes Martin has made, and discuss their effect.
2. The revised essay is written primarily in the third person. Is this point of view
more effective? Why or why not?
3. Do the sources Martin has chosen help to balance his argument, or do they favor
one viewpoint?
4. Do the sources give Martin’s voice more authority? If so, explain how. If you do
not think so, explain why not. Did he cite his sources properly? How does that
affect his authority?
5. Is the revision more effective as an argument? Explain your answer, with specific
references to the initial draft and the revision.
6. Find and read one or more of the sources. Are the quotations and references effective? Would you have made other choices? Why or why not?

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 383

6/18/12 3:11 PM

384

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

Grammar as Rhetoric and Style
Parallel Structures
Sentences or parts of a sentence are parallel when structures within them take the
same form. Parallelism is important at the level of the word, the phrase, and the
clause.

Words
Why should we live with such hurry and waste of life?
— Henry David Thoreau

In this sentence, the words hurry and waste, both nouns, follow the preposition
with; hurry and waste are parallel.
In eternity there is indeed something true and sublime.
— Henry David Thoreau

In this sentence, the words true and sublime, both adjectives, modify the pronoun
something; true and sublime are parallel.

Phrases
Men esteem truth remote, in the outskirts of the system behind the farthest
star, before Adam and after the last man.
— Henry David Thoreau

To modify the adjective remote in this first sentence, Thoreau uses parallel prepositional phrases: in the outskirts, before the farthest star, before Adam, and after
the last man.
More difficult because there is no zeitgeist to read, no template to follow, no
mask to wear.
— Anna Quindlen

And in the preceding sentence, Anna Quindlen uses three parallel nouns each
preceded by no and each followed by an infinitive: no zeitgeist to read, no template to follow, and no mask to wear.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 384

6/18/12 3:11 PM

GrAMMAr AS rHETorIC AnD STyLE

385

clauses
“Where I Lived, and What I Lived For”
— Title of an essay by Henry David Thoreau

The title of Thoreau’s essay consists of two parallel dependent, or subordinate,
clauses; one begins with where, and the other begins with what.
[W]e perceive that only great and worthy things have any permanent and
absolute existence, that petty fears and petty pleasures are but the shadow of
the reality.
— Henry David Thoreau

The preceding example contains two parallel dependent clauses, each beginning
with that and functioning as an object of the verb perceive.
If we are really dying, let us hear the rattle in our throats and feel cold in the
extremities; if we are alive, let us go about our business.
— Henry David Thoreau

This example begins with a dependent clause (If . . . dying) followed by an independent, or main, clause (let . . . extremities); then, after the semicolon, Thoreau
presents another dependent-independent construction, parallel to the first.

lack of Parallelism
To fully appreciate the power of the parallelism created by Thoreau and Quindlen
in the preceding examples, consider what happens when supposedly equal elements of a sentence do not follow the same grammatical or syntactical form —
that is, when they are not parallel with each other.
Why should we live with such hurry and to waste life?
This version of Thoreau’s sentence tries to modify the verb should live by coordinating a prepositional phrase, with such hurry, with an infinitive phrase, to waste
life. The two phrases are not parallel with each other, and as a result, the sentence
lacks balance and force.
Parallelism can be tricky when the elements — words, phrases, or clauses —
are separated by modifiers or other syntactical elements. The following sentence
may not at first glance seem to lack parallelism:
It [the process of friendships fading] was sweet and sad and, though you’d
rarely admit it, a necessity.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 385

6/18/12 3:11 PM

386

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

When you analyze carefully, you notice that sweet and sad are adjectives, and
necessity is a noun. Notice that in the actual sentence that Scott Brown wrote in
“Friendonomics,” he makes all three words parallel adjectives:
It was sweet and sad, and though you’d rarely admit it, necessary.
— Scott Brown

The fact that all three are adjectives underscores the unity in the qualities Brown
argues is the natural ebb and flow of friendships fading: it’s sweet and sad and
also necessary.
Parallelism is often at its most effective at the level of the clause, but, again, it
may be difficult to keep track. Let’s use an example from Malcolm Gladwell. Here
it is without parallel structure:
In other words, Facebook activism succeeds not by motivating people to
make a real sacrifice but when people are motivated to do things even
though they are not motivated enough to make a real sacrifice.
That sentence makes sense — once you’ve untangled all the motivations! — but
the emphasis Gladwell intends is on the not: people are not motivated by x but by
y. In the sentence that actually appears in his essay, he repeats the phrase by motivating and thus uses parallel structure to emphasize the contrast:
In other words, Facebook activism succeeds not by motivating people to
make a real sacrifice but by motivating them to do the things that people do
when they are not motivated enough to make a real sacrifice.
— Malcolm Gladwell

Rhetorical and Stylistic Strategy
Looking first at the parallel sentences at the beginning of this lesson and then at
the rewrites that lack parallelism, you can see that writers use parallelism on the
level of the word, phrase, or clause as a rhetorical and stylistic device to emphasize ideas, to contrast ideas, or to connect ideas.
Following are the names, definitions, and examples of specific types of parallelism:
anaphora: Repetition of a word or phrase at the beginning of successive phrases,
clauses, or lines.
But when you have seen vicious mobs lynch your mothers and fathers at will and
drown your sisters and brothers at whim; when you have seen hate-filled policemen
curse, kick, and even kill your black brothers and sisters; . . . when you are forever

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 386

6/18/12 3:11 PM

GrAMMAr AS rHETorIC AnD STyLE

387

fighting a degenerating sense of “nobodiness” — then you will understand why we find
it difficult to wait.
— Martin Luther King Jr.

In this example, form follows function. Just as King is saying that African Americans have had to endure unjust treatment as they waited for full civil rights, this
series of parallel clauses makes the reader wait — and wait — for the main point
in the independent clause.
antimetabole:

Repetition of words in reverse order.

We do not ride on the railroad; it rides upon us.
— Henry David Thoreau
Ask not what your country can do for you; ask what you can do for your country.
— John F. Kennedy

The example above from President Kennedy is, perhaps, his most famous quote.
Part of what makes this quote so “quotable” is that the repetition inherent in
antimetabole makes it dramatic and easy to remember. Because the pattern of the
two clauses is so similar, the listener only needs to remember one pattern. Because
that sentence pattern is repeated, it gives the listener two chances to understand
the entire sentence and places extra emphasis on the second part. It is almost as if
Kennedy is repeating a point for emphasis. Keep an eye out for antimetabole in
modern political soundbites.
antithesis:

Opposition, or contrast, of ideas or words in a parallel construction.

[F]reedom is never voluntarily given by the oppressor; it must be demanded by the
oppressed.
— Martin Luther King Jr.
One has not only a legal but a moral responsibility to obey just laws. Conversely, one
has a moral responsibility to disobey unjust laws.
— Martin Luther King Jr.
That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind.
— Neil Armstrong

In all three of these examples, the parallel structure creates a clear comparison between two things in order to emphasize the difference between them. Given
by the oppressor is contrasted in meaning and in placement with demanded by
the oppressed. Notice also how the parallel prepositional phrases by the oppressor and by the oppressed call attention to the tension between oppressor and
oppressed.
zeugma: Use of two different words in a grammatically similar way that produces different, often incongruous, meanings.
Someone sent me a T-shirt not long ago that read “Well-Behaved Women Don’t Make
History.” They don’t make good lawyers, either, or doctors or businesswomen.
— Anna Quindlen

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 387

6/18/12 3:11 PM

388

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

You are free to execute your laws and your citizens as you see fit.
— Star Trek: The Next Generation

In this example, the zeugma is created when the verb make takes many different
nouns as its direct object: history, but also, lawyers, doctors, and businesswomen.
While all of these words are nouns, they do not have the same meanings — history
is not an occupation, while all the other nouns are. There is a consistency in the
pattern, but an inconsistency in the meaning of the words. Quindlen exploits the
ironic inconsistency of the zeugma to draw a connection between two things that
her audience might not otherwise think of as connected: activists who fought for
women’s rights, and women today who are trying to build their careers.

• ExERCISE 1 •
Identify the parallel structure in words, phrases, or clauses in each of the
following sentences.
1. “A penny saved is a penny earned.” (Benjamin Franklin)
2. Was this act the work of a genius or a lunatic?
3. This situation is a problem not only for the students but also for the
teachers.
4. Heather learned to work fast, ask few questions, and generally keep a
low profile.
5. After you finish your homework and before you check your email,
please do your chores.

• ExERCISE 2 •
Correct the faulty parallelism in the following sentences.
1. My new exercise program and going on a strict diet will help me lose
the weight I gained over the holidays.
2. As part of his accounting business, Rick has private clients, does some
pro bono work, and corporations.
3. Try not to focus on the mistakes that you’ve made; what you’ve learned
from them should be your focus instead.
4. A new job is likely to cause a person anxiety and working extra hours
to make a good impression.
5. A competent physician will assess a patient’s physical symptoms, and
mental attitude will also be considered.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 388

6/18/12 3:11 PM

GrAMMAr AS rHETorIC AnD STyLE

389

• ExERCISE 3 •
Identify the parallel structures in the following sentences from Martin
Luther King Jr.’s “Letter from Birmingham Jail,” and explain their effect.
1. So I, along with several members of my staff, am here because I was
invited here. I am here because I have organizational ties here. (para. 2)
2. We are caught in an inescapable network of mutuality, tied in a single
garment of destiny. (para. 4)
3. Whatever affects one directly, affects all indirectly. (para. 4)
4. In any nonviolent campaign there are four basic steps: collection of the
facts to determine whether injustices exist; negotiation; self-purification;
and direct action. (para. 6)
5. An unjust law is a code that a numerical or power majority group compels a minority group to obey but does not make binding on itself. This
is difference made legal. By the same token, a just law is a code that a
majority compels a minority to follow and that it is willing to follow
itself. This is sameness made legal. (para. 17)
6. Was not Jesus an extremist for love: “Love your enemies, bless them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which
despitefully use you, and persecute you.” Was not Amos an extremist for
justice: “Let justice roll down like waters and righteousness like an everflowing stream.” Was not Paul an extremist for the Christian gospel: “I
bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus.” Was not Martin Luther
an extremist: “Here I stand; I cannot do otherwise, so help me God.”
And John Bunyan: “I will stay in jail to the end of my days before I make
a butchery of my conscience.” And Abraham Lincoln: “This nation cannot
survive half slave and half free.” And Thomas Jefferson: “We hold these
truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal. . . .” (para. 31)
7. If I have said anything in this letter that overstates the truth and indicates an unreasonable impatience, I beg you to forgive me. If I have said
anything that understates the truth and indicates my having a patience
that allows me to settle for anything less than brotherhood, I beg God
to forgive me. (para. 49)

• ExERCISE 4 •
The following paragraph is from Toni Morrison’s Nobel Lecture, delivered
in 1993 when she won the Nobel Prize for Literature. Find examples of parallel structure; identify whether the construction is a word, clause, or phrase;
and explain its effect.

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 389

6/18/12 3:11 PM

390

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

The systematic looting of language can be recognized by the tendency of
its users to forgo its nuanced, complex, mid-wifery properties for menace
and subjugation. Oppressive language does more than represent violence;
it is violence; does more than represent the limits of knowledge; it limits
knowledge. Whether it is obscuring state language or the faux-language of
mindless media; whether it is the proud but calcified language of the academy or the commodity driven language of science; whether it is the malign
language of law-without-ethics, or language designed for the estrangement of minorities, hiding its racist plunder in its literary cheek — it must
be rejected, altered and exposed. It is the language that drinks blood, laps
vulnerabilities, tucks its fascist boots under crinolines of respectability
and patriotism as it moves relentlessly toward the bottom line and the
bottomed-out mind. Sexist language, racist language, theistic language —
all are typical of the policing languages of mastery, and cannot, do not permit new knowledge or encourage the mutual exchange of ideas.

• ExERCISE 5 •
Each of the following sentences is an example of parallelism. Identify the
type of parallelism, explain its effect, and then model a sentence of your
own on the example.
1. To spend too much time in studies is sloth; to use them too much for
ornament is affectation; to make judgment wholly by their rules is the
humour of a scholar.
— Francis Bacon
2. Alas, art is long, and life is short.
— Benjamin Franklin
3. Flowers are as common here . . . as people are in London.
— Oscar Wilde
4. Where justice is denied, where poverty is enforced, where ignorance
prevails, and where any one class is made to feel that society is in an
organized conspiracy to oppress, rob, and degrade them, neither persons nor property will be safe.
— Frederick Douglass
5. He carried a strobe light and the responsibility for the lives of his men.
— Tim O’Brien

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 390

6/18/12 3:11 PM

SUGGESTIonS For WrITInG

391

Suggestions for Writing
Community
Now that you have examined a number of texts that focus on community, explore
this topic yourself by synthesizing your own ideas and the readings. You might
want to do more research or use readings from other classes as you write.
1. Cell phones, e-mail, social networking sites, blogs, and other electronic communication have made our world smaller and increased the pace at which we
live life. Have these inventions also given us a new sense of community or
opened up communities that would otherwise be closed to us? Have they lowered or expanded our standards of what community means?
2. Write about the discussion that might ensue among several of the writers you
have studied in this chapter if they were to focus on the following question:
What are the characteristics of a productive and successful community at the
start of the twenty-first century?
3. Creating a community of like-minded people is the principle behind the
development of many charter schools. Select a charter school in your area, and
examine it as an intentional community, defined as “a group of people who
have chosen to live together with a common purpose, working cooperatively
to create a lifestyle that reflects their shared core values.”
4. Was the Ku Klux Klan in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries a community? Many would argue yes, that it fit most definitions of community. It was,
however, one of many so-called communities that might be seen as counterproductive. Choose another controversial community (such as the punk community, a country club, or a secret society), examine its structure and purpose,
and argue for or against its value to its members and to the larger community.
5. Many colleges and universities are developing what they call living-learning
communities, in which students choose to live together as a group centered
around a theme, which could be anything from Chinese culture to women in
science. Some critics believe such groupings are limiting because the students
are not exposed to different viewpoints and interests. Others object because
they believe segregation based on race, ethnicity, or religion does not contribute to the mission of higher education. What do you think of living-learning
communities? Will you choose to live in one when you go to college? Why or
why not?
6. Examine a community that is organized around shared values but not geographic proximity. What holds that community together? What do members
gain from it? Why does it continue?

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 391

6/18/12 3:11 PM

392

CHAPTEr 6 • CoMMUnITy

7. Following is a description of a coffeehouse called Java from the novel Queen of
Dreams by Chitra Banerjee Divakaruni.
Java demands nothing from them [customers] except their money. It allows them
to remain unknown. . . . And yet they have community, too, as much of it as they
want: the comfortable company of a roomful of nameless-faceless folks just like
themselves, happy to be alone, to gaze into middle distance, to notice no one.

Discuss this concept of community, explain how it can function for some, and
describe examples of it that you have seen.
8. Write an essay about making the transition from one community to another
and how that change affects your sense of self. The transition might be from
one country to another or simply from one neighborhood or group of friends
to another. Include descriptions of the communities as well as your own emotional responses. You might also include photographs as part of the essay.
9. The author Kurt Vonnegut Jr. wrote, “What should young people do with their
lives today? Many things, obviously. But the most daring thing is to create
stable communities in which the terrible disease of loneliness can be cured.”
Write a speech that you would deliver to a group of your peers (identify which
group) that uses Vonnegut’s idea as your main point and recommends ways to
“create stable communities.”

06_SHE_67650_Ch06_279_392.indd 392

6/18/12 3:11 PM

7
The Economy
What is the role of the economy in our everyday lives?

H

ardly a day goes by without people hearing something about the
economy — good or bad. Just what is this grand presence that inserts
itself into our lives? Generally, “the economy” refers to the production, trade, and
consumption of goods and services. And economics is the study of that process.
It is generally broken into macroeconomics and microeconomics: the former refers
to the economy at large, and the latter refers to the economic considerations and
transactions that we make in our everyday lives.
For most of us, our experience of the economy begins first with consumption
of goods, and then with work. We perform labor in order to purchase goods, especially those that are necessary to life. And yet it’s not so simple. How do we choose
what work to do? What counts as important work? Should work do more than
pay the bills — should it satisfy the soul? And what exactly do we mean by “necessary for life”?
Our national mythology — the American Dream — is based on the belief that
hard work will not go unrewarded. Yet recently that dream seems increasingly
difficult to realize. We consume more and more but produce less and less. For the
first time in history, we are participating in a truly global economy. Ultimately,
what will be the outcome of such extreme shifts?
The authors and artists whose work you find in this chapter offer different perspectives on the meaning of economics in our lives. In the central work, Barbara
Ehrenreich tells of her experience trying to make a living earning minimum wage;
and in our classic essay, Jonathan Swift poses a novel solution to the woes of the destitute in eighteenth-century Ireland. Eric Schlosser (p. 431) asks whether we can
enjoy the fruits of labor without exploiting the laborers, and Matthew B. Crawford
(p. 449) looks at the nature of work itself, discussing what he calls “knowledge
work” and “manual work.” Other authors in this chapter consider the plight of
the poor and the future of the American Dream. Finally, we enter a conversation
about materialism in American culture. Do we insist on consuming more than
we need — more, in fact, than is good for us and for the world? Or is our consumption of goods and services a realization of the American Dream?

393

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 393

6/18/12 3:11 PM

from Serving in Florida
Barbara Ehrenreich
Best-selling author Barbara Ehrenreich (b. 1941) started out as a scientist. But after receiving her PhD in biology from Rockefeller University,
she pursued a career in the academic world only briefly before starting
to write for magazines such as Time and the Progressive. A social critic
with a decidedly liberal bent, her sardonic sensibility often animates
her writing. Some of her recent books include Nickel and Dimed: On
(Not) Getting By in America (2001), Bait and Switch: The (Futile) Pursuit of the American Dream (2005), and Bright-Sided: How the Relentless Pursuit of Positive Thinking Has Undermined America (2009). To research her
most famous book, Nickel and Dimed, a study of the working poor in the United
States, Ehrenreich worked undercover as a server, maid, and salesclerk; and she
tried to live on the wages she received. The following excerpt from “Serving in
Florida,” a chapter in Nickel and Dimed, describes Ehrenreich’s experience working
in a restaurant named Jerry’s.

P

icture a fat person’s hell, and I don’t mean a place with no food. Instead
there is everything you might eat if eating had no bodily consequences —
the cheese fries, the chicken-fried steaks, the fudge-laden desserts — only here
every bite must be paid for, one way or another, in human discomfort. The kitchen
is a cavern, a stomach leading to the lower intestine that is the garbage and dishwashing area, from which issue bizarre smells combining the edible and the offal:
creamy carrion, pizza barf, and that unique and enigmatic Jerry’s scent, citrus
fart. The floor is slick with spills, forcing us to walk through the kitchen with tiny
steps, like Susan McDougal1 in leg irons. Sinks everywhere are clogged with scraps
of lettuce, decomposing lemon wedges, water-logged toast crusts. Put your hand
down on any counter and you risk being stuck to it by the film of ancient syrup
spills, and this is unfortunate because hands are utensils here, used for scooping
up lettuce onto the salad plates, lifting out pie slices, and even moving hash browns
from one plate to another. The regulation poster in the single unisex rest room
admonishes us to wash our hands thoroughly, and even offers instructions for
doing so, but there is always some vital substance missing — soap, paper towels,
toilet paper — and I never found all three at once. You learn to stuff your pockets

1Susan McDougal was imprisoned in 1996 for contempt of court, fraud, and conspiracy in connection with the failed Whitewater land deal involving President Bill Clinton and First Lady
Hillary Rodham Clinton. The Clintons were never charged with any wrongdoing. — Eds.

394

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 394

6/18/12 3:11 PM

EhREnREich • SERving in FloRiDA

395

with napkins before going in there, and too bad about the customers, who must
eat, although they don’t realize it, almost literally out of our hands.
The break room summarizes the whole situation: there is none, because there
are no breaks at Jerry’s. For six to eight hours in a row, you never sit except to pee.
Actually, there are three folding chairs at a table immediately adjacent to the bathroom, but hardly anyone ever sits in this, the very rectum of the gastroarchitectural system. Rather, the function of the peri-toilet area is to house the ashtrays in
which servers and dishwashers leave their cigarettes burning at all times, like
votive candles, so they don’t have to waste time lighting up again when they dash
back here for a puff. Almost everyone smokes as if their pulmonary well-being
depended on it — the multinational mélange of cooks; the dishwashers, who are
all Czechs here; the servers, who are American natives — creating an atmosphere
in which oxygen is only an occasional pollutant. My first morning at Jerry’s, when
the hypoglycemic shakes set in, I complain to one of my fellow servers that I don’t
understand how she can go so long without food. “Well, I don’t understand how
you can go so long without a cigarette,” she responds in a tone of reproach. Because
work is what you do for others; smoking is what you do for yourself. I don’t know
why the antismoking crusaders have never grasped the element of defiant selfnurturance that makes the habit so endearing to its victims — as if, in the American workplace, the only thing people have to call their own is the tumors they are
nourishing and the spare moments they devote to feeding them.
Now, the Industrial Revolution is not an easy transition, especially, in my
experience, when you have to zip through it in just a couple of days. I have gone
from craft work straight into the factory, from the air-conditioned morgue of the
Hearthside directly into the flames. Customers arrive in human waves, sometimes
disgorged fifty at a time from their tour buses, peckish and whiny. Instead of two
“girls” on the floor at once, there can be as many as six of us running around in
our brilliant pink-and-orange Hawaiian shirts. Conversations, either with customers or with fellow employees, seldom last more than twenty seconds at a time.
On my first day, in fact, I am hurt by my sister servers’ coldness. My mentor for the
day is a supremely competent, emotionally uninflected twenty-three-year-old,
and the others, who gossip a little among themselves about the real reason someone is out sick today and the size of the bail bond someone else has had to pay,
ignore me completely. On my second day, I find out why. “Well, it’s good to see
you again,” one of them says in greeting. “Hardly anyone comes back after the first
day.” I feel powerfully vindicated — a survivor — but it would take a long time,
probably months, before I could hope to be accepted into this sorority.
I start out with the beautiful, heroic idea of handling the two jobs at once,
and for two days I almost do it: working the breakfast/lunch shift at Jerry’s from
8:00 till 2:00, arriving at the Hearthside a few minutes late, at 2:10, and attempting to hold out until 10:00. In the few minutes I have between jobs, I pick up a
spicy chicken sandwich at the Wendy’s drive-through window, gobble it down in

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 395

6/18/12 3:11 PM

396

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

the car, and change from khaki slacks to black, from Hawaiian to rust-colored
polo. There is a problem, though. When, during the 3:00–4:00 dead time, I finally
sit down to wrap silver, my flesh seems to bond to the seat: I try to refuel with a
purloined cup of clam chowder, as I’ve seen Gail and Joan do dozens of times, but
Stu catches me and hisses “No eating!” although there’s not a customer around to
be offended by the sight of food making contact with a server’s lips. So I tell Gail
I’m going to quit, and she hugs me and says she might just follow me to Jerry’s
herself.
But the chances of this are minuscule. She has left the flophouse and her
annoying roommate and is back to living in her truck. But, guess what, she reports
to me excitedly later that evening, Phillip has given her permission to park overnight in the hotel parking lot, as long as she keeps out of sight, and the parking
lot should be totally safe since it’s patrolled by a hotel security guard! With the
Hearthside offering benefits like that, how could anyone think of leaving? This
must be Phillip’s theory, anyway. He accepts my resignation with a shrug, his main
concern being that I return my two polo shirts and aprons.
Gail would have triumphed at Jerry’s, I’m sure, but for me it’s a crash course in
exhaustion management. Years ago, the kindly fry cook who trained me to waitress at a Los Angeles truck stop used to say: Never make an unnecessary trip; if you
don’t have to walk fast, walk slow; if you don’t have to walk, stand. But at Jerry’s
the effort of distinguishing necessary from unnecessary and urgent from whenever
would itself be too much of an energy drain. The only thing to do is to treat each
shift as a one-time-only emergency: you’ve got fifty starving people out there,
lying scattered on the battlefield, so get out there and feed them! Forget that you
will have to do this again tomorrow, forget that you will have to be alert enough
to dodge the drunks on the drive home tonight — just burn, burn, burn! Ideally, at
some point you enter what servers call a “rhythm” and psychologists term a “flow
state,” where signals pass from the sense organs directly to the muscles, bypassing
the cerebral cortex, and a Zen-like emptiness sets in. I’m on a 2:00–10:00 p.m. shift
now, and a male server from the morning shift tells me about the time he “pulled
a triple” — three shifts in a row, all the way around the clock — and then got off
and had a drink and met this girl, and maybe he shouldn’t tell me this, but they
had sex right then and there and it was like beautiful.
But there’s another capacity of the neuromuscular system, which is pain. I start
tossing back drugstore-brand ibuprofens as if they were vitamin C, four before
each shift, because an old mouse-related repetitive-stress injury in my upper back
has come back to full-spasm strength, thanks to the tray carrying. In my ordinary
life, this level of disability might justify a day of ice packs and stretching. Here I
comfort myself with the Aleve commercial where the cute blue-collar guy asks: If
you quit after working four hours, what would your boss say? And the not-so-cute
blue-collar guy, who’s lugging a metal beam on his back, answers: He’d fire me,
that’s what. But fortunately, the commercial tells us, we workers can exert the same
kind of authority over our painkillers that our bosses exert over us. If Tylenol

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 396

5

6/18/12 3:11 PM

EhREnREich • SERving in FloRiDA

397

doesn’t want to work for more than four hours, you just fire its ass and switch to
Aleve.
True, I take occasional breaks from this life, going home now and then to catch
up on e-mail and for conjugal visits (though I am careful to “pay” for everything
I eat here, at $5 for a dinner, which I put in a jar), seeing The Truman Show with
friends and letting them buy my ticket. And I still have those what-am-I-doinghere moments at work, when I get so homesick for the printed word that I obsessively reread the six-page menu. But as the days go by, my old life is beginning to
look exceedingly strange. The e-mails and phone messages addressed to my former
self come from a distant race of people with exotic concerns and far too much
time on their hands. The neighborly market I used to cruise for produce now
looks forbiddingly like a Manhattan yuppie emporium. And when I sit down one
morning in my real home to pay bills from my past life, I am dazzled by the twoand three-figure sums owed to outfits like Club Body Tech and Amazon.com.
Management at Jerry’s is generally calmer and more “professional” than at
the Hearthside, with two exceptions. One is Joy, a plump, blowsy woman in her
early thirties who once kindly devoted several minutes of her time to instructing
me in the correct one-handed method of tray carrying but whose moods change
disconcertingly from shift to shift and even within one. The other is B.J., aka B.J.
the Bitch, whose contribution is to stand by the kitchen counter and yell, “Nita,
your order’s up, move it!” or “Barbara, didn’t you see you’ve got another table out
there? Come on, girl!” Among other things, she is hated for having replaced the
whipped cream squirt cans with big plastic whipped-cream-filled baggies that
have to be squeezed with both hands — because, reportedly, she saw or thought
she saw employees trying to inhale the propellant gas from the squirt cans, in the
hope that it might be nitrous oxide. On my third night, she pulls me aside abruptly
and brings her face so close that it looks like she’s planning to butt me with her
forehead. But instead of saying, “You’re fired,” she says, “You’re doing fine.” The
only trouble is I’m spending time chatting with customers: “That’s how they’re
getting you.” Furthermore I am letting them “run me,” which means harassment
by sequential demands: you bring the catsup and they decide they want extra
Thousand Island; you bring that and they announce they now need a side of fries,
and so on into distraction. Finally she tells me not to take her wrong. She tries to
say things in a nice way, but “you get into a mode, you know, because everything
has to move so fast.”2
I mumble thanks for the advice, feeling like I’ve just been stripped naked by
the crazed enforcer of some ancient sumptuary law: No chatting for you, girl. No

10

2In Workers in a Lean World: Unions in the International Economy (Verso, 1997), Kim Moody

cites studies finding an increase in stress-related workplace injuries and illness between the mid1980s and the early 1990s. He argues that rising stress levels reflect a new system of “management
by stress” in which workers in a variety of industries are being squeezed to extract maximum
productivity, to the detriment of their health.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 397

6/18/12 3:11 PM

398

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

fancy service ethic allowed for the serfs. Chatting with customers is for the goodlooking young college-educated servers in the downtown carpaccio and ceviche
joints, the kids who can make $70–$100 a night. What had I been thinking? My
job is to move orders from tables to kitchen and then trays from kitchen to tables.
Customers are in fact the major obstacle to the smooth transformation of information into food and food into money — they are, in short, the enemy. And the
painful thing is that I’m beginning to see it this way myself. There are the traditional asshole types — frat boys who down multiple Buds and then make a fuss
because the steaks are so emaciated and the fries so sparse — as well as the variously
impaired — due to age, diabetes, or literacy issues — who require patient nutritional counseling. The worst, for some reason, are the Visible Christians — like
the ten-person table, all jolly and sanctified after Sunday night service, who run
me mercilessly and then leave me $1 on a $92 bill. Or the guy with the crucifixion
T-shirt (someone to look up to) who complains that his baked potato is too
hard and his iced tea too icy (I cheerfully fix both) and leaves no tip at all. As a
general rule, people wearing crosses or wwjd? (“What Would Jesus Do?”) buttons
look at us disapprovingly no matter what we do, as if they were confusing waitressing with Mary Magdalene’s original profession.
I make friends, over time, with the other “girls” who work my shift: Nita, the
tattooed twenty-something who taunts us by going around saying brightly, “Have
we started making money yet?” Ellen, whose teenage son cooks on the graveyard
shift and who once managed a restaurant in Massachusetts but won’t try out for
management here because she prefers being a “common worker” and not “ordering people around.” Easygoing fiftyish Lucy, with the raucous laugh, who limps
toward the end of the shift because of something that has gone wrong with her
leg, the exact nature of which cannot be determined without health insurance.
We talk about the usual girl things — men, children, and the sinister allure of Jerry’s
chocolate peanut-butter cream pie — though no one, I notice, ever brings up anything potentially expensive, like shopping or movies. As at the Hearthside, the
only recreation ever referred to is partying, which requires little more than some
beer, a joint, and a few close friends. Still, no one is homeless, or cops to it anyway,
thanks usually to a working husband or boyfriend. All in all, we form a reliable
mutual-support group: if one of us is feeling sick or overwhelmed, another one
will “bev” a table or even carry trays for her. If one of us is off sneaking a cigarette
or a pee, the others will do their best to conceal her absence from the enforcers of
corporate rationality.3

3Until April 1998, there was no federally mandated right to bathroom breaks. According to Marc

Linder and Ingrid Nygaard, authors of Void Where Prohibited: Rest Breaks and the Right to Urinate
on Company Time (Cornell University Press, 1997), “The right to rest and void at work is not
high on the list of social or political causes supported by professional or executive employees, who
enjoy personal workplace liberties that millions of factory workers can only dream about. . . .

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 398

6/18/12 3:11 PM

EhREnREich • SERving in FloRiDA

399

But my saving human connection — my oxytocin [hormone] receptor, as it
were — is George, the nineteen-year-old Czech dishwasher who has been in this
country exactly one week. We get talking when he asks me, tortuously, how much
cigarettes cost at Jerry’s. I do my best to explain that they cost over a dollar more
here than at a regular store and suggest that he just take one from the half-filled
packs that are always lying around on the break table. But that would be unthinkable. Except for the one tiny earring signaling his allegiance to some vaguely alternative point of view, George is a perfect straight arrow — crew-cut, hardworking,
and hungry for eye contact. “Czech Republic,” I ask, “or Slovakia?” and he seems
delighted that I know the difference. “Vaclav Havel,” I try, “Velvet Revolution, Frank
Zappa?” “Yes, yes, 1989,” he says, and I realize that for him this is already history.
My project is to teach George English. “How are you today, George?” I say at
the start of each shift. “I am good, and how are you today, Barbara?” I learn that
he is not paid by Jerry’s but by the “agent” who shipped him over — $5 an hour,
with the agent getting the dollar or so difference between that and what Jerry’s
pays dishwashers. I learn also that he shares an apartment with a crowd of other
Czech “dishers,” as he calls them, and that he cannot sleep until one of them goes
off for his shift, leaving a vacant bed. We are having one of our ESL sessions late
one afternoon when B.J. catches us at it and orders “Joseph” to take up the rubber
mats on the floor near the dishwashing sinks and mop underneath. “I thought
your name was George,” I say loud enough for B.J. to hear as she strides off back
to the counter. Is she embarrassed? Maybe a little, because she greets me back at
the counter with “George, Joseph — there are so many of them!” I say nothing,
neither nodding nor smiling, and for this I am punished later, when I think I am
ready to go and she announces that I need to roll fifty more sets of silverware, and
isn’t it time I mixed up a fresh four-gallon batch of blue-cheese dressing? May you
grow old in this place, B.J., is the curse I beam out at her when I am finally permitted to leave. May the syrup spills glue your feet to the floor.
I make the decision to move closer to Key West. First, because of the drive.
Second and third, also because of the drive: gas is eating up $4–$5 a day, and
although Jerry’s is as high-volume as you can get, the tips average only 10 percent,
and not just for a newbie like me. Between the base pay of $2.15 an hour and the
obligation to share tips with the busboys and dishwashers, we’re averaging only
about $7.50 an hour. Then there is the $30 I had to spend on the regulation tan
slacks worn by Jerry’s servers — a setback it could take weeks to absorb. (I had
combed the town’s two downscale department stores hoping for something cheaper
While we were dismayed to discover that workers lacked an acknowledged right to void at
work, [the workers] were amazed by outsiders’ naïve belief that their employers would permit
them to perform this basic bodily function when necessary. . . . A factory worker, not allowed a
break for six-hour stretches, voided into pads worn inside her uniform; and a kindergarten
teacher in a school without aides had to take all twenty children with her to the bathroom and
line them up outside the stall door while she voided.”

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 399

6/18/12 3:11 PM

400

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

but decided in the end that these marked-down Dockers, originally $49, were
more likely to survive a daily washing.) Of my fellow servers, everyone who lacks a
working husband or boyfriend seems to have a second job: Nita does something at
a computer eight hours a day; another welds. Without the forty-five-minute commute, I can picture myself working two jobs and still having the time to shower
between them.
So I take the $500 deposit I have coming from my landlord, the $400 I have
earned toward the next month’s rent, plus the $200 reserved for emergencies, and
use the $1,100 to pay the rent and deposit on trailer number 46 in the Overseas
Trailer Park, a mile from the cluster of budget hotels that constitute Key West’s
version of an industrial park. Number 46 is about eight feet in width and shaped
like a barbell inside, with a narrow region — because of the sink and the stove —
separating the bedroom from what might optimistically be called the “living”
area, with its two-person table and half-sized couch. The bathroom is so small my
knees rub against the shower stall when I sit on the toilet, and you can’t just leap
out of the bed, you have to climb down to the foot of it in order to find a patch of
floor space to stand on. Outside, I am within a few yards of a liquor store, a bar
that advertises “free beer tomorrow,” a convenience store, and a Burger King — but
no supermarket or, alas, laundromat. By reputation, the Overseas park is a nest
of crime and crack, and I am hoping at least for some vibrant multicultural street
life. But desolation rules night and day, except for a thin stream of pedestrians
heading for their jobs at the Sheraton or the 7-Eleven. There are not exactly
people here but what amounts to canned labor, being preserved between shifts
from the heat.
In line with my reduced living conditions, a new form of ugliness arises at
Jerry’s. First we are confronted — via an announcement on the computers through
which we input orders — with the new rule that the hotel bar, the Driftwood, is
henceforth off-limits to restaurant employees. The culprit, I learn through the
grapevine, is the ultraefficient twenty-three-year-old who trained me — another
trailer home dweller and a mother of three. Something had set her off one morning, so she slipped out for a nip and returned to the floor impaired. The restriction
mostly hurts Ellen, whose habit it is to free her hair from its rubber band and
drop by the Driftwood for a couple of Zins before heading home at the end of her
shift, but all of us feel the chill. Then the next day, when I go for straws, I find the
dry-storage room locked. It’s never been locked before; we go in and out of it all
day — for napkins, jelly containers, Styrofoam cups for takeout. Vic, the portly
assistant manager who opens it for me, explains that he caught one of the dishwashers attempting to steal something and, unfortunately, the miscreant will be
with us until a replacement can be found — hence the locked door. I neglect to ask
what he had been trying to steal but Vic tells me who he is — the kid with the buzz
cut and the earring, you know, he’s back there right now.
I wish I could say I rushed back and confronted George to get his side of the
story. I wish I could say I stood up to Vic and insisted that George be given a trans-

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 400

15

6/18/12 3:11 PM

EhREnREich • SERving in FloRiDA

401

lator and allowed to defend himself or announced that I’d find a lawyer who’d
handle the case pro bono. At the very least I should have testified as to the kid’s
honesty. The mystery to me is that there’s not much worth stealing in the drystorage room, at least not in any fenceable quantity: “Is Gyorgi here, and am having 200 — maybe 250 — catsup packets. What do you say?” My guess is that he had
taken — if he had taken anything at all — some Saltines or a can of cherry pie mix
and that the motive for taking it was hunger.
So why didn’t I intervene? Certainly not because I was held back by the kind
of moral paralysis that can mask as journalistic objectivity. On the contrary, something new — something loathsome and servile — had infected me, along with the
kitchen odors that I could still sniff on my bra when I finally undressed at night.
In real life I am moderately brave, but plenty of brave people shed their courage
in POW camps, and maybe something similar goes on in the infinitely more congenial milieu of the low-wage American workplace. Maybe, in a month or two more
at Jerry’s, I might have regained my crusading spirit. Then again, in a month or two
I might have turned into a different person altogether — say, the kind of person
who would have turned George in.

Questions for Discussion
1. Does Barbara Ehrenreich seem to be exaggerating the workplace as she describes
it in this selection? If you have worked in a restaurant, does her description of the
environment match your experience?
2. What is Ehrenreich’s attitude toward her coworkers? Does she appreciate them? Is
she condescending? How do you react to her observations?
3. Early in the selection, as Ehrenreich pays bills left over from her “real life,” she
reflects, “[My] old life is beginning to look exceedingly strange” (para. 8). At the
end, she asks, “So why didn’t I intervene [with George]?” (para. 18). Does the experience of “serving in Florida” change Ehrenreich? Cite specific passages to support
your response.
4. According to Ehrenreich, who is to blame for the situation of those who work at
low-paying jobs in restaurants? Are there heroes and villains, or does the workplace itself change the people who are part of it?
5. Overall, what is your attitude toward Ehrenreich and her method of research?
Does choosing to live as one of the working poor for a short time — as a kind of
visitor or tourist — give her an accurate picture of their lives? Explain whether you
find her presentation of them respectful, convincing, sympathetic, patronizing,
superficial, or some combination of these. Cite specific passages.
6. Ehrenreich’s essay delivers strong implications about the U.S. economy. What is the
relationship between the macroeconomy and the microeconomy in the essay?
Which is more prominent? Identify places where she addresses each. What implications does her essay make about each?

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 401

6/18/12 3:11 PM

402

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

Questions on Rhetoric and Style
1. Ehrenreich opens the selection with “Picture a fat person’s hell . . .” (para. 1).
What is the intended effect? Does she want to shock or disgust the reader? Is she
being humorous?
2. Ehrenreich describes the kitchen in terms of bodily organs and functions. What
response is she trying to evoke? Is she successful? (See paras. 1 and 2.)
3. Ehrenreich provides fairly extensive commentary in footnotes. What is the effect
of this strategy? In the footnotes, is her tone different from the one used in the
body of the piece? Explain.
4. Ehrenreich uses lively, emotionally charged language throughout. Identify one
passage and analyze the diction, especially the connotations of the words. Suggestions: the paragraph beginning “Now, the Industrial Revolution is not an easy
transition . . .” (para. 3) or “I make friends, over time, with the other ‘girls’ who
work my shift . . .” (para. 11).
5. Ehrenreich occasionally uses crude expressions. Are they appropriate? What is her
intended effect in shifting to diction that is not only informal but, some would
say, crass?
6. In this selection Ehrenreich is both outsider and insider; that is, she is the writer
observing the environment in which she is playing a role. How does she make this
narrative stance work? Does she shift abruptly between describing what is going
on and commenting about it, or does she move smoothly between the two? Discuss by citing specific passages.
7. Discuss specific instances of humor in this selection. Is it primarily ironic humor?
Aggressively sarcastic? Affectionately amusing? Cite specific passages in your
response.
8. What elements of fiction does Ehrenreich employ? Consider such elements as figurative language, dialogue, narrative commentary, and description of people and
settings.
9. In this selection, Ehrenreich does not state a thesis or indicate directly what her
purpose is; instead, she works by inference and implication. What is her purpose?
State it directly in a sentence that begins, “In this selection, Ehrenreich . . .”
10. At times, Ehrenreich seems to raise tangential issues. When she describes her
coworker smoking, for instance, she writes: “Because work is what you do for
others; smoking is what you do for yourself. I don’t know why the antismoking
crusaders have never grasped the element of defiant self-nurturance that makes
the habit so endearing to its victims — as if, in the American workplace, the only
thing people have to call their own is the tumors they are nourishing and the
spare moments they devote to feeding them” (para. 2). What is the effect of this
commentary? What is its relevance to Ehrenreich’s overall purpose?
11. How does Ehrenreich establish her ethos in this selection? What part does her
relationship with George play in her appeal to ethos?
12. Who is Ehrenreich’s audience? Base your answer on the tone you detect in specific
passages.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 402

6/18/12 3:11 PM

EhREnREich • SERving in FloRiDA

403

Suggestions for Writing
1. Using Ehrenreich as a model, describe a negative work experience (for example,
you may have found a boss to be arrogant or you may have encountered prejudice
or bias). You can narrate — and comment — but also use dialogue, as Ehrenreich
does, to make the situation come alive for your readers.
2. In “Evaluation,” the final chapter of Nickel and Dimed, Ehrenreich observes:
Some odd optical property of our highly polarized and unequal society makes the
poor almost invisible to their economic superiors. The poor can see the affluent easily
enough — on television, for example, or on the covers of magazines. But the affluent
rarely see the poor or, if they do catch sight of them in some public space, rarely
know what they’re seeing, since — thanks to consignment stores and, yes, Wal-Mart —
the poor are usually able to disguise themselves as members of the more comfortable
classes.

Write an essay supporting or challenging Ehrenreich’s analysis.
3. Nickel and Dimed takes place from 1998 to 2000. Write an essay explaining whether
the author’s experience would be the same or different in today’s economy.
4. Write an editorial for a newspaper on a topic related to the issues Ehrenreich
raises — for example, a minimum wage, health care, working conditions.
5. How much is the minimum wage? Develop a budget for living for one month as a
single person earning the minimum wage (plus tips if applicable) in your geographical area. What kind of living accommodations could you afford? How much money
would you have available for food? What would your transportation costs be?

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 403

6/18/12 3:11 PM

A Modest Proposal
Jonathan Swift
Perhaps best known for Gulliver’s Travels (1726), which has mistakenly
come to be thought of as a children’s novel, Jonathan Swift (1667–
1745) was born in ireland to English parents. he was educated at
Trinity college, was ordained a minister, and was appointed dean of
Saint Patrick’s cathedral in Dublin in 1713. For years he addressed
the political problems of his day by publishing pamphlets on contemporary social issues, some of them anonymously. For one, it is
believed that a reward of 300 pounds was offered to anyone who
would “discover” the authorship. Among these pamphlets is the well-known essay
“A Modest Proposal for Preventing the children of Poor People in ireland from
Being a Burden to Their Parents or country, and for Making Them Beneficial to the
Publick,” widely known as “A Modest Proposal.” As a model of elegant prose and
cogent argument, it has gained deserved fame. After reading it, you will understand
what Swiftian means and why Swift is regarded as one of the world’s premier
satirists.

I

t is a melancholy object to those who walk through this great town or
travel in the country, when they see the streets, the roads, and cabin doors,
crowded with beggars of the female sex, followed by three, four, or six children,
all in rags and importuning every passenger for an alms. These mothers instead
of being able to work for their honest livelihood, are forced to employ all their
time in strolling to beg sustenance for their helpless infants: who as they grow up
either turn thieves for want of work, or leave their dear native country to fight for
the pretender1 in Spain, or sell themselves to the Barbadoes.
I think it is agreed by all parties that this prodigious number of children in
the arms, or on the backs, or at the heels of their mothers, and frequently of their
fathers, is in the present deplorable state of the kingdom a very great additional
grievance; and, therefore, whoever could find out a fair, cheap, and easy method of
making these children sound, useful members of the commonwealth, would deserve
so well of the public as to have his statue set up for a preserver of the nation.
But my intention is very far from being confined to provide only for the children of professed beggars; it is of a much greater extent, and shall take in the whole
number of infants at a certain age who are born of parents in effect as little able to
support them as those who demand our charity in the streets.

1James Francis Edward, son of deposed Catholic King James II. His claim to the throne was not
considered legitimate; thus, he was a pretender to the throne. — Eds.

404

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 404

6/18/12 3:11 PM

SwiFT • A MoDEST PRoPoSAl

405

As to my own part, having turned my thoughts for many years upon this
important subject, and maturely weighed the several schemes of our projectors, I
have always found them grossly mistaken in their computation. It is true, a child
just dropped from its dam may be supported by her milk for a solar year, with
little other nourishment; at most not above the value of 2s., which the mother
may certainly get, or the value in scraps, by her lawful occupation of begging; and
it is exactly at one year old that I propose to provide for them in such a manner
as instead of being a charge upon their parents or the parish, or wanting food and
raiment for the rest of their lives, they shall on the contrary contribute to the
feeding, and partly to the clothing, of many thousands.
There is likewise another great advantage in my scheme, that it will prevent
those voluntary abortions, and that horrid practice of women murdering their
bastard children, alas! too frequent among us! sacrificing the poor innocent babes
I doubt more to avoid the expense than the shame, which would move tears and
pity in the most savage and inhuman breast.
The number of souls in this kingdom being usually reckoned one million
and a half, of these I calculate there may be about 200,000 couple whose wives are
breeders; from which number I subtract 30,000 couple who are able to maintain
their own children (although I apprehend there cannot be so many, under the present distress of the kingdom); but this being granted, there will remain 170,000 breeders. I again subtract 50,000 for those women who miscarry, or whose children die
by accident or disease within the year. There only remain 120,000 children of poor
parents annually born. The question therefore is, how this number shall be reared
and provided for? which, as I have already said, under the present situation of
affairs, is utterly impossible by all the methods hitherto proposed. For we can neither employ them in handicraft of agriculture; we neither build houses (I mean
in the country) nor cultivate land; they can very seldom pick up a livelihood by
stealing, till they arrive at six years old, except where they are of towardly parts,
although I confess they learn the rudiments much earlier; during which time they
can, however, be properly looked upon only as probationers; as I have been
informed by a principal gentleman in the county of Cavan, who protested to me
that he never knew above one or two instances under the age of six, even in a part
of the kingdom so renowned for the quickest proficiency in that art.
I am assured by our merchants, that a boy or a girl before twelve years old is
no salable commodity; and even when they come to this age they will not yield
above 3£ or 3£ 2s. 6d.2 at most on the exchange; which cannot turn to account
either to the parents or kingdom, the charge of nutriment and rags having been
at least four times that value.
I shall now therefore humbly propose my own thoughts, which I hope will
not be liable to the least objection.

5

23 pounds, 2 shillings, 6 pence (denominations of English money). — Eds.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 405

6/18/12 3:11 PM

406

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

I have been assured by a very knowing American of my acquaintance in London,
that a young healthy child well nursed is at a year old a most delicious, nourishing, and wholesome food, whether stewed, roasted, baked, or broiled; and I make
no doubt that it will equally serve in a fricassee or a ragout.
I do therefore humbly offer it to public consideration that of the 120,000
children already computed, 20,000 may be reserved for breed, whereof only onefourth part to be males; which is more than we allow to sheep, black cattle, or
swine; and my reason is, that these children are seldom the fruits of marriage, a
circumstance not much regarded by our savages; therefore one male will be sufficient to serve four females. That the remaining 100,000 may, at a year old, be
offered in sale to the persons of quality and fortune through the kingdom; always
advising the mother to let them suck plentifully in the last month, so as to render
them plump and fat for a good table. A child will make two dishes at an entertainment for friends; and when the family dines alone, the fore and hind quarter will
make a reasonable dish, and seasoned with a little pepper or salt will be very good
boiled on the fourth day, especially in winter.
I have reckoned upon a medium that a child just born will weigh 12 pounds,
and in a solar year, if tolerably nursed, will increase to 28 pounds.
I grant this food will be somewhat dear, and therefore very proper for landlords, who, as they have already devoured most of the parents, seem to have the
best title to the children.
Infants’ flesh will be in season throughout the year, but more plentiful in March,
and a little before and after: for we are told by a grave author, an eminent French
physician, that fish being a prolific diet, there are more children born in Roman
Catholic countries about nine months after Lent than at any other season; therefore,
reckoning a year after Lent, the markets will be more glutted than usual, because the
number of popish infants is at least three to one in this kingdom: and therefore it will
have one other collateral advantage, by lessening the number of papists among us.
I have already computed the charge of nursing a beggar’s child (in which list
I reckon all cottagers, laborers, and four-fifths of the farmers) to be about 2s. per
annum, rags included; and I believe no gentleman would repine to give 10s. for the
carcass of a good fat child, which, as I have said, will make four dishes of excellent
nutritive meat, when he has only some particular friend or his own family to dine
with him. Thus the squire will learn to be a good landlord, and grow popular
among the tenants; the mother will have 8s. net profit, and be fit for work till she
produces another child.
Those who are more thrifty (as I must confess the times require) may flay the
carcass; the skin of which artificially dressed will make admirable gloves for ladies,
and summer boots for fine gentlemen.
As to our city of Dublin, shambles may be appointed for this purpose in the
most convenient parts of it, and butchers we may be assured will not be wanting:
although I rather recommend buying the children alive, and dressing them hot
from the knife as we do roasting pigs.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 406

10

15

6/18/12 3:11 PM

SwiFT • A MoDEST PRoPoSAl

407

A very worthy person, a true lover of his country, and whose virtues I highly
esteem, was lately pleased in discoursing on this matter to offer a refinement upon
my scheme. He said that many gentlemen of this kingdom, having of late destroyed
their deer, he conceived that the want of venison might be well supplied by the
bodies of young lads and maidens, not exceeding fourteen years of age nor under
twelve; so great a number of both sexes in every country being now ready to starve
for want of work and service; and these to be disposed of by their parents, if alive,
or otherwise by their nearest relations. But with due deference to so excellent a friend
and so deserving a patriot, I cannot be altogether in his sentiments; for as to the
males, my American acquaintance assured me from frequent experience that their
flesh was generally tough and lean, like that of our schoolboys by continual exercise, and their taste disagreeable; and to fatten them would not answer the charge.
Then as to the females, it would, I think, with humble submission be a loss to the
public, because they soon would become breeders themselves: and besides, it is
not improbable that some scrupulous people might be apt to censure such a practice (although indeed very unjustly), as a little bordering upon cruelty; which, I
confess, has always been with me the strongest objection against any project, how
well soever intended.
But in order to justify my friend, he confessed that this expedient was put
into his head by the famous Psalmanazar, a native of the island Formosa,3 who
came from thence to London about twenty years ago: and in conversation told my
friend, that in his country when any young person happened to be put to death,
the executioner sold the carcass to persons of quality as a prime dainty; and that
in his time the body of a plump girl of fifteen, who was crucified for an attempt
to poison the emperor, was sold to his imperial majesty’s prime minister of state,
and other great mandarins of the court, in joints from the gibbet, at 400 crowns.
Neither indeed can I deny, that if the same use were made of several plump young
girls in this town, who without one single groat to their fortunes cannot stir abroad
without a chair, and appear at the playhouse and assemblies in foreign fineries
which they never will pay for, the kingdom would not be the worse.
Some persons of a desponding spirit are in great concern about the vast number of poor people, who are aged, diseased, or maimed, and I have been desired
to employ my thoughts what course may be taken to ease the nation of so grievous an encumbrance. But I am not in the least pain upon that matter, because it
is very well known that they are every day dying and rotting by cold and famine,
and filth and vermin, as fast as can be reasonably expected. And as to the young
laborers, they are now in as hopeful condition: They cannot get work, and consequently pine away for want of nourishment, to a degree that if at any time they
are accidentally hired to common labor, they have not strength to perform it; and
thus the country and themselves are happily delivered from the evils to come.
3Taiwan. Psalmanazar was later found to be a fraud. His book on Formosa and its culture
described cannibalistic religious rituals. — Eds.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 407

6/18/12 3:11 PM

408

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

I have too long digressed, and therefore shall return to my subject. I think the
advantages by the proposal which I have made are obvious and many, as well as
of the highest importance.
For first, as I have already observed, it would greatly lessen the number of
papists, with whom we are yearly overrun, being the principal breeders of the
nation as well as our most dangerous enemies; and who stay at home on purpose
to deliver the kingdom to the Pretender, hoping to take their advantage by the
absence of so many good Protestants, who have chosen rather to leave their country
than stay at home and pay tithes against their conscience to an Episcopal curate.
Secondly, The poor tenants will have something valuable of their own, which
by law may be made liable to distress and help to pay their landlord’s rent, their
corn and cattle being already seized, and money a thing unknown.
Thirdly, Whereas the maintenance of 100,000 children from two years old and
upward, cannot be computed at less than 10s. a-piece per annum, the nation’s stock
will be thereby increased £50,000 per annum, beside the profit of a new dish introduced to the tables of all gentlemen of fortune in the kingdom who have any refinement in taste. And the money will circulate among ourselves, the goods being
entirely of our own growth and manufacture.
Fourthly, The constant breeders beside the gain of 8s. sterling per annum by
the sale of their children, will be rid of the charge of maintaining them after the
first year.
Fifthly, This food would likewise bring great custom to taverns where the vintners will certainly be so prudent as to procure the best receipts for dressing it to
perfection, and consequently have their houses frequented by all the fine gentlemen, who justly value themselves upon their knowledge in good eating; and a
skilful cook who understands how to oblige his guests, will contrive to make it as
expensive as they please.
Sixthly, This would be a great inducement to marriage, which all wise nations
have either encouraged by rewards or enforced by laws and penalties. It would
increase the care and tenderness of mothers toward their children, when they were
sure of a settlement for life to the poor babes, provided in some sort by the public,
to their annual profit instead of expense. We should see an honest emulation among
the married women, which of them would bring the fattest child to the market.
Men would become as fond of their wives during the time of their pregnancy as
they are now of their mares in foal, their cows in calf, their sows when they are
ready to farrow; nor offer to beat or kick them (as is too frequent a practice) for
fear of a miscarriage.
Many other advantages might be enumerated. For instance, the addition of
some thousand carcasses in our exportation of barreled beef, the propagation of
swine’s flesh, and improvement in the art of making good bacon, so much wanted
among us by the great destruction of pigs, too frequent at our table; which are no
way comparable in taste or magnificence to a well-grown, fat, yearling child, which
roasted whole will make a considerable figure at a lord mayor’s feast or any other
public entertainment. But this and many others I omit, being studious of brevity.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 408

20

25

6/18/12 3:11 PM

SwiFT • A MoDEST PRoPoSAl

409

Supposing that 1,000 families in this city would be constant customers for
infants’ flesh, besides others who might have it at merry-meetings, particularly at
weddings and christenings, I compute that Dublin would take off annually about
20,000 carcasses; and the rest of the kingdom (where probably they will be sold
somewhat cheaper) the remaining 80,000.
I can think of no one objection that will possibly be raised against this proposal unless it should be urged that the number of people will be thereby much
lessened in the kingdom. This I freely own, and it was indeed one principal design
in offering it to the world. I desire the reader will observe, that I calculate my
remedy for this one individual kingdom of Ireland and for no other that ever was,
is, or I think ever can be upon earth. Therefore let no man talk to me of other
expedients: of taxing our absentees at 5s. a pound: of using neither clothes nor
household furniture except what is of our own growth and manufacture: of utterly
rejecting the materials and instruments that promote foreign luxury: of curing
the expensiveness of pride, vanity, idleness, and gaming in our women: of introducing a vein of parsimony, prudence, and temperance: of learning to love our
country, in the want of which we differ even from Laplanders and the inhabitants
of Topinamboo4: of quitting our animosities and factions; nor acting any longer
like the Jews, who were murdering one another at the very moment their city was
taken: of being a little cautious not to sell our country and conscience for nothing:
of teaching landlords to have at least one degree of mercy toward their tenants:
lastly, of putting a spirit of honesty, industry, and skill into our shopkeepers; who,
if a resolution could now be taken to buy only our native goods, would immediately unite to cheat and exact upon us in the price, the measure, and the goodness,
nor could ever yet be brought to make one fair proposal of just dealing, though
often and earnestly invited to it.
Therefore I repeat, let no man talk to me of these and the like expedients, till
he has at least some glimpse of hope that there will be ever some hearty and sincere attempt to put them in practice.
But as to myself, having been wearied out for many years with offering vain,
idle, visionary thoughts, and at length utterly despairing of success, I fortunately
fell upon this proposal; which, as it is wholly new, so it has something solid and
real, of no expense and little trouble, full in our own power, and whereby we can
incur no danger in disobliging England. For this kind of commodity will not bear
exportation, the flesh being of too tender a consistence to admit a long continuance in salt, although perhaps I could name a country which would be glad to eat
up our whole nation without it.
After all, I am not so violently bent upon my own opinion as to reject any
offer proposed by wise men, which shall be found equally innocent, cheap, easy,
and effectual. But before something of that kind shall be advanced in contradiction to my scheme, and offering a better, I desire the author or authors will be

30

4“Laplanders” refers to Norwegians, and “Topinamboo” is a region in Brazil. — Eds.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 409

6/18/12 3:11 PM

410

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

pleased maturely to consider two points. First, as things now stand, how they will
be able to find food and raiment for 100,000 useless mouths and backs. And secondly, there being a round million of creatures in human figure throughout this
kingdom, whose subsistence put into a common stock would leave them in debt
2,000,000£, sterling, adding those who are beggars by profession to the bulk of
farmers, cottagers, and laborers, with the wives and children who are beggars in
effect; I desire those politicians who dislike my overture, and may perhaps be so
bold as to attempt an answer, that they will first ask the parents of these mortals,
whether they would not at this day think it a great happiness to have been sold for
food at a year old in the manner I prescribe, and thereby have avoided such a
perpetual scene of misfortunes as they have since gone through by the oppression
of landlords, the impossibility of paying rent without money or trade, the want
of common sustenance, with neither house nor clothes to cover them from the
inclemencies of the weather, and the most inevitable prospect of entailing the like
or greater miseries upon their breed for ever.
I profess, in the sincerity of my heart, that I have not the least personal interest
in endeavoring to promote this necessary work, having no other motive than the
public good of my country, by advancing our trade, providing for infants, relieving the poor, and giving some pleasure to the rich. I have no children by which I can
propose to get a single penny; the youngest being nine years old, and my wife past
childbearing.

Questions for Discussion
1. What were the social conditions in Ireland that occasioned the writing of Jonathan
Swift’s essay? Does the essay indicate what Swift considers to be the causes of these
conditions? Does the government — the state — have a responsibility for the condition of its poor? Does Swift target anybody in particular with his satire? How can
you tell?
2. Would a modern audience be more or less offended by Swift’s proposal? Explain
your reasoning.
3. Of the six advantages Swift enumerates (paras. 21–26), which one might be considered the most sardonic? Explain.
4. Explain how Swift uses the essay to satirize both his subject and the vehicle he
employs — that is, a political proposal itself.
5. What is Swift’s overall purpose? Why did he choose such a provocative approach?
6. The modern reader may notice the misogyny in Swift’s essay. Does it affect your
opinion of the essay? Does it make Swift’s criticism of society less powerful?
7. Several eighteenth-century writers made allusions to “A Modest Proposal” in the
titles of their satiric essays. For example, Philip Skelton made his irony obvious by
calling an essay “Some Proposals for the Revival of Christianity.” Why do you think
Swift’s title was considered such a useful satiric tool?

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 410

6/18/12 3:11 PM

SwiFT • A MoDEST PRoPoSAl

411

8. By publishing such an outrageous text, what might Swift have hoped to bring about
among the people of Ireland?

Questions on Rhetoric and Style
1. How does Swift want the reader to view his speaker? That is, how would Swift
want his reader to describe the persona he adopts?
2. At what point in the essay did you recognize that Swift’s proposal is meant to be
satiric? Do you think a modern audience would get the joke faster than Swift’s
contemporaries did?
3. Note Swift’s diction in the first seven paragraphs. How does it show quantification
and dehumanization? Explain the purpose of Swift’s specific word choices.
4. At the beginning of the essay, Swift explains the anticipated results before revealing the actual proposal. Explain the rhetorical purpose of such a strategy.
5. In paragraph 9, why doesn’t Swift end the sentence after the word food? Explain
the purpose and effect of the modifiers included there.
6. Identify examples of appeals to values such as thrift and patriotism. Explain the
rhetorical strategy behind each example.
7. Consider the additional proposal that Swift mentions in paragraph 17. Explain
the rhetorical strategy at work in that paragraph.
8. Which targets does Swift ironically identify in paragraphs 21 and 22? Note the
rhetorical progression of paragraphs 21–26. By using such a method, what is Swift
satirizing?
9. What are the assumptions behind each of Swift’s claims in paragraphs 21–26?
Explain them.
10. Read carefully paragraphs 29–31. What are the “expedients” that Swift discusses
there? How does irony serve his rhetorical purpose in this section?
11. To what do the “vain, idle, visionary thoughts” (para. 31) refer? What is Swift’s
tone here?
12. How does the final paragraph of the essay contribute to Swift’s rhetorical purpose?

Suggestions for Writing
1. “A Modest Proposal” is remarkably consistent in its ironic voice throughout. There
are, however, some places where Swift’s own voice intrudes. Write an essay showing how these breaks in tone reveal Swift’s own attitude toward his subject.
2. Read carefully paragraphs 20–26. Then write an essay explaining how Swift uses
resources of language to develop his positions. Consider diction, voice, pacing,
and other rhetorical features to support your position.
3. Write an essay explaining the influence of Swift on a contemporary example of
satire. One example, by political commentator Christopher Buckley about mad
cow disease, was published in the New Yorker (April 15, 1996) and titled “A Moodest
Proposal.” Another example might be the satiric news program The Colbert Report.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 411

6/18/12 3:11 PM

412

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

4. Write a response to Swift in the voice of an economist sympathetic to Swift’s views,
or in the voice of someone who takes the proposal seriously, challenging Swift’s
argument.
5. Write your own “modest proposal” about an economic condition in today’s society.
Be sure to specify who your audience is — whether you intend your piece to be
published in a national magazine, your local newspaper, or your school newspaper.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 412

6/18/12 3:11 PM

from The Roots of Honor
John Ruskin
John Ruskin (1819–1900) was born in london, the only child of a wine importer.
he was educated at home and studied at King’s college, london, and at oxford.
A precocious young man, he started writing articles at age fifteen and became a
highly influential art critic, publishing his first great work, Modern Painters, in five
volumes between 1843 and 1860. he later turned to social and political concerns,
writing such works as the three-volume The Stones of Venice (1851–1853), Unto
This Last (1860), and Sesame and Lilies (1865). Unto This Last addresses social
reform and economics; it includes “The Roots of honor,” excerpted here. Ruskin held
an oxford professorship from 1870 to 1880, when he resigned for health reasons.
he had bouts of madness until 1883, when he was reelected to his professorship.
Astoundingly prolific, Ruskin wrote over 250 works on art, ornithology, politics, history, economics, geology, literature, mythology, and what we would now call environmental science. he also wrote a fantasy novel, The King of the Golden River
(1841), and worked on his autobiography, Praeterita, from 1885 to 1889. Ruskin’s
thought on art and political economy has been highly influential. Unto This Last had a
profound influence on Mahatma gandhi, and Ruskin continues to influence such contemporary writers as wendell Berry, whose work is included in this chapter (p. 484).

N

ow there can be no question but that the tact, foresight, decision, and
other mental powers required for the successful management of a large
mercantile concern, if not such as could be compared with those of a great lawyer,
general, or divine, would at least match the general conditions of mind required
in the subordinate officers of a ship, or of a regiment, or in the curate of a country
parish. If, therefore, all the efficient members of the so-called liberal professions
are still, somehow, in public estimate of honor, preferred before the head of a
commercial firm, the reason must lie deeper than in the measurement of their
several powers of mind.
And the essential reason for such preference will be found to lie in the fact
that the merchant is presumed to act always selfishly. His work may be very necessary to the community; but the motive of it is understood to be wholly personal.
The merchant’s first object in all his dealings must be (the public believe) to get
as much for himself, and leave as little to his neighbor (or customer) as possible.
Enforcing this upon him, by political statute, as the necessary principle of his
action; recommending it to him on all occasions, and themselves reciprocally
adopting it; proclaiming vociferously, for law of the universe, that a buyer’s function is to cheapen, and a seller’s to cheat — the public, nevertheless, involuntarily
condemn the man of commerce for his compliance with their own statement, and
stamp him forever as belonging to an inferior grade of human personality.

413

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 413

6/18/12 3:11 PM

414

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

This they will find, eventually, they must give up doing. They must not cease
to condemn selfishness; but they will have to discover a kind of commerce which
is not exclusively selfish. Or, rather, they will have to discover that there never was,
or can be, any other kind of commerce; that this which they have called commerce
was not commerce at all, but cozening; and that a true merchant differs as much
from a merchant according to laws of modern political economy, as the hero of
the “Excursion” from Autolycus.1 They will find that commerce is an occupation
which gentlemen will every day see more need to engage in, rather than in the
businesses of talking to men or slaying them; that, in true commerce, as in true
preaching, or true fighting, it is necessary to admit the idea of occasional voluntary
loss; that sixpences have to be lost, as well as lives, under a sense of duty; that the
market may have its martyrdoms as well as the pulpit; and trade its heroisms, as
well as war.
May have — in the final issue, must have — and only has not had yet, because
men of heroic temper have always been misguided in their youth into other fields,
not recognizing what is in our days, perhaps, the most important of all fields; so
that, while many a zealous person loses his life in trying to teach the form of a
gospel, very few will lose a hundred pounds in showing the practice of one.
The fact is, that people never have had clearly explained to them the true functions of a merchant with respect to other people. I should like the reader to be very
clear about this.
Five great intellectual professions, relating to daily necessities of life, have hitherto existed — three exist necessarily in every civilized nation:

5

The Soldier’s profession is to defend it.
The Pastor’s, to teach it.
The Physician’s, to keep it in health.
The Lawyer’s, to enforce justice in it.
The Merchant’s, to provide for it.
And the duty of all these men is, on due occasion, to die for it.
“On due occasion,” namely:
The Soldier, rather than leave his post in battle.
The Physician, rather than leave his post in plague.
The Pastor, rather than teach Falsehood.
The Lawyer, rather than countenance Injustice.
The Merchant — What is his “due occasion” of death?
It is the main question for the merchant, as for all of us. For, truly, the man
who does not know when to die, does not know how to live.
1By the “Excursion,” Ruskin is playfully referring to the Odyssey and its hero, Odysseus. In contrast, Odysseus’s grandfather, Autolycus, was a child of Hermes, and thus a thief. It was said he
could never be caught. — Eds.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 414

6/18/12 3:11 PM

RUSKin • ThE RooTS oF honoR

415

Observe, the merchant’s function (or manufacturer’s, for in the broad sense
in which it is here used the word must be understood to include both) is to provide for the nation. It is no more his function to get profit for himself out of that
provision than it is a clergyman’s function to get his stipend. The stipend is a due
and necessary adjunct, but not the object, of his life, if he be a true clergyman, any
more than his fee (or honorarium) is the object of life to a true physician. Neither
is his fee the object of life to a true merchant. All three, if true men, have a work to
be done irrespective of fee — to be done even at any cost, or for quite the contrary
of fee; the pastor’s function being to teach, the physician’s to heal, and the merchant’s, as I have said, to provide. That is to say, he has to understand to their very
root the qualities of the things he deals in, and the means of obtaining or producing it; and he has to apply all his sagacity and energy to the producing or obtaining it in perfect state, and distributing it at the cheapest possible price where it is
most needed.
And because the production or obtaining of any commodity involves necessarily the agency of many lives and hands, the merchant becomes in the course of
his business the master and governor of large masses of men in a more direct,
though less confessed way, than a military officer or pastor; so that on him falls,
in great part, the responsibility for the kind of life they lead; and it becomes his
duty, not only to be always considering how to produce what he sells in the purest
and cheapest forms, but how to make the various employments involved in the
production, or transference of it, most beneficial to the men employed.
And as into these two functions, requiring for their right exercise the highest
intelligence, as well as patience, kindness, and tact, the merchant is bound to put
all his energy, so for their just discharge he is bound, as soldier or physician is
bound, to give up, if need be, his Life, in such way as it may be demanded of him.
Two main points he has in his Providing function to maintain: first, his engagements (faithfulness to engagements being the real root of all possibilities in commerce); and secondly, the perfectness and purity of the thing provided; so that,
rather than fail in any engagement, or consent to any deterioration, adulteration,
or unjust and exorbitant price of that which he provides, he is bound to meet
fearlessly any form of distress, poverty, or labor, which may, through maintenance
of these points, come upon him.
Again: in his office as governor of the men employed by him, the merchant or
manufacturer is invested with a distinctly paternal authority and responsibility.
In most cases, a youth entering a commercial establishment is withdrawn altogether from home influence; his master must become his father, else he has, for
practical and constant help, no father at hand: in all cases the master’s authority,
together with the general tone and atmosphere of his business, and the character
of the men with whom the youth is compelled in the course of it to associate, have
more immediate and pressing weight than the home influence, and will usually
neutralize it either for good or evil; so that the only means which the master has
of doing justice to the men employed by him is to ask himself sternly whether he

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 415

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

416

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

is dealing with such subordinate as he would with his own son, if compelled by
circumstances to take such a position.
Supposing the captain of a frigate saw it right, or were by any chance obliged,
to place his own son in the position of a common sailor; as he would then treat
his son, he is bound always to treat every one of the men under him. So, also, supposing the master of a manufactory saw it right, or were by any chance obliged, to
place his own son in the position of an ordinary workman; as he would then treat
his son, he is bound always to treat every one of his men. This is the only effective,
true, or practicable Rule which can be given on this point of political economy.
And as the captain of a ship is bound to be the last man to leave his ship in
case of wreck, and to share his last crust with the sailors in case of famine, so the
manufacturer, in any commercial crisis or distress, is bound to take the suffering of it with his men, and even to take more of it for himself than he allows his
men to feel; as a father would in a famine, shipwreck, or battle, sacrifice himself
for his son.
All which sounds very strange: the only real strangeness in the matter being,
nevertheless, that it should so sound. For all this is true, and that not partially nor
theoretically, but everlastingly and practically: all other doctrine than this respecting matters political being false in premises, absurd in deduction, and impossible
in practice, consistently with any progressive state of national life; all the life which
we now possess as a nation showing itself in the resolute denial and scorn, by a
few strong minds and faithful hearts, of the economic principles taught to our
multitudes, which principles, so far as accepted, lead straight to national destruction. Respecting the modes and forms of destruction to which they lead, and, on
the other hand, respecting the farther practical working of true polity, I hope to
reason further in a following paper.

15

Exploring the Text
1. What is the “preference” John Ruskin refers to at the beginning of the second paragraph? According to Ruskin, who is responsible for it? The merchant himself? The
public? Explain.
2. How does Ruskin characterize commerce in paragraphs 3 and 4? What has changed
since 1862? What has not?
3. How reasonable are Ruskin’s statements about the five great professions (para. 6)?
Do you agree that the merchant’s profession is not, as many would say, to make
money, but to provide for the country?
4. Ruskin writes, “For, truly, the man who does not know when to die, does not know
how to live” (para. 8). What does Ruskin mean to suggest with this epigrammatic
statement? How might it apply to your life?
5. Explain the nature of the comparison Ruskin makes between the merchant and
the clergyman (para. 9).

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 416

6/18/12 3:11 PM

wAShingTon • ThE ATlAnTA ExPoSiTion ADDRESS

417

6. In paragraph 9, Ruskin writes of the pastor, the physician, and the merchant, “All
three, if true men. . . .” What are the purpose and effect of the qualifier “if true men”?
7. What, according to Ruskin, is the duty of the merchant as described in paragraphs
10 and 11?
8. What is the nature of the analogy developed in paragraphs 12–14? Do you find it
reasonable and persuasive? Explain.
9. Ruskin concludes, “All which sounds very strange: the only real strangeness in the
matter being, nevertheless, that it should so sound” (para. 15). Does it “sound strange”
to you? Do you agree that the sounding strange is the only strange thing about it?
Why does he conclude this way?

The Atlanta Exposition Address
Booker T. Washington
Born a slave in west virginia, Booker T. washington (1856–1915) was an influential educator and the founder of Tuskegee normal and industrial institute in
Alabama. After emancipation, he worked in salt mines and coal mines and then
literally walked two hundred miles to attend the hampton institute in virginia, which
was then an industrial school for African Americans and native Americans. There,
he paid his tuition and board by working as a janitor. graduating with honors in
1875, washington taught at the hampton institute until 1881. Stressing the importance of learning a trade and developing self-confidence, washington’s pragmatism
appealed to African Americans living in the post-Reconstruction South. he was criticized by the nAAcP and other organizations for promoting accommodation rather
than resistance to Southern white supremacy. he worked behind the scenes, however, to sponsor civil rights suits and advocate on behalf of historically Black colleges and Universities. washington delivered the following speech in 1895 before
the cotton States and international Exposition in Atlanta to promote the economic
ascendancy of the South.

M

r. President and Gentlemen of the Board of Directors and
Citizens.
One-third of the population of the South is of the Negro race. No enterprise
seeking the material, civil, or moral welfare of this section can disregard this element of our population and reach the highest success. I but convey to you, Mr.
President and Directors, the sentiment of the masses of my race when I say that in
no way have the value and manhood of the American Negro been more fittingly
and generously recognized than by the managers of this magnificent Exposition
at every stage of its progress. It is a recognition that will do more to cement the
friendship of the two races than any occurrence since the dawn of our freedom.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 417

6/18/12 3:11 PM

418

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

Not only this, but the opportunity here afforded will awaken among us a new
era of industrial progress. Ignorant and inexperienced, it is not strange that in the
first years of our new life we began at the top instead of at the bottom; that a seat
in Congress or the state legislature was more sought than real estate or industrial
skill; that the political convention of stump speaking had more attractions than
starting a dairy farm or truck garden.
A ship lost at sea for many days suddenly sighted a friendly vessel. From the
mast of the unfortunate vessel was seen a signal, “Water, water; we die of thirst!”
The answer from the friendly vessel at once came back, “Cast down your bucket
where you are.” A second time the signal, “Water, water; send us water!” ran up from
the distressed vessel, and was answered, “Cast down your bucket where you are.”
And a third and fourth signal for water was answered, “Cast down your bucket
where you are.” The captain of the distressed vessel, at last heeding the injunction,
cast down his bucket, and it came up full of fresh, sparkling water from the mouth
of the Amazon River. To those of my race who depend on bettering their condition in a foreign land or who underestimate the importance of cultivating friendly
relations with the Southern white man, who is their next-door neighbour, I would
say: “Cast down your bucket where you are” — cast it down in making friends in
every manly way of the people of all races by whom we are surrounded.
Cast it down in agriculture, mechanics, in commerce, in domestic service, and
in the professions. And in this connection it is well to bear in mind that whatever
other sins the South may be called to bear, when it comes to business pure and
simple, it is in the South that the Negro is given a man’s chance in the commercial
world, and in nothing is this Exposition more eloquent than in emphasizing this
chance. Our greatest danger is that in the great leap from slavery to freedom we
may overlook the fact that the masses of us are to live by the productions of our
hands, and fail to keep in mind that we shall prosper in proportion as we learn to
dignify and glorify common labour and put brains and skill into the common
occupations of life; shall prosper in proportion as we learn to draw the line
between the superficial and the substantial, the ornamental gewgaws of life and
the useful. No race can prosper till it learns that there is as much dignity in tilling
a field as in writing a poem. It is at the bottom of life we must begin, and not at
the top. Nor should we permit our grievances to overshadow our opportunities.
To those of the white race who look to the incoming of those of foreign birth
and strange tongue and habits for the prosperity of the South, were I permitted I
would repeat what I say to my own race, “Cast down your bucket where you are.”
Cast it down among the eight millions of Negroes whose habits you know, whose
fidelity and love you have tested in days when to have proved treacherous meant
the ruin of your firesides. Cast down your bucket among these people who have,
without strikes and labour wars, tilled your fields, cleared your forests, builded
your railroads and cities, and brought forth treasures from the bowels of the earth,
and helped make possible this magnificent representation of the progress of the
South. Casting down your bucket among my people, helping and encouraging them
as you are doing on these grounds, and to education of head, hand, and heart, you

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 418

5

6/18/12 3:11 PM

wAShingTon • ThE ATlAnTA ExPoSiTion ADDRESS

419

will find that they will buy your surplus land, make blossom the waste places in
your fields, and run your factories. While doing this, you can be sure in the future,
as in the past, that you and your families will be surrounded by the most patient,
faithful, law-abiding, and unresentful people that the world has seen. As we have
proved our loyalty to you in the past, in nursing your children, watching by the
sickbed of your mothers and fathers, and often following them with tear-dimmed
eyes to their graves, so in the future, in our humble way, we shall stand by you
with a devotion that no foreigner can approach, ready to lay down our lives, if need
be, in defence of yours, interlacing our industrial, commercial, civil, and religious
life with yours in a way that shall make the interests of both races one. In all
things that are purely social we can be as separate as the fingers, yet one as the
hand in all things essential to mutual progress.
There is no defence or security for any of us except in the highest intelligence
and development of all. If anywhere there are efforts tending to curtail the fullest
growth of the Negro, let these efforts be turned into stimulating, encouraging, and
making him the most useful and intelligent citizen. Effort or means so invested
will pay a thousand per cent interest. These efforts will be twice blessed — “blessing
him that gives and him that takes.”
There is no escape through law of man or God from the inevitable: —
The laws of changeless justice bind
Oppressor with oppressed;
And close as sin and suffering joined
We march to fate abreast.

Nearly sixteen millions of hands will aid you in pulling the load upward, or
they will pull against you the load downward. We shall constitute one-third and
more of the ignorance and crime of the South, or one-third its intelligence and
progress; we shall contribute one-third to the business and industrial prosperity
of the South, or we shall prove a veritable body of death, stagnating, depressing,
retarding every effort to advance the body politic.
Gentlemen of the Exposition, as we present to you our humble effort at an
exhibition of our progress, you must not expect overmuch. Starting thirty years
ago with ownership here and there in a few quilts and pumpkins and chickens
(gathered from miscellaneous sources), remember the path that has led from
these to the inventions and production of agricultural implements, buggies, steamengines, newspapers, books, statuary, carving, paintings, the management of drugstores and banks, has not been trodden without contact with thorns and thistles.
While we take pride in what we exhibit as a result of our independent efforts, we
do not for a moment forget that our part in this exhibition would fall far short of
your expectations but for the constant help that has come to our educational life,
not only from the Southern states, but especially from Northern philanthropists,
who have made their gifts a constant stream of blessing and encouragement.
The wisest among my race understand that the agitation of questions of
social equality is the extremest folly, and that progress in the enjoyment of all the

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 419

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

420

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

privileges that will come to us must be the result of severe and constant struggle
rather than of artificial forcing. No race that has anything to contribute to the
markets of the world is long in any degree ostracized. It is important and right
that all privileges of the law be ours, but it is vastly more important that we be
prepared for the exercises of these privileges. The opportunity to earn a dollar in
a factory just now is worth infinitely more than the opportunity to spend a dollar
in an opera-house.
In conclusion, may I repeat that nothing in thirty years has given us more
hope and encouragement, and drawn us so near to you of the white race, as this
opportunity offered by the Exposition; and here bending, as it were, over the altar
that represents the results of the struggles of your race and mine, both starting
practically empty-handed three decades ago, I pledge that in your effort to work
out the great and intricate problem which God has laid at the doors of the South,
you shall have at all times the patient, sympathetic help of my race; only let this
be constantly in mind, that, while from representations in these buildings of the
product of field, of forest, of mine, of factory, letters, and art, much good will come,
yet far above and beyond material benefits will be that higher good, that, let us pray
God, will come, in a blotting out of sectional differences and racial animosities
and suspicions, in a determination to administer absolute justice, in a willing obedience among all classes to the mandates of law. This, then, coupled with our material prosperity, will bring into our beloved South a new heaven and new earth.

Exploring the Text
1. What are Booker T. Washington’s goals as articulated in this speech? What does
he believe is the best way to achieve them?
2. What appeals to ethos does Washington make in the opening paragraphs? What
additional appeals to ethos does he make as the speech proceeds?
3. What is the point of the story Washington tells in paragraph 3 about a “ship lost
at sea”? What is the rhetorical effect?
4. This speech has come to be known by the sentence “Cast down your bucket where
you are” (para. 3). What does Washington mean by this exhortation?
5. In what types of work does Washington want African Americans to engage? Are
such jobs as readily available now as they were at the time of his speech? To what
extent do his ideas apply in our current economy?
6. How do you interpret Washington’s concluding statement in paragraph 5: “In all
things that are purely social we can be as separate as the fingers, yet one as the
hand in all things essential to mutual progress”?
7. Why is the Shakespeare quotation in paragraph 6 (“‘blessing him that gives and
him that takes’”) appropriate to the point Washington is making?
8. Discuss two possible — and contrasting — interpretations of Washington’s assertion: “The opportunity to earn a dollar in a factory just now is worth infinitely

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 420

6/18/12 3:11 PM

EighnER • on DUMPSTER Diving

421

more than the opportunity to spend a dollar in an opera-house” (para. 10). In
today’s age of globalization and outsourcing, when many of our factory jobs have
gone to foreign workers, does this statement still apply? Rewrite the sentence,
replacing “factory” with a contemporary place of employment. Does the new
sentence effectively update the idea? Why or why not?
9. Where in this speech does Washington implicitly argue against racial stereotypes
and advocate American values of rugged individualism and a strong work ethic?
How have racial stereotypes changed since then? Is our work ethic as strong now
as it once was?
10. Discuss the importance of the occasion and audience of this speech. How do
these factors influence its form and content?
11. In the introduction to Washington’s autobiography, Up from Slavery, Henry
Louis Gates Jr. and Nellie McKay make the following observation: “To some,
Washington’s autobiography seems to paper over centuries of accumulated white
responsibility for the evils of slavery, and instead of demanding the reform of
white American institutions, it calls for African American conformity to the
dominant myth of individualism in the United States. To other readers, however,
Washington’s message in Up from Slavery puts its priorities exactly where they
had to be — on the necessity of self-help within the African American community” (Norton Anthology of African American Literature). Which view is closer to
yours? Cite specific passages to support your position.

On Dumpster Diving
Lars Eighner
lars Eighner was born in corpus christi, Texas, in 1948 and grew up primarily in
houston. As a child, he studied creative writing at the corpus christi Fine Arts
colony, and after graduating from lamar high School, he attended the University
of Texas at Austin. After losing his job at the state asylum in Austin, Eighner became
homeless for three years. “on Dumpster Diving,” an account of being homeless
with his dog, lizbeth, was published as “My Daily Dives in the Dumpster” in Harper’s
magazine in 1991 and was revised to become part of Eighner’s 1993 memoir,
Travels with Lizbeth: Three Years on the Road and on the Streets. Eighner’s work has
appeared in the Threepenny Review, Harper’s, the Washington Post, the Utne Reader,
and the New York Times Book Review.

L

ong before I began Dumpster diving I was impressed with Dumpsters,
enough so that I wrote the Merriam-Webster research service to discover
what I could about the word “Dumpster.” I learned from them that “Dumpster”
is a proprietary word belonging to the Dempster Dumpster company.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 421

6/18/12 3:11 PM

422

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

Since then I have dutifully capitalized the word although it was lowercased in
almost all of the citations Merriam-Webster photocopied for me. Dempster’s word
is too apt. I have never heard these things called anything but Dumpsters. I do not
know anyone who knows the generic name for these objects. From time to time,
however, I hear a wino or hobo give some corrupted credit to the original and call
them Dipsy Dumpsters.
I began Dumpster diving about a year before I became homeless.
I prefer the term “scavenging” and use the word “scrounging” when I mean to
be obscure. I have heard people, evidently meaning to be polite, using the word
“foraging,” but I prefer to reserve that word for gathering nuts and berries and
such which I do also according to the season and the opportunity. “Dumpster
diving” seems to me to be a little too cute and, in my case, inaccurate because I
lack the athletic ability to lower myself into the Dumpsters as the true divers do,
much to their increased profit.
I like the frankness of the word “scavenging,” which I can hardly think of without picturing a big black snail on an aquarium wall. I live from the refuse of others.
I am a scavenger. I think it a sound and honorable niche, although if I could I
would naturally prefer to live the comfortable consumer life, perhaps — and only
perhaps — as a slightly less wasteful consumer owing to what I have learned as a
scavenger.
While my dog Lizbeth and I were still living in the house on Avenue B in
Austin, as my savings ran out, I put almost all my sporadic income into rent. The
necessities of daily life I began to extract from Dumpsters. Yes, we ate from Dumpsters. Except for jeans, all my clothes came from Dumpsters. Boom boxes, candles,
bedding, toilet paper, medicine, books, a typewriter, a virgin male love doll,
change sometimes amounting to many dollars: I acquired many things from the
Dumpsters.
I have learned much as a scavenger. I mean to put some of what I have learned
down here, beginning with the practical art of Dumpster diving and proceeding
to the abstract.
What is safe to eat?
After all, the finding of objects is becoming something of an urban art. Even
respectable employed people will sometimes find something tempting sticking
out of a Dumpster or standing beside one. Quite a number of people, not all of
them of the bohemian type, are willing to brag that they found this or that piece
in the trash. But eating from Dumpsters is the thing that separates the dilettanti
from the professionals.
Eating safely from the Dumpsters involves three principles: using the senses
and common sense to evaluate the condition of the found materials, knowing the
Dumpsters of a given area and checking them regularly, and seeking always to
answer the question “Why was this discarded?”
Perhaps everyone who has a kitchen and a regular supply of groceries has, at
one time or another, made a sandwich and eaten half of it before discovering mold

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 422

5

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

EighnER • on DUMPSTER Diving

423

on the bread or got a mouthful of milk before realizing the milk had turned.
Nothing of the sort is likely to happen to a Dumpster diver because he is constantly reminded that most food is discarded for a reason. Yet a lot of perfectly
good food can be found in Dumpsters.
Canned goods, for example, turn up fairly often in the Dumpsters I frequent.
All except the most phobic people would be willing to eat from a can even if it
came from a Dumpster. Canned goods are among the safest of foods to be found
in Dumpsters, but are not utterly foolproof.
Although very rare with modern canning methods, botulism is a possibility.
Most other forms of food poisoning seldom do lasting harm to a healthy person. But
botulism is almost certainly fatal and often the first symptom is death. Except for
carbonated beverages, all canned goods should contain a slight vacuum and suck
air when first punctured. Bulging, rusty, dented cans and cans that spew when punctured should be avoided, especially when the contents are not very acidic or syrupy.
Heat can break down the botulin, but this requires much more cooking than
most people do to canned goods. To the extent that botulism occurs at all, of
course, it can occur in cans on pantry shelves as well as in cans from Dumpsters.
Need I say that home-canned goods found in Dumpsters are simply too risky to
be recommended.
From time to time one of my companions, aware of the source of my provisions, will ask, “Do you think these crackers are really safe to eat?” For some reason it is most often the crackers they ask about.
This question always makes me angry. Of course I would not offer my companion anything I had doubts about. But more than that I wonder why he cannot
evaluate the condition of the crackers for himself. I have no special knowledge
and I have been wrong before. Since he knows where the food comes from, it seems
to me he ought to assume some of the responsibility for deciding what he will put
in his mouth.
For myself I have few qualms about dry foods such as crackers, cookies,
cereal, chips, and pasta if they are free of visible contaminates and still dry and
crisp. Most often such things are found in the original packaging, which is not so
much a positive sign as it is the absence of a negative one.
Raw fruits and vegetables with intact skins seem perfectly safe to me, excluding
of course the obviously rotten. Many are discarded for minor imperfections which
can be pared away. Leafy vegetables, grapes, cauliflower, broccoli, and similar
things may be contaminated by liquids and may be impractical to wash.
Candy, especially hard candy, is usually safe if it has not drawn ants. Chocolate is often discarded only because it has become discolored as the cocoa butter
de-emulsified. Candying after all is one method of food preservation because
pathogens do not like very sugary substances.
All of these foods might be found in any Dumpster and can be evaluated with
some confidence largely on the basis of appearance. Beyond these are foods which
cannot be correctly evaluated without additional information.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 423

15

20

6/18/12 3:11 PM

424

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

I began scavenging by pulling pizzas out of the Dumpster behind a pizza delivery shop. In general prepared food requires caution, but in this case I knew when
the shop closed and went to the Dumpster as soon as the last of the help left.
Such shops often get prank orders, called “bogus.” Because help seldom stays
long at these places pizzas are often made with the wrong topping, refused on delivery for being cold, or baked incorrectly. The products to be discarded are boxed
up because inventory is kept by counting boxes: A boxed pizza can be written off;
an unboxed pizza does not exist.
I never placed a bogus order to increase the supply of pizzas and I believe no
one else was scavenging in this Dumpster. But the people in the shop became
suspicious and began to retain their garbage in the shop overnight.
While it lasted I had a steady supply of fresh, sometimes warm pizza. Because
I knew the Dumpster I knew the source of the pizza, and because I visited the
Dumpster regularly I knew what was fresh and what was yesterday’s.
The area I frequent is inhabited by many affluent college students. I am not
here by chance; the Dumpsters in this area are very rich. Students throw out many
good things, including food. In particular they tend to throw everything out when
they move at the end of a semester, before and after breaks, and around midterm
when many of them despair of college. So I find it advantageous to keep an eye on
the academic calendar.
The students throw food away around the breaks because they do not know
whether it has spoiled or will spoil before they return. A typical discard is a half
jar of peanut butter. In fact nonorganic peanut butter does not require refrigeration and is unlikely to spoil in any reasonable time. The student does not know
that, and since it is Daddy’s money, the student decides not to take a chance.
Opened containers require caution and some attention to the question “Why
was this discarded?” But in the case of discards from student apartments, the
answer may be that the item was discarded through carelessness, ignorance, or
wastefulness. This can sometimes be deduced when the item is found with many
others, including some that are obviously perfectly good.
Some students, and others, approach defrosting a freezer by chucking out the
whole lot. Not only do the circumstances of such a find tell the story, but also the
mass of frozen goods stays cold for a long time and items may be found still frozen or freshly thawed.
Yogurt, cheese, and sour cream are items that are often thrown out while they
are still good. Occasionally I find a cheese with a spot of mold, which of course I
just pare off, and because it is obviously why such a cheese was discarded, I treat
it with less suspicion than an apparently perfect cheese found in similar circumstances. Yogurt is often discarded, still sealed, only because the expiration date on
the carton had passed. This is one of my favorite finds because yogurt will keep
several days, even in warm weather.
Students throw out canned goods and staples at the end of semesters and
when they give up college at midterm. Drugs, pornography, spirits, and the like
are often discarded when parents are expected — Dad’s day, for example. And

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 424

25

30

6/18/12 3:11 PM

EighnER • on DUMPSTER Diving

425

spirits also turn up after big party weekends, presumably discarded by the newly
reformed. Wine and spirits, of course, keep perfectly well even once opened.
My test for carbonated soft drinks is whether they still fizz vigorously. Many
juices or other beverages are too acid or too syrupy to cause much concern provided they are not visibly contaminated. Liquids, however, require some care.
One hot day I found a large jug of Pat O’Brien’s Hurricane mix. The jug had
been opened, but it was still ice cold. I drank three large glasses before it became
apparent to me that someone had added the rum to the mix, and not a little rum.
I never tasted the rum and by the time I began to feel the effects I had already
ingested a very large quantity of the beverage. Some divers would have considered
this a boon, but being suddenly and thoroughly intoxicated in a public place in
the early afternoon is not my idea of a good time.
I have heard of people maliciously contaminating discarded food and even
handouts, but mostly I have heard of this from people with vivid imaginations
who have had no experience with the Dumpsters themselves. Just before the pizza
shop stopped discarding its garbage at night, jalapeños began showing up on most
of the discarded pizzas. If indeed this was meant to discourage me it was a wasted
effort because I am a native Texan.
For myself, I avoid game, poultry, pork, and egg-based foods whether I find
them raw or cooked. I seldom have the means to cook what I find, but when I do
I avail myself of plentiful supplies of beef which is often in very good condition.
I suppose fish becomes disagreeable before it becomes dangerous. The dog is happy
to have any such thing that is past its prime and, in fact, does not recognize fish as
food until it is quite strong.
Home leftovers, as opposed to surpluses from restaurants, are very often bad.
Evidently, especially among students, there is a common type of personality that
carefully wraps up even the smallest leftover and shoves it into the back of the
refrigerator for six months or so before discarding it. Characteristic of this type
are the reused jars and margarine tubs which house the remains.
I avoid ethnic foods I am unfamiliar with. If I do not know what it is supposed
to look like when it is good, I cannot be certain I will be able to tell if it is bad.
No matter how careful I am I still get dysentery at least once a month, oftener
in warm weather. I do not want to paint too romantic a picture. Dumpster diving
has serious drawbacks as a way of life.
I learned to scavenge gradually, on my own. Since then I have initiated several
companions into the trade. I have learned that there is a predictable series of
stages a person goes through in learning to scavenge.
At first the new scavenger is filled with disgust and self-loathing. He is ashamed
of being seen and may lurk around, trying to duck behind things, or he may try
to dive at night.
(In fact, most people instinctively look away from a scavenger. By skulking
around, the novice calls attention to himself and arouses suspicion. Diving at
night is ineffective and needlessly messy.)

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 425

35

40

6/18/12 3:11 PM

426

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

Every grain of rice seems to be a maggot. Everything seems to stink. He can
wipe the egg yolk off the found can, but he cannot erase the stigma of eating garbage out of his mind.
That stage passes with experience. The scavenger finds a pair of running shoes
that fit and look and smell brand new. He finds a pocket calculator in perfect
working order. He finds pristine ice cream, still frozen, more than he can eat or
keep. He begins to understand: People do throw away perfectly good stuff, a lot of
perfectly good stuff.
At this stage, Dumpster shyness begins to dissipate. The diver, after all, has
the last laugh. He is finding all manner of good things which are his for the taking. Those who disparage his profession are the fools, not he.
He may begin to hang onto some perfectly good things for which he has neither a use nor a market. Then he begins to take note of the things which are not
perfectly good but are nearly so. He mates a Walkman with broken earphones and
one that is missing a battery cover. He picks up things which he can repair.
At this stage he may become lost and never recover. Dumpsters are full of
things of some potential value to someone and also of things which never have
much intrinsic value but are interesting. All the Dumpster divers I have known
come to the point of trying to acquire everything they touch. Why not take it, they
reason, since it is all free.
This is, of course, hopeless. Most divers come to realize that they must restrict
themselves to items of relatively immediate utility. But in some cases the diver
simply cannot control himself. I have met several of these pack-rat types. Their
ideas of the values of various pieces of junk verge on the psychotic. Every bit of
glass may be a diamond, they think, and all that glistens, gold.
I tend to gain weight when I am scavenging. Partly this is because I always
find far more pizza and doughnuts than water-packed tuna, nonfat yogurt, and
fresh vegetables. Also I have not developed much faith in the reliability of Dumpsters as a food source, although it has been proven to me many times. I tend to eat
as if I have no idea where my next meal is coming from. But mostly I just hate to
see food go to waste and so I eat much more than I should. Something like this
drives the obsession to collect junk.
As for collecting objects, I usually restrict myself to collecting one kind of
small object at a time, such as pocket calculators, sunglasses, or campaign buttons.
To live on the street I must anticipate my needs to a certain extent: I must pick up
and save warm bedding I find in August because it will not be found in Dumpsters in November. But even if I had a home with extensive storage space I could
not save everything that might be valuable in some contingency.
I have proprietary feelings about my Dumpsters. As I have suggested, it is no
accident that I scavenge from Dumpsters where good finds are common. But my
limited experience with Dumpsters in other areas suggests to me that it is the
population of competitors rather than the affluence of the dumpers that most
affects the feasibility of survival by scavenging. The large number of competitors
is what puts me off the idea of trying to scavenge in places like Los Angeles.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 426

45

6/18/12 3:11 PM

EighnER • on DUMPSTER Diving

427

Curiously, I do not mind my direct competition, other scavengers, so much
as I hate the can scroungers.
People scrounge cans because they have to have a little cash. I have tried scrounging cans with an able-bodied companion. Afoot a can scrounger simply cannot
make more than a few dollars a day. One can extract the necessities of life from the
Dumpsters directly with far less effort than would be required to accumulate the
equivalent value in cans.
Can scroungers, then, are people who must have small amounts of cash. These are
drug addicts and winos, mostly the latter because the amounts of cash are so small.
Spirits and drugs do, like all other commodities, turn up in Dumpsters and
the scavenger will from time to time have a half bottle of a rather good wine with
his dinner. But the wino cannot survive on these occasional finds; he must have his
daily dose to stave off the DTs. All the cans he can carry will buy about three
bottles of Wild Irish Rose.
I do not begrudge them the cans, but can scroungers tend to tear up the
Dumpsters, mixing the contents and littering the area. They become so specialized that they can see only cans. They earn my contempt by passing up change,
canned goods, and readily hockable items.
There are precious few courtesies among scavengers. But it is a common
practice to set aside surplus items: pairs of shoes, clothing, canned goods, and such.
A true scavenger hates to see good stuff go to waste and what he cannot use he
leaves in good condition in plain sight.
Can scroungers lay waste to everything in their path and will stir one of a pair
of good shoes to the bottom of the Dumpster, to be lost or ruined in the muck.
Can scroungers will even go through individual garbage cans, something I have
never seen a scavenger do.
Individual garbage cans are set out on the public easement only on garbage
days. On other days going through them requires trespassing close to a dwelling.
Going through individual garbage cans without scattering litter is almost impossible. Litter is likely to reduce the public’s tolerance of scavenging. Individual garbage cans are simply not as productive as Dumpsters; people in houses and duplexes
do not move as often and for some reason do not tend to discard as much useful
material. Moreover, the time required to go through one garbage can that serves
one household is not much less than the time required to go through a Dumpster
that contains the refuse of twenty apartments.
But my strongest reservation about going through individual garbage cans is
that this seems to me a very personal kind of invasion to which I would object if
I were a householder. Although many things in Dumpsters are obviously meant
never to come to light, a Dumpster is somehow less personal.
I avoid trying to draw conclusions about the people who dump in the Dumpsters I frequent. I think it would be unethical to do so, although I know many
people will find the idea of scavenger ethics too funny for words.
Dumpsters contain bank statements, bills, correspondence, and other documents, just as anyone might expect. But there are also less obvious sources of

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 427

50

55

60

6/18/12 3:11 PM

428

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

information. Pill bottles, for example. The labels on pill bottles contain the name
of the patient, the name of the doctor, and the name of the drug. AIDS drugs and
antipsychotic medicines, to name but two groups, are specific and seldom prescribed for any other disorders. The plastic compacts for birth control pills usually
have complete label information.
Despite all of this sensitive information, I have had only one apartment resident object to my going through the Dumpster. In that case it turned out the
resident was a university athlete who was taking bets and who was afraid I would
turn up his wager slips.
Occasionally a find tells a story. I once found a small paper bag containing
some unused condoms, several partial tubes of flavored sexual lubricant, a partially
used compact of birth control pills, and the torn pieces of a picture of a young
man. Clearly she was through with him and planning to give up sex altogether.
Dumpster things are often sad — abandoned teddy bears, shredded wedding
books, despaired-of sales kits. I find many pets lying in state in Dumpsters. Although
I hope to get off the streets so that Lizbeth can have a long and comfortable old
age, I know this hope is not very realistic. So I suppose when her time comes she
too will go into a Dumpster. I will have no better place for her. And after all, for
most of her life her livelihood has come from the Dumpster. When she finds something I think is safe that has been spilled from the Dumpster I let her have it. She
already knows the route around the best Dumpsters. I like to think that if she survives me she will have a chance of evading the dog catcher and of finding her sustenance on the route.
Silly vanities also come to rest in the Dumpsters. I am a rather accomplished
needleworker. I get a lot of materials from the Dumpsters. Evidently sorority girls,
hoping to impress someone, perhaps themselves, with their mastery of a womanly
art, buy a lot of embroider-by-number kits, work a few stitches horribly, and eventually discard the whole mess. I pull out their stitches, turn the canvas over, and
work an original design. Do not think I refrain from chuckling as I make original
gifts from these kits.
I find diaries and journals. I have often thought of compiling a book of literary found objects. And perhaps I will one day. But what I find is hopelessly commonplace and bad without being, even unconsciously, camp. College students
also discard their papers. I am horrified to discover the kind of paper which now
merits an A in an undergraduate course. I am grateful, however, for the number
of good books and magazines the students throw out.
In the area I know best I have never discovered vermin in the Dumpsters, but
there are two kinds of kitty surprise. One is alley cats which I meet as they leap,
claws first, out of Dumpsters. This is especially thrilling when I have Lizbeth in tow.
The other kind of kitty surprise is a plastic garbage bag filled with some ponderous, amorphous mass. This always proves to be used cat litter.
City bees harvest doughnut glaze and this makes the Dumpster at the doughnut shop more interesting. My faith in the instinctive wisdom of animals is always

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 428

65

6/18/12 3:11 PM

EighnER • on DUMPSTER Diving

429

shaken whenever I see Lizbeth attempt to catch a bee in her mouth, which she does
whenever bees are present. Evidently some birds find Dumpsters profitable, for
birdie surprise is almost as common as kitty surprise of the first kind. In hunting
season all kinds of small game turn up in Dumpsters, some of it sadly, not entirely
dead. Curiously, summer and winter, maggots are uncommon.
The worst of the living and near-living hazards of the Dumpsters are the fire
ants. The food that they claim is not much of a loss, but they are vicious and
aggressive. It is very easy to brush against some surface of the Dumpster and pick
up half a dozen or more fire ants, usually in some sensitive area such as the underarm. One advantage of bringing Lizbeth along as I make Dumpster rounds is that,
for obvious reasons, she is very alert to ground-based fire ants. When Lizbeth
recognizes the signs of fire ant infestation around our feet she does the Dance of
the Zillion Fire Ants. I have learned not to ignore this warning from Lizbeth,
whether I perceive the tiny ants or not, but to remove ourselves at Lizbeth’s first
pas de bourrée.1 All the more so because the ants are the worst in the months I
wear flip-flops, if I have them.
(Perhaps someone will misunderstand the above. Lizbeth does the Dance of
the Zillion Fire Ants when she recognizes more fire ants than she cares to eat, not
when she is being bitten. Since I have learned to react promptly, she does not get
bitten at all. It is the isolated patrol of fire ants that falls in Lizbeth’s range that
deserves pity. Lizbeth finds them quite tasty.)
By far the best way to go through a Dumpster is to lower yourself into it.
Most of the good stuff tends to settle at the bottom because it is usually weightier
than the rubbish. My more athletic companions have often demonstrated to me that
they can extract much good material from a Dumpster I have already been over.
To those psychologically or physically unprepared to enter a Dumpster, I recommend a stout stick, preferably with some barb or hook at one end. The hook
can be used to grab plastic garbage bags. When I find canned goods or other
objects loose at the bottom of a Dumpster I usually can roll them into a small bag
that I can then hoist up. Much Dumpster diving is a matter of experience for which
nothing will do except practice.
Dumpster diving is outdoor work, often surprisingly pleasant. It is not entirely
predictable; things of interest turn up every day and some days there are finds of
great value. I am always very pleased when I can turn up exactly the thing I most
wanted to find. Yet in spite of the element of chance, scavenging more than most
other pursuits tends to yield returns in some proportion to the effort and intelligence brought to bear. It is very sweet to turn up a few dollars in change from a
Dumpster that has just been gone over by a wino.
The land is now covered with cities. The cities are full of Dumpsters. I think
of scavenging as a modern form of self-reliance. In any event, after ten years of

70

1A transitional ballet step. — Eds.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 429

6/18/12 3:11 PM

430

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

government service, where everything is geared to the lowest common denominator,
I find work that rewards initiative and effort refreshing. Certainly I would be happy
to have a sinecure again, but I am not heartbroken not to have one anymore.
I find from the experience of scavenging two rather deep lessons. The first is
to take what I can use and let the rest go by. I have come to think that there is no
value in the abstract. A thing I cannot use or make useful, perhaps by trading, has
no value however fine or rare it may be. I mean useful in a broad sense — so, for
example, some art I would think useful and valuable, but other art might be otherwise for me.
I was shocked to realize that some things are not worth acquiring, but now I
think it is so. Some material things are white elephants that eat up the possessor’s
substance.
The second lesson is of the transience of material being. This has not quite
converted me to a dualist, but it has made some headway in that direction. I do
not suppose that ideas are immortal, but certainly mental things are longer-lived
than other material things.
Once I was the sort of person who invests material objects with sentimental
value. Now I no longer have those things, but I have the sentiments yet.
Many times in my travels I have lost everything but the clothes I was wearing
and Lizbeth. The things I find in Dumpsters, the love letters and ragdolls of so many
lives, remind me of this lesson. Now I hardly pick up a thing without envisioning
the time I will cast it away. This I think is a healthy state of mind. Almost everything I have now has already been cast out at least once, proving that what I own
is valueless to someone.
Anyway, I find my desire to grab for the gaudy bauble has been largely sated.
I think this is an attitude I share with the very wealthy — we both know there is
plenty more where what we have came from. Between us are the rat-race millions
who have confounded their selves with the objects they grasp and who nightly
scavenge the cable channels looking for they know not what.
I am sorry for them.

75

80

Exploring the Text
1. What is the effect of Lars Eighner’s attention to language in the first five paragraphs? Does this opening appeal more to ethos, logos, or pathos? Explain.
2. In paragraph 7, Eighner identifies the rhetorical direction he plans to follow. What
is the effect of such information?
3. Note the technical and clinical nature of much of the first part (paras. 1–37) of
the essay. In paragraph 19, for example, Eighner writes of de-emulsification and
the behavior of pathogens. What is the effect of such scientific language and
information?

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 430

6/18/12 3:11 PM

SchloSSER • in ThE STRAwBERRY FiElDS

431

4. The wealth of goods that Eighner is able to salvage from Dumpsters would suggest that our society is wasteful — at least on the micro level. What might be the
effect of such wasteful habits on the macroeconomy?
5. Identify and explain two examples of irony in the section about students (paras.
25–30). What does this section suggest about their relationship to the economy at
large?
6. Paragraph 37 concludes, “I do not want to paint too romantic a picture. Dumpster
diving has serious drawbacks as a way of life.” What is the effect of these sentences? What is their rhetorical purpose?
7. Note the careful distinction Eighner makes between the “true scavenger” and the
“can scrounger” (paras. 50–56). What purpose does it serve?
8. Eighner addresses homelessness in America. How successfully does he debunk the
stereotype of homeless people as indolent and uneducated?
9. Explain the irony in paragraph 73 where Eighner writes, “I think of scavenging as
a modern form of self-reliance.”
10. Explain the irony in the closing passage (paras. 78–80). In the sentence “This I
think is a healthy state of mind,” what does this refer to? Do you agree with Eighner’s
claim? Explain.
11. How would you characterize Eighner’s attitudes toward wealth and materialism
as revealed especially in paragraphs 74–80? What implications do they have
regarding the economy at large?
12. Eighner is obviously an intelligent man who writes well. What does it suggest
about our economy that such a person as he could become homeless and resort
to Dumpster diving? Does our society have an obligation to help those in similar
situations? Explain.

from In the Strawberry Fields
Eric Schlosser
Born in 1959 and raised in new York and los Angeles, Eric Schlosser graduated
from Princeton University with a degree in American history and studied British history at oxford University. in addition to working as a correspondent for the Atlantic,
he has published articles in such periodicals as the New Yorker, the Nation, Rolling
Stone, and Vanity Fair. his 2001 book about the food industry, Fast Food Nation:
The Dark Side of the American Meal, became a best seller and was adapted into
a film in 2006. Schlosser also participated in the making of the 2009 documentary film Food Inc. his second best seller, Reefer Madness: Sex, Drugs, and Cheap
Labor in the American Black Market (2003), grew out of his articles on the enforcement of marijuana laws and illegal immigration in california. it includes “in the
Strawberry Fields,” an earlier version of which appeared in the Atlantic Monthly
in 1995.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 431

6/18/12 3:11 PM

432

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

La Fruta del Diablo
It was mid-April when I visited Watsonville, and heavy rains had recently flooded
hundreds of acres. Bright blue plastic barrels from a Smuckers plant were scattered across local strawberry fields and embedded in the mud. Many fields that
hadn’t been flooded still had been damaged by the rains. I met with strawberry
workers at an old labor camp — a small slum set amid rolling hills and strawberry
fields not far from town. For most of the year this bleak collection of gray wooden
barracks housed about 350 residents, mainly strawberry workers and their families. But at the peak of the harvest hundreds more crammed into its forty apartments. In the mid-1990s there’d been a major outbreak of tuberculosis at the
camp, fueled by its crowded living quarters and poor building design. The bedrooms occupied a central corridor of the barracks; none had a window. The tenants paid $500 a month for their two-bedroom apartments and felt lucky to have
a roof over their heads. As I walked around the camp, there were children everywhere, running and playing in the courtyards, oblivious of the squalor.
The sky was overcast, more bad weather was coming, and a year’s income for
these workers would be determined in the next few months. Half a dozen strawberry pickers, leaning against parked cars, told me that at this point in the season
they usually worked in the fields eight or ten hours a day. Only one of them was
employed at the moment. Every morning the others visited the strawberry farm
on a nearby hillside, inquired about work, and were turned away. The foreman,
who had hired them for years, said to try again next week.
Harvest work in the strawberry fields, like most seasonal farmwork in California, is considered “at will.” There is no contract, no seniority, no obligation
beyond the day-to-day. A grower hires and fires workers as necessary, without
need for explanation. It makes no difference whether the migrant has been an
employee for six days or for six years. The terms of employment are laid down on
a daily basis. If a grower wants slow and careful work, wages are paid by the hour.
If a grower wants berries quickly removed from the field, the wages are piece-rate,
providing an incentive to move fast. A migrant often does not know how long the
workday will last or what the wage rate will be until he or she arrives at the field
that morning. There might be two weeks of ten-hour days followed by a week of
no work at all, depending upon the weather and the market.
This system did not arise because growers are innately mean and heartless.
Harvests are unpredictable from beginning to end. Many growers try to guarantee their workers a certain amount of income each week. Among other things, it
makes good business sense to have reliable and capable workers returning each
year. And yet there is no denying where the power lies.
The strawberry has long been known to migrants as la fruta del diablo — the
fruit of the devil. Picking strawberries is some of the lowest-paid, most difficult,
and therefore least desirable farmwork in California. Strawberries are fragile and
bruise easily. They must be picked with great care, especially the berries that will

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 432

5

6/18/12 3:11 PM

SchloSSER • in ThE STRAwBERRY FiElDS

433

be sold fresh at the market. Market berries are twisted, not pulled, off the stem to
preserve a green cap on top. Workers must select only berries of the proper size,
firmness, shape, and color. They must arrange the berries neatly in baskets to
catch the shopper’s eye. Learning how to pick strawberries correctly can take weeks.
The worker is often responsible not only for gathering and packing the fruit but
also for tending the plants. The drip irrigation system has to be continually checked.
Shoots and runners have to be removed. Rotting berries have to be tossed away,
or they will spoil the rest. When a piece-rate wage is being paid, workers must
perform these tasks and pick berries as fast as they can. There is a strong undercurrent of anxiety in a field being harvested at piece-rate. Workers move down the
furrows pushing small wheelbarrows; they pause, bend over, brush away leaves to
their left and right, pick berries, place them in boxes, check the plants, and move
on, all in one fluid motion. Once their boxes are filled, they rush to have them
tallied at the end of the field, rush back, and begin the process again.
Strawberry plants are four or five inches high and grow from beds eight to
twelve inches high. You must bend at the waist to pick the fruit, which explains
why the job is so difficult. Bending over that way for an hour can cause a stiff back;
doing so for ten to twelve hours a day, weeks at a time, can cause excruciating pain
and lifelong disabilities. Most strawberry pickers suffer back pain. As would be
expected, the older you get, the more your back hurts. Farmworkers, like athletes,
also decline in speed as they age. The fastest strawberry pickers tend to be in their
late teens and early twenties. Most migrants quit picking strawberries in their midthirties, although some highly skilled women do work longer. Age discrimination
is commonplace in the fields — it is purely a question of efficiency.
The hourly wages vary considerably, depending on the grower, the type of
strawberry being picked, the time of year, and often, the skill of the worker. Wages
are higher in Watsonville and the Salinas than in Southern California, because of
the greater distance from Mexico. Growers producing top-quality berries for the
fresh market may pay as much as $8 or $10 an hour. At the height of the season,
when berries are plentiful and growers pay a piece-rate of $1.25 a box, the fastest
workers can earn more than $150 a day. But wages at that level only last for a
month or so, and even during that period most workers can’t attain them. When
a crew of thirty picks at a piece-rate, three or four will earn $10 an hour, five or
six will earn at or below the state minimum wage, $6.75 an hour, and the rest will
earn somewhere in between.
The availability of work, not the pay scale, is of greatest concern to migrants.
Despite the hardships that accompany the job, there is an oversupply of people
hoping to pick strawberries. The fear of unemployment haunts all farmworkers
in California today. Each harvest brings a new struggle to line up enough jobs for
a decent income. The average migrant spends half the year working and a few
months looking for work.
Another constant worry is finding a place to sleep. Santa Cruz and Monterey
counties have some of the highest housing costs in the country. Long popular

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 433

6/18/12 3:11 PM

434

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

with tourists and wealthy retirees, the area has also attracted commuters from
Silicon Valley. The residents of Watsonville and Salinas are determined to preserve
the local farm economy, despite enormous pressure from developers. Agricultural
land that currently sells for $40,000 an acre could be sold for many times that
amount if it were rezoned; there are strawberry fields overlooking the Pacific
Ocean. The determination to preserve agricultural land has not, however, extended
to providing shelter for agricultural workers. Since 1980 the acreage around Watsonville and Salinas devoted to strawberries has more than doubled and the tonnage
of strawberries produced there has nearly quadrupled. But the huge influx of migrant
workers required to pick these berries has been forced to compete for a supply of
low-income housing that’s been inadequate for decades.
The few remaining labor camps for single men are grim places. I toured one
that was a group of whitewashed buildings surrounded by chain-link fences and
barbed wire. Desolate except for a rosebush in front of the manager’s office, it
looked like a holding pen or an old minimum-security prison. A nearby camp was
reputed to be one of the best of its kind. Inside the barracks, the walls were freshly
painted and the concrete floor was clean. A typical room was roughly twelve feet
by ten feet, unheated, and occupied by four men. Sheets of plywood separated the
steel cots. For $80 a week, a price far too high for most migrants, you got a bed
and two meals a day. I’ve seen nicer horse barns.
Nevertheless, the labor camps are often preferable to the alternatives. When
migrants stay in residential neighborhoods, they must pool their resources. In
Watsonville three to four families will share a small house, seven or eight people
to a room. Migrants routinely pay $100 to $200 a month to sleep in a garage with
anywhere from four to ten other people. A survey of garages in Soledad found
1,500 inhabitants — a number roughly equal to one-eighth of the town’s official
population. At the peak of the harvest the housing shortage becomes acute.
Migrants at the labor camps sometimes pay to sleep in parked cars. The newest
migrant workers, who lack family in the area and haven’t yet learned the ropes,
often sleep outdoors in the wooded sections of Prunedale, trespassing, moving to a
different hiding place each night. On hillsides above the Salinas Valley, hundreds
of strawberry pickers have been found living in caves.

10

Locked into Dependence
The immigration history of Guadalupe, California, can be read in the names and
faces adorning headstones at its small cemetery. The Swiss and Italian and Portuguese surnames belong to families who settled in the Santa Maria Valley around
the turn of the last century, growing beans and sugar beets, running cattle, and
raising dairy herds. The Chinese, Japanese, and Filipino names belong to the first
wave of farmworkers, some of whom managed to acquire land of their own. Spanish surnames greatly outnumber the rest, marking the recent graves along with plastic flowers and the images of saints. There is a sepulchral custom in Guadalupe,

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 434

6/18/12 3:11 PM

SchloSSER • in ThE STRAwBERRY FiElDS

435

practiced for generations: most of the headstones bear sepia-tinted photographs
of the deceased. Walking through the graveyard, one sees at a glance the slightly
different ethnic traits and the subtle variations in skin color — long the basis of
economic status and rivalry. Now all these faces stare in the same direction from
the same place, arranged like crops in long, straight rows.
For most of the twentieth century, the Santa Maria Valley had a diverse farm
economy. Although migrants were a large seasonal presence, the area lacked the
huge industrial farms that dominated the landscape elsewhere in California. The
acreage around Guadalupe was devoted primarily to field crops and irrigated pasture. The cattle ranches and dairy farms were owned and managed by local families. Fruits and vegetables, though an important source of revenue, occupied a small
portion of the agricultural land.
Then, from the early 1970s to the late 1980s, the Santa Maria Valley was
transformed. As field crops and dairy products became less profitable, farmers
either switched to high-value crops or quit farming. Much of the land was bought
by outside corporations, such as Mobil and the Bank of America. Irrigated pastures
became strawberry fields (dotted with oil wells) on leased land. The number of
migrant workers soared. In 1960 Guadalupe’s population was 18 percent Latino;
today it is about 85 percent Latino. The middle classes fled to the nearby city of
Santa Maria, leaving behind a rural underclass.
Juan Vicente Palerm has spent the last two decades studying the social and
economic changes in the Santa Maria Valley. The director of the University of
California’s Institute for Mexico and the United States, Palerm is an anthropologist by training. His early fieldwork traced the lives of Spanish guest workers in
northern Europe — migrants imported by treaty to labor in the factories and fields.
He is an imposing figure, with the graying beard of a patriarch, and has a remarkable grasp not only of labor market dynamics, but also of how every crop in the
valley is planted, tended, marketed, and sold. I spent a day with Palerm and one
of his graduate students, Manolo Gonzalez (who picked strawberries for a year as
part of his research), driving the side streets of Guadalupe, touring the fields, and
discussing how the growers of California and the peasants of rural Mexico created
an agricultural system that has locked them into mutual dependence.
By relying on poor migrants from Mexico, California growers established a wage
structure that discouraged American citizens from seeking farmwork. The wages
offered at harvest were too low to sustain a family in the United States, but they
were up to ten times as high as any wages Mexican peasants could earn in their
native villages. A system evolved in which the cheap labor of Mexican migrants subsidized California agriculture, while remittances from that farmwork preserved
rural communities in Mexico that otherwise might have collapsed. For decades the
men of Mexican villages have traveled north to the fields of California, leaving behind
women, children, and the elderly to look after their small farms. Migrant work in
California has long absorbed Mexican surplus labor, while Mexico has in effect
paid for the education, health care, and retirement of California’s farmworkers.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 435

15

6/18/12 3:11 PM

436

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

Whenever migrants decided to settle in California, however, they disrupted the
smooth workings of this system, by imposing higher costs on the state — especially
if they married and raised children. That is why the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) used to round up and deport illegal immigrants in California
immediately after the harvest. Nevertheless, millions of Mexican farmworkers have
settled in the United States over the years, most of them becoming American citizens. Although agricultural employment has long been a means of entering U.S.
society, low wages and poor working conditions have made it an occupation that
most immigrants and their children hope to escape. Farm labor is more physically demanding and less financially rewarding than almost any other kind of work.
A migrant who finds a job in a factory can triple his or her income. As a result, the
whole system now depends upon a steady supply of illegal immigrants to keep farm
wages low and to replace migrants who have either retired to Mexico or found better jobs in California.
Juan Vicente Palerm believes that today there are not only more migrants
shuttling back and forth from Mexico but also more Mexican farmworkers settling
permanently in California. Throughout the state towns like Guadalupe, Calexico,
Cutler, and McFarland are becoming enclaves of rural poverty. In the Santa Maria
Valley the increased production of fruits and vegetables, higher yields per acre, and
an extended growing season have created thousands of full- and part-time jobs
for farmworkers. Broccoli fields now occupy more than 20,000 acres, requiring a
large supply of resident workers for a staggered harvest that lasts most of the year.
Celery and cauliflower production has also increased the number of full-time
jobs. Perhaps 40 percent of the farm labor in the valley is currently performed by
workers who live there. Many farmworkers now own houses. But the strawberry
fields have drawn thousands of poor migrants to the area. Only 12 percent of the
work force at a strawberry farm can claim year-round employment. And cultivating the fruit is so labor-intensive — twenty-five times as labor-intensive as cultivating broccoli — that strawberry production now employs more farmworkers
than the production of all the vegetables grown in the valley combined. Most
strawberry pickers hope to find jobs in the neighboring vegetable fields, where
the wages are better and the work is less arduous. Turnover rates are extremely high
in the strawberry work force. But there is no impending shortage of potential
migrants. The rural population of Mexico has tripled since the 1940s. “In terms
of absolute numbers,” Palerm says, “there are far more Mexican peasants today
than ever before.”
Twenty-five years ago academic texts declared that California agriculture —
with its large-scale irrigation, sophisticated farming practices, corporate structure,
and low-wage, imported labor — was unique. That is no longer true. Southern
Spain is fast becoming the “California of Europe,” borrowing many of the same
techniques to grow the same high-value crops and relying on illegal immigrants
from North Africa. Southern Italy and Mediterranean France are adopting the
system as well. Mexico, Guatemala, and Chile, with the aid of foreign investors,

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 436

6/18/12 3:11 PM

SchloSSER • in ThE STRAwBERRY FiElDS

437

are recreating California’s industrialized agriculture in Latin America, producing
some crops that now compete with those grown in the United States. Improvements in transportation systems and cooling technology have created an international market for commodities that until recent years were rarely exported. Juan
Vicente Palerm believes that the cultivation of fruits and vegetables for processing
will increasingly shift from California to Mexico, where labor costs are much lower.
Mexico will produce the frozen vegetables for TV dinners, while California grows
artichokes, broccoli, strawberries, and asparagus for the fresh market. The harvest
of these specialty crops, however, cannot easily be mechanized: their high value is
closely linked to their unblemished appearance. The prosperity of California agriculture increasingly depends on uninterrupted access to Mexico’s peasantry.
Most of the strawberry workers in the Santa Maria Valley are Mixtec Indians —
some of the poorest and most exploited people in the Western Hemisphere. Soil
erosion and declining crop yields in the mountains of western Oaxaca have forced
the Mixtecs to become migrant workers. According to Michael Kearney, a professor of anthropology at the University of California at Riverside, their choice is
simple: “Migrate or starve.” Mixtecs now dominate the lowest-paid jobs in California agriculture. In Tijuana you often see wives and children of Mixtec farmworkers, small and dark and beautiful, dressed in the bright colors of their native
villages, selling Chiclets to tourists on the street.
Until the 1970s almost all the Mexican farmworkers in California were mestizos
with strong links to communities already in the state. The new migrants present
social workers with unusual challenges. In addition to the ninety-two dialects of
Mixtec, there are at least half a dozen other pre-Columbian languages spoken by
the indigenous peoples of Oaxaca. Perhaps one-fifth of the Mixtec farmworkers
in California speak little English or Spanish. Throughout their migratory route
Mixtecs are the victims of robbery and discrimination. In central Mexico they
must run a gauntlet of officials demanding bribes. In Tijuana they are preyed upon
by smugglers, rapists, and thieves. In the Imperial Desert, east of San Diego, they
risk their lives crossing the border. Two or three migrants now die there from
exposure every week.
In Guadalupe many of the settled farmworkers resent the new arrivals from
Oaxaca. Illegal immigrants often crossed picket lines during the 1980s, helping to
drive the UFW from the valley. Adjusted for inflation, the hourly wages have declined,
and there is widespread underemployment. Labor contractors now actively recruit
illegals, who work for less money and raise fewer objections than legal residents.
At harvest time Guadalupe’s population of roughly 5,700 swells by as much as
one-third, placing greater demands on local services. Palerm’s researchers once
discovered twenty-two people living in a two-bedroom apartment.
Despite the hardships of the long journey, Mixtecs hoping to sustain their
native villages have a strong incentive to find work in California. Wages in Oaxaca
are about two or three dollars a day. Wages in the strawberry fields of Baja California are about five dollars a day. A Mixtec farmworker in the Santa Maria Valley,

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 437

20

6/18/12 3:11 PM

438

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

making ten dollars an hour at the peak of the strawberry harvest, can earn more
in one day than he or she could earn back home in a month. . . .

Bowing Down to the Market
One morning in San Diego County, I met a strawberry grower named Doug. We
sat and talked in a trailer on the edge of his field. Doug’s father and his grandfather had both been sent to an internment camp for Japanese Americans during
World War II. Upon their release, the grandfather bought a used truck. At first he
worked for other farmers, then he leased some land. He spoke no English and so
Doug’s father, still a teenager, assumed an important role in the business. The two
grew vegetables with success and eventually shifted to strawberries, shipping and
processing the fruit as well. On the land where their original farm once stood,
there are now condominiums, a park, and a school. Doug grows strawberries a few
miles inland. His fields are surrounded by chain-link fences topped with barbed
wire. An enormous real estate development, with hundreds of Spanish-style condo
units, is creeping up the hills toward his farm. Many of the farmers nearby have
already sold their land. Doug has spent most of his life in strawberry fields, learning every aspect of the business first-hand, but now isn’t sure he wants his children to do the same.
“Farming’s not a glamorous business,” Doug said. “Farmers don’t have a high
status in this community. In fact, we’re resented by most people.” With all the
hassles today from the state and from his neighbors, he sometimes asks himself,
“Hey, why do this?” Selling the land would make him instantly rich. Instead, he worries about water costs, about theft, about the strawberries from New Zealand he saw
in the market the other day. Rain had wiped out a quarter of his early-season berries,
just when the market price was at its peak. Doug cannot understand the hostility
toward growers in California. After all, agriculture preserves open land. He thinks
Americans don’t appreciate how lucky they are to have cheap food. He doesn’t understand why anyone would impede strawberry production by limiting his access to
migrants. “My workers are helping themselves,” he said. “I’ve picked strawberries,
and let me tell you, there is no harder work. I respect these people. They work damn
hard. And my jobs are open to anyone who wants to apply.” Every so often college
kids visit the ranch, convinced that picking strawberries would be a nice way to
earn some extra money. Doug laughed. “They don’t last an hour out here.”
We stepped from the trailer into bright sunshine. Workers moved down the
furrows under close supervision. Doug takes great pride in being a third-generation
grower. He is smart, well educated, meticulous, and it showed in his field. But I
wondered if Doug and his workers would still be there in a few years.
Doug picked a berry and handed it to me, a large Chandler that was brilliantly red. I took a bite. The strawberry was warm and sweet and fragrant, with a
slightly bitter aftertaste from the soil.
That evening I inadvertently met some of Doug’s workers. Ricardo Soto, a
young lawyer at CRLA, had brought me to the edge of an avocado orchard to visit

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 438

25

6/18/12 3:11 PM

SchloSSER • in ThE STRAwBERRY FiElDS

439

a hidden encampment of migrant workers. Perhaps one-third of the farmworkers in
northern San Diego County — about 7,000 people — are now homeless. An additional 9,000 of their family members are homeless, too. Many are living outdoors.
The shortage of low-income housing became acute in the early 1980s, and large
shantytowns began to appear, some containing hundreds of crude shacks. As suburbs encroached on agricultural land in northern San Diego County, wealthy
commuters and strawberry pickers became neighbors. At one large shantytown I
visited, women were doing their laundry in a stream not far from a walled compound with tennis courts, a pool, and a sign promising country club living. The
suburbanites do not like living beside Mexican farmworkers. Instead of providing
low-income housing, local authorities have declared states of emergency, passed
laws to forbid curbside hiring, and bulldozed many of the large encampments.
San Diego growers appalled by the living conditions of their migrants have tried
to build farmworker housing near the fields — only to encounter fierce resistance
from neighboring home-owners. Although the shantytowns lower nearby property
values, permanent farmworker housing might reduce property values even more.
“When people find out you want to build housing for your migrants,” one grower
told me, “they just go ballistic.”
The new encampments are smaller and built to avoid detection. At the end of
a driveway, near a chain-link fence, I met a young Mixtec who lived in such an
encampment. His name was Francisco, and he was eighteen years old. He looked
deeply exhausted. He had just picked strawberries for twelve hours at Doug’s farm.
I asked what he thought of Doug as a boss. “Not bad,” he said politely.
The previous year Francisco had picked strawberries from April until July.
He had saved $800 during that period and had wired all of it to his mother and
father in the village of San Sebastian Tecomaxtlahuaca. This was Francisco’s second season in the fields, but he had not seen much of San Diego County. He was
too afraid of getting caught. His days were spent at the farm, his nights at the
encampment. He picked strawberries six days a week, sometimes seven, for ten or
twelve hours a day. “When there’s work,” Francisco said, “you have to work.” Each
morning he woke up around four-thirty and walked for half an hour to reach
Doug’s field.
At dusk, thirteen tired men in dirty clothes approached us. They were all
from Francisco’s village. They worked together at Doug’s farm and stayed at the
same encampment. They knew one another’s families back home and looked after
one another here. The oldest was forty-three and the youngest looked about fifteen. All the men were illegals. All were sick with coughs, but none dared to see a
doctor. As the sun dropped behind the hills, clouds of mosquitoes descended, and
yet the migrants seemed too tired to notice. They lay on their backs, on their sides,
resting on the hard ground as though it were a sofa.
Francisco offered to show me their encampment. We squeezed through a hole
in the chain-link fence and through gaps in rusting barbed wire, and climbed a
winding path enclosed by tall bushes. It felt like a medieval maze. As we neared
the camp, I noticed beer cans and food wrappers littering the ground. We came

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 439

30

6/18/12 3:11 PM

440

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

upon the first shack — short and low, more like a tent, just silver trash bags draped
over a wooden frame. A little farther up the path stood three more shacks in a
small clearing. They were built of plywood and camouflaged. Branches and leaves
had been piled on their roofs. The land-owner did not know the migrants lived
here, and the encampment would be difficult to find. These migrants were hiding
out, like criminals or Viet Cong. Garbage was everywhere. Francisco pointed to
his shack, which was about five feet high, five feet wide, and seven feet long. He
shared it with two other men. He had a good blanket. But when it rained at night
the roof leaked, and the men would go to work soaking wet the next day and dry
off in the sun. Francisco had never lived this way before coming to San Diego. At
home he always slept in a bed.
Beyond the sheds, bushes crowded the path again, and then it reached another
clearing, where two battered lawn chairs had been placed at the edge of the hill.
There was a wonderful view of strawberry fields, new houses, and the lights of the
freeway in the distance.
Driving back to my motel that night, I thought about the people of Orange
County, one of the richest counties in the nation — big on family values, yet bankrupt from financial speculation, unwilling to raise taxes to pay for their own children’s education, unwilling to pay off their debts, whining about the injustice of
it, and blaming all their problems on illegal immigrants. And I thought about
Francisco, their bogeyman, their scapegoat, working ten hours a day at one of the
hardest jobs imaginable, and sleeping on the ground every night, for months, so
that he could save money and send it home to his parents.
We have been told for years to bow down before “the market.” We have placed
our faith in the laws of supply and demand. What has been forgotten, or ignored,
is that the market rewards only efficiency. Every other human value gets in its way.
The market will drive wages down like water, until they reach the lowest possible
level. Today that level is being set not in Washington or New York or Sacramento
but in the fields of Baja California and the mountain villages of Oaxaca. That level
is about five dollars a day. No deity that men have ever worshipped is more ruthless and more hollow than the free market unchecked; there is no reason why
shantytowns should not appear on the outskirts of every American city. All those
who now consider themselves devotees of the market should take a good look at
what is happening in California. Left to its own devices, the free market always
seeks a work force that is hungry, desperate, and cheap — a work force that is anything but free.

35

Notes (by Paragraph)
8 spends half the year working: According to the latest NAWS survey, the average farmworker
spent 47 percent of his or her time in the United States doing farmwork, 19 percent
residing but not working, and 8 percent in nonfarm work. See “NAWS, 1997–98,” p. 24.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 440

6/18/12 3:11 PM

SchloSSER • in ThE STRAwBERRY FiElDS

441

9

Since 1980, the acreage around Watsonville and Salinas: In 1980 there were 4,270 acres
of strawberries in the area that produced about 96,000 tons of strawberries. In 2000
there were 11,570 acres that produced about 365,000 tons of strawberries. See “California Strawberry Acreage and Yield by Major Areas, 1972 through 1994,” California
Strawberry Commission, and the Agricultural Commission crop reports for Monterey
County and Santa Cruz County, 2000.
11 A survey of garages in Soledad: Meuter interview.
hundreds of strawberry pickers have been found living in caves: A decade ago, a large
encampment was found near a strawberry farm in Prunedale. Smaller encampments
are discovered from time to time in the area. See Roya Camp, “Shanty Camp Draws Aid;
Field Workers Found Living in Makeshift Caves,” Salinas Californian, August 28, 1991;
Everett Messick and Susan Ferris, “Authorities to Move Laborers Out of Caves; Seeks
Housing for 200 Migrants in Castroville, Salinas Areas,” Monterey Herald, August 29,
1991; “Back Wages Sought for Farmworkers,” Watsonville Register-Pajaronian, September 3, 1991.
14 Guadalupe’s population was 18 percent Latino: Cited in Juan Vicente Palerm, “Farm
Labor Needs and Farmworkers in California, 1970 to 1989,” California Agricultural
Studies, 91–92, Labor Market Information Division, State Employment Development
Department, April 1991, p. 21.
today it is about 85 percent Latino: According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Guadalupe’s
population was 84.5 percent Latino in 2000. The actual proportion was most likely
higher, given the perennial undercount of Latinos by the census.
16 up to ten times as high as any wages Mexican peasants could earn: See Juan Vicente Palerm
with Jose Ignacio Urquiola, “A Binational System of Agricultural Production: The
Case of the Mexican Bajio and California,” in Daniel G. Aldrich, Jr., and Lorenzo
Meyer, eds., Mexico and the United States: Neighbors in Crisis (San Bernardino, Calif.:
Borgo Press, 1993), p. 327.
preserved rural communities in Mexico that otherwise might have collapsed: According
to Michael Kearney, a professor of anthropology at the University of California, Northridge, some villages in Oaxaca now derive 80 percent of their annual income from
remittances sent home by migrant workers in California. Interview with Michael
Kearney. See also “Binational System,” pp. 311, 346; Michael Kearney, “Mixtec Ethnicity:
Social Identity, Political Consciousness, and Political Activism,” Latin American Research
Review 25 (2): 74–77.
18 Juan Vicente Palerm believes: Palerm interview.
Perhaps 40 percent of the farm labor: Cited in Palerm, “Immigrant and Migrant Farmworkers in the Santa Maria Valley, California,” Center for Survey Methods Research,
Bureau of the Census, 1994, p. 11.
twenty-five times as labor-intensive as cultivating broccoli: Broccoli production requires
80 man-hours per acre; strawberry production requires about 2,000 man-hours per
acre. See “Immigrant and Migrant,” pp. 4, 6.
The rural population of Mexico: Palerm interview.
20 “Migrate or starve”: Kearney interview.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 441

6/18/12 3:11 PM

442

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

21 Perhaps one-fifth of the Mixtec farmworkers: Interview with Agimiro Morales, Coalition
of Indian Communities of Oaxaca.
Two or three migrants now die there from exposure: One hundred and three migrants
were found dead in California’s Imperial Desert during 2001. Cited in Kenny Klein,
“Search Ended for Immigrants Missing in Imperial Desert,” Desert Sun (Palm Springs),
August 15, 2002. The official death toll no doubt understates the number of migrant
deaths; many bodies lie undiscovered in remote areas of the desert. For a good account of
why INS policies have made crossing the border so treacherous, see Wayne A. Cornelius,
“Death at the Border: Efficacy and Unintended Consequences of U.S. Immigration
Control Policy,” Population and Development Review, December 1, 2001.
23 Wages in Oaxaca: Morales interview.
Wages in the strawberry fields of Baja California: Kearney interview.
28 Perhaps one-third of the farmworkers in northern San Diego County: Cited in Dan Weisman, “Farmworkers Often Homeless: Estimated 7,000 in North Country Lack Housing,”
North Country Times, March 21, 2000.

Exploring the Text
1. Note Eric Schlosser’s title, “In the Strawberry Fields.” Compare the imagery
evoked by the Beatles song “Strawberry Fields” and the ceremonial place in New
York’s Central Park with Schlosser’s description in paragraphs 1 and 2.
2. How does Schlosser use the resources of language to characterize the work of the
strawberry pickers in paragraph 6?
3. What are some of the particular hardships facing the strawberry pickers? Which
one does Schlosser say is the worst?
4. Explain the rhetorical shift that Schlosser makes from “La Fruta del Diablo” to
“Locked into Dependence.”
5. According to Schlosser, how has economics changed the land and the population?
6. Schlosser concludes paragraphs 16 and 17 with claims. Analyze his arguments
according to the Toulmin model as explained in Chapter 3.
7. What aspects of strawberry production differ significantly from the production
of broccoli, celery, or cauliflower (para. 18)? How does this affect the lives of the
workers?
8. Explain the nature of the economic imperative that concludes the section “Locked
into Dependence” (para. 23).
9. How do you feel about the conditions described in the selection? Does reading it
influence your attitude toward eating strawberries? Toward migrant workers?
Explain.
10. Why does Schlosser conclude with narration and personal experience?
11. How would you characterize Schlosser’s tone in the concluding paragraphs (34–35)?
Do you agree with his conclusions? Why or why not?
12. Select an example of a general statement, such as the one that concludes the first
section: “On hillsides above the Salinas Valley, hundreds of strawberry pickers

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 442

6/18/12 3:11 PM

DUBnER AnD lEviTT • whAT ThE BAgEl MAn SAw

443

have been found living in caves.” Then read the endnote that corresponds to the
sentence. Explain the relationship between the endnote and the text. What is the
rhetorical function of the endnote? Overall, what effect do the endnotes have on
ethos and logos? Explain.

What the Bagel Man Saw
Stephen J. Dubner and Steven D. Levitt
Stephen J. Dubner (b. 1963) and Steven D. levitt (b. 1967) are the authors of the
best sellers Freakonomics (2005) and SuperFreakonomics (2009). Dubner lives in
new York city. in addition to Freakonomics and SuperFreakonomics, he is the author
of Turbulent Souls (Choosing My Religion) (1998), Confessions of a Hero-Worshiper
(2003), and a children’s book, The Boy with Two Belly Buttons (2007). he has
written for publications including the New York Times Magazine, the New Yorker,
and Time. in addition, his journalism has been anthologized in The Best American Sportswriting and The Best American Crime Writing. he has taught English at
columbia University, where he earned an MFA and played in a rock band. Steven
levitt is a professor of economics at the University of chicago, where he directs the
Becker center on chicago Price Theory. in 2004, he was awarded the John Bates
clark Medal, which recognizes the most influential economist in America under the
age of forty. More recently, he was named one of Time magazine’s “100 People
who Shape our world.” levitt received his BA from harvard University in 1989,
and his PhD from MiT in 1994, and he has taught at chicago since 1997. “what
the Bagel Man Saw” first appeared in the New York Times Magazine in 2004.

O

nce upon a time, Paul F. dreamed big dreams. While studying agricultural economics at Cornell, he wanted to end world hunger. Instead,
after doctoral work at M.I.T., he wound up taking a job with a research institute
in Washington, analyzing the weapons expenditures of the United States Navy.
This was in 1962. After four years came more of the same: analyst jobs with the
Bureau of the Budget, the Institute for Defense Analyses, the President’s Commission on Federal Statistics. Still, he dreamed. He had “potent research ideas,” as he
recalls them now, which the Environmental Protection Agency failed to appreciate. He developed a statistical means of predicting cancer clusters, but because he
was an economist and not a doctor, he couldn’t make headway with the National
Cancer Institute. He still loved the art of economics — the data-gathering, the statistical manipulation, the problem-solving — but it had led him to a high-level dead
end. He was well paid and unfulfilled. “I’d go to the office Christmas party, and
people would introduce me to their wives or husbands as the guy who brings in the
bagels,” he says. “‘Oh! You’re the guy who brings in the bagels!’ Nobody ever said,
‘This is the guy in charge of the public research group.’”

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 443

6/18/12 3:11 PM

444

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

The bagels had begun as a casual gesture: a boss treating his employees whenever they won a new research contract. Then he made it a habit. Every Friday, he
would bring half a dozen bagels, a serrated knife, some cream cheese. When
employees from neighboring floors heard about the bagels, they wanted some,
too. Eventually he was bringing in 15 dozen bagels a week. He set out a cash basket to recoup his costs. His collection rate was about 95 percent; he attributed the
underpayment to oversight.
In 1984, when his research institute fell under new management, he took a
look at his career and grimaced. “I was sick of every aspect of the whole thing,” he
says. “I was discouraged. I was tired of chasing contracts. So I said to management:
‘I’m getting out of this. I’m going to sell bagels.’”
His economist friends thought he had lost his mind. They made oblique
remarks (and some not so oblique) about “a terrible waste of talent.” But his wife
supported his decision. They had retired their mortgage; the last of their three
children was finishing college. Driving around the office parks that encircle
Washington, he solicited customers with a simple pitch: early in the morning, he
would deliver some bagels and a cash basket to a company’s snack room; he would
return before lunch to pick up the money and the leftovers. It was an honor-system
commerce scheme, and it worked. Within a few years, he was delivering 700 dozen
bagels a week to 140 companies and earning as much as he had ever made as a
research analyst. He had thrown off the shackles of cubicle life and made himself
happy.
He had also — quite without meaning to — designed a beautiful economic
experiment. By measuring the money collected against the bagels taken, he could
tell, down to the penny, just how honest his customers were. Did they steal from
him? If so, what were the characteristics of a company that stole versus a company
that did not? Under what circumstances did people tend to steal more, or less?
As it happens, his accidental study provides a window onto a subject that has
long stymied academics: white-collar crime. (Yes, shorting the bagel man is whitecollar crime, writ however small.) Despite all the attention paid to companies like
Enron, academics know very little about the practicalities of white-collar crime.
The reason? There aren’t enough data.
A key fact of white-collar crime is that we hear about only the very slim fraction of people who are caught. Most embezzlers lead quiet and theoretically happy
lives; employees who steal company property are rarely detected. With street crime,
meanwhile, that is not the case. A mugging or a burglary or a murder is usually
counted whether or not the criminal is caught. A street crime has a victim, who
typically reports the crime to the police, which generates data, which in turn generate thousands of academic papers by criminologists, sociologists and economists.
But white-collar crime presents no obvious victim. Whom, exactly, did the masters of Enron steal from? And how can you measure something if you don’t know
to whom it happened, or with what frequency, or in what magnitude?
Paul F.’s bagel business was different. It did present a victim. The victim was
Paul F.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 444

5

6/18/12 3:11 PM

DUBnER AnD lEviTT • whAT ThE BAgEl MAn SAw

445

It is 3:32 a.m., and Paul F. is barreling down a dark Maryland road when he
jams on the brakes and swears. “I forgot my hearing aids,” he mutters. He throws
the gearshift into reverse and proceeds to drive backward nearly as fast as he had
been driving forward.
He is 72, and his business is still thriving. (Thus his request to mask his full
name and his customers’ identities: he is wary of potential competitors poaching
his clients.) His daughter, son-in-law and one other employee now make most
of the deliveries. Today is Friday, which is the only day Paul F. still drives. Semiretirement has left him more time to indulge his economist self and tally his
data. He now knows, for instance, that in the past eight years he has delivered
1,375,103 bagels, of which 1,255,483 were eaten. (He has also delivered 648,341
doughnuts, of which 608,438 were eaten.)
He knows a good deal about the payment rate, too. When he first went into
business, he expected 95 percent payment, based on the experience at his own
office. But just as crime tends to be low on a street where a police car is parked, the
95 percent rate was artificially high: Paul F.’s presence had deterred theft. Not only
that, but those bagel eaters knew the provider and had feelings (presumably good
ones) about him. A broad swath of psychological and economic research has argued
that people will pay different amounts for the same item depending on who is
providing it. The economist Richard Thaler, in his 1985 “Beer on the Beach”
study, showed that a thirsty sunbather would pay $2.65 for a beer delivered from
a resort but only $1.50 for the same beer if it came from a shabby grocery store.
In the real world, Paul F. learned to settle for less than 95 percent. Now he
considers companies “honest” if the payment is 90 percent or more. “Averages
between 80 percent and 90 percent are annoying but tolerable,” he says. “Below
80 percent, we really have to grit our teeth to continue.”
In recent years, he has seen two remarkable trends in overall payment rates.
The first was a long, slow decline that began in 1992. “All my friends say: ‘Aha!
Clinton!’” Paul F. says. “Although I must say that most of my friends are conservative and inclined to see such things where others might not.” The second trend
revealed in Paul F.’s data was even starker. Entering the summer of 2001, the overall payment rate had slipped to about 87 percent. Immediately after Sept. 11, the
rate spiked a full 2 percent and hasn’t slipped much since. (If a 2 percent gain in
payment doesn’t sound like much, think of it this way: the nonpayment rate fell
from 13 percent to 11 percent, which amounts to a 15 percent decline in theft.)
Because many of Paul F.’s customers are affiliated with national security, there
may be a patriotic element to this 9/11 effect. Or it may represent a more general
surge in empathy. Whatever the reason, Paul F. was grateful for the boost. He
expends a great deal of energy hectoring his low-paying customers, often in the
form of a typewritten note. “The cost of bagels has gone up dramatically since the
beginning of the year,” reads one. “Unfortunately, the number of bagels and doughnuts that disappear without being paid for has also gone up. Don’t let that continue. I don’t imagine that you would teach your children to cheat, so why do it
yourselves?”

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 445

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

446

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

He is impatient and cantankerous but in sum agreeable. Dressed in jeans and
sneakers, with busy eyes and a wavy fringe of gray hair, he awoke this Friday at
3 a.m. Working out of his garage, he first loaded 50 cardboard trays of doughnuts —
a local bakery delivered them overnight — into the back of his van. He drives an
unmarked white Ford E-150 rigged with a bagel-warming compartment. (The van
was never stopped during the D.C. sniper attacks, but Paul F.’s tendency to park at
the curb caused problems in the near aftermath of 9/11. One customer left a note
saying: “Please park in a parking space. You are freaking a lot of people out.”)
After the doughnuts, Paul F. loaded two dozen money boxes, which he made
himself out of plywood. A money slot is cut into the top. When he started out, he
left behind an open basket for the cash, but too often the money vanished. Then
he tried a coffee can with a slot in its plastic lid, which also proved too tempting.
The wooden box has worked well. Each year he drops off about 7,000 boxes and
loses, on average, just one to theft. This is an intriguing statistic: the same people
who routinely steal more than 10 percent of his bagels almost never stoop to stealing his money box — a tribute to the nuanced social calculus of theft. From Paul F.’s
perspective, an office worker who eats a bagel without paying is committing a
crime; the office worker apparently doesn’t think so. This distinction probably has
less to do with the admittedly small amount of money involved than with the context of the “crime.” (The same office worker who fails to pay for his bagel might also
help himself to a long slurp of soda while he’s filling a glass in a self-serve restaurant, but it is extremely unlikely that he will leave the restaurant without paying.)
After retrieving his hearing aids, he heads for the bagel shop that provides him
with roughly 50 dozen bagels, in six flavors, every day. He drives nearly 80 m.p.h.
along empty highways and discusses what he has learned about honesty. He is leery
of disparaging individual companies or even most industries, for fear it will hurt
his business. But he will say that the telecom companies have robbed him blind,
and another bagel-delivery man found that law firms aren’t worth the trouble. He
also says he believes that employees further up the corporate ladder cheat more than
those down below. He reached this conclusion in part after delivering for years to
one company spread out over three floors — an executive floor on top and two
lower floors with sales, service and administrative employees. Maybe, he says, the
executives stole bagels out of a sense of entitlement. (Or maybe cheating is how
they got to be executives.) His biggest surprise? “I had idly assumed that in places
where security clearance was required for an individual to have a job, the employees would be more honest than elsewhere. That hasn’t turned out to be true.”
Since he started delivering bagels, Paul F. has kept rigorous data — which,
when run through a computer and measured against external factors ranging from
the local weather to the unemployment rate, can tell some interesting stories.
Other conclusions, meanwhile, are purely intuitive, based on Paul F.’s 20-year exposure to bagel behavior.
He has identified two great overriding predictors of a company’s honesty:
morale and size. Paul F. has noted a strong correlation between high payment

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 446

15

6/18/12 3:11 PM

DUBnER AnD lEviTT • whAT ThE BAgEl MAn SAw

447

rates and an office where people seem to like their boss and their work. (This is
one of his intuitive conclusions.) He also gleans a higher payment rate from
smaller offices. (This one is firmly supported by the data.) An office with a few
dozen employees generally outpays by 3 percent to 5 percent an office with a few
hundred employees. This may seem counterintuitive: in a bigger office, a bigger
crowd is bound to convene around the bagel table — providing more witnesses to
make sure you drop your money in the box. (Paul F. currently charges $1 for a
bagel and 50 cents for a doughnut.) But in the big-office/small-office comparison,
bagel crime seems to mirror street crime. There is far less crime per capita in rural
areas than in cities, in large part because a rural criminal is more likely to be
known (and therefore caught). Also, a rural community tends to exert greater social
incentives against crime, the main one being shame.
The bagel data also show a correlation between payment rate and the local
rate of unemployment. Intuition might have argued that these two factors would
be negatively correlated — that is, when unemployment is low (and the economy
is good), people would tend to be freer with their cash. “But I found that as the
unemployment rate goes down, dishonesty goes up,” Paul F. says. “My guess is
that a low rate of unemployment means that companies are having to hire a lower
class of employee.” The data also show that the payment rate does not change
when he raises bagel prices, though volume may temporarily fall.
If the payment tendencies that Paul F. has noted so far might be called macro
trends, it is the micro trends — those reflecting personal mood — that are perhaps
most compelling. Weather, for instance, has a major effect on the payment rate.
Unseasonably pleasant weather inspires people to pay a significantly higher rate.
Unseasonably cold weather, meanwhile, makes people cheat prolifically; so does
heavy rain and wind. But worst are the holidays. The week of Christmas produces
a 2 percent drop in payment rates — again, a 15 percent increase in theft, an effect
on the same order, in reverse, as 9/11. Thanksgiving is nearly as bad; the week of
Valentine’s Day is also lousy, as is the week straddling April 15. There are, however,
a few good holidays: July 4, Labor Day and Columbus Day. The difference in the
two sets of holidays? The low-cheating holidays represent little more than an extra
day off from work. The high-cheating holidays are freighted with miscellaneous
anxieties and the high expectations of loved ones.
As considerable as these oscillations may be, the fact is that a poorly paying
office rarely turns into a well-paying office, or vice versa. This has led Paul F. to
believe in a sobering sort of equilibrium: honest people are honest, and cheaters will
cheat regardless of the circumstance. “One time when I was cleaning up leftovers,”
he recalls, “a man came and took a doughnut while I was standing there, and started
to walk away without putting any money in the box. I never challenge people about
paying, but in that place, despite notes and appeals to management, the payment rate
had been abysmal, and I was fed up. I said to the guy, ‘Are you going to pay for that?’
And he said, ‘Oh, I left my wallet in my car,’ and started to put the doughnut back.
Now I knew, and he knew that I knew, that he hadn’t left his wallet in the car, but he

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 447

20

6/18/12 3:11 PM

448

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

was too cheap to pay 50 cents for a doughnut and too brazen to say, ‘Oh, I’m sorry,
I just wasn’t thinking,’ which is what anyone with half a conscience would say.”
Once the van is loaded up with fresh bagels, sorted by the dozen into white
paper bags that Paul F. had earlier labeled with customers’ names, he begins his
rounds. It is 5:02 a.m. The first stop is an office building in northern Virginia. His
routine is nearly always the same. He grabs one of the magnetic ID cards dangling
from his rearview mirror, hangs it from his neck, jumps around to the side of the
van, loads up a cardboard box with bagels, doughnuts and a cash box and practically sprints inside. In the snack room, he dumps the bagels from their bag, folds
back the top of the doughnut tray, plunks his money box on the table and hustles
out. Then back into the van, which he drives maniacally even from one officepark cul-de-sac to the next. (When a woman in a Lexus tarries at the entrance to
one parking lot, he calls her terrible names.) Another office building, another ID
card, another delivery. You can tell the defense contractors by the art on the walls:
achingly sensual black-and-white photographs of missiles and armored personnel
carriers. Some of the break rooms have vending machines whose offerings —
“Spicy Chicken Biscuit” and “Chopped Beefsteak Sandwich” — look so vile that
the simple appeal of a warm, fresh bagel becomes all the more apparent.
By 9 a.m., he has made all his deliveries. At 11, he will start picking up leftovers and the money boxes. Until then, it is time for his weekly Friday morning
breakfast with a dozen of his old economist friends. They meet in the groundfloor cafeteria of the office building where one of them now works. They swap
gossip, tax tips, Ziploc bags of pipe tobacco.
These are some of the same friends who 20 years ago told Paul F. that his
bagel business would never work. People cannot be trusted, they said. Their conversation this morning continues along those lines. One man cites a story he heard
about a toll-collector strike in England. During the strike, drivers were asked simply
to put their money into a box. As it turned out, the government collected more
toll money during the strike — which suggests that the drivers were at least fairly
honest, but also that the toll collectors had been skimming like mad. Another
economist at the table is now a tax preparer. He ticks off a long list of common
tax evasions his clients try to use — lying about the cost basis of stocks is perhaps
the favorite — and reminds the others that the United States tax code is, like
Paul F.’s bagel business, largely built on an honor system.
Amid all the talk of cheating, lying and scamming, Paul F. takes the floor to
declare his faith in humankind. “You guys know the story about the Rings of Gyges,
right?” he says.
A man named Gyges, he explains, came upon a cave and, inside it, a skeleton
wearing a ring. When Gyges put on the ring, he found that it made him invisible.
Now he was faced with a choice: would he use his invisibility for good or evil? The
story comes from Plato’s Republic. It was told by a student named Glaucon, in
challenge to a Socratic teaching about honesty and justice. “Socrates was arguing
against the idea that people will be dishonest if given the chance,” Paul F. says.
“His point was that people are good, even without enforcement.”

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 448

25

6/18/12 3:11 PM

cRAwFoRD • ThE cASE FoR woRKing wiTh YoUR hAnDS

449

But Paul F. doesn’t tell his friends how Glaucon’s story ends. Gyges actually
did woeful things once he got the ring — seduced the queen, murdered the king
and so on. The story posed a moral question: could any man resist the temptation
of evil if he knew his acts could not be witnessed? Glaucon seemed to think the
answer was no. But Paul F. sides with Socrates — for he knows that the answer, at
least 89 percent of the time, is yes.

Exploring the Text
1. What rhetorical effect does the “fairy tale” opening “Once upon a time . . .” have?
2. What is the major implication developed in the first paragraph?
3. As Stephen Dubner and Steven Levitt develop their essay, they use a great deal of
quantification. Note three particular examples. How does their use of numbers
affect their argument?
4. What is the nature of the appeals in Paul F.’s typewritten notes (para. 13)?
5. What do the writers mean by the phrase “the nuanced social calculus of theft”
(para. 15)?
6. Find and explain an example of humor. How does the humor affect the argument
developed by the authors?
7. Of the two predictors presented in paragraph 18, which do you think is the more
compelling? Also, which deterrent do you think would be stronger — the fear of
being caught or the shame associated with the crime?
8. According to the authors, what is the difference between macro and micro trends
as they apply to payment for bagels? Do you find the authors’ position compelling? Why or why not?
9. Do you agree with the way that Dubner and Levitt characterize “honest people”
and “cheaters”? Explain.
10. Identify the point where the essay moves toward conclusion. Explain the appeal
the writers use there. What is its effect on the reader?
11. How does the story of Gyges (paras. 26–27) contribute to the piece as a whole?
Do you find it to be an effective conclusion?
12. In summary, what, exactly, was it that “the bagel man saw”? How does that relate
to the economy as a whole?

The Case for Working with Your Hands
Matthew B. Crawford
A philosopher, writer, and mechanic, Matthew B. crawford grew up in the San Francisco Bay area with a theoretical physicist for a father and worked his way through
high school and college as an electrician. he earned a degree in physics at the
University of california at Santa Barbara and a PhD in political philosophy at the

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 449

6/18/12 3:11 PM

450

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

University of chicago, where he was a fellow at the committee on Social Thought.
crawford has done research on ocean surface temperature at the Scripps institute of
oceanography in la Jolla, california. he has also done emission control research,
taught high school latin, and worked on a white-collar assembly line, where his job
was to write summaries of scientific journal articles that he did not understand. currently a fellow at the institute for Advanced Studies in culture at the University of
virginia, he owns and operates Shockoe Moto, an independent motorcycle repair
shop in Richmond, virginia. “The case for working with Your hands” originally
appeared in the New York Times Magazine in 2009. That year also saw the publication of crawford’s best seller, Shop Class as Soulcraft: An Inquiry into the Value of
Work, and in 2010 he published The Case for Working with Your Hands: Or Why
Office Work Is Bad for Us and Fixing Things Feels Good.

T

he television show Deadliest Catch depicts commercial crab fishermen
in the Bering Sea. Another, Dirty Jobs, shows all kinds of grueling work;
one episode featured a guy who inseminates turkeys for a living. The weird fascination of these shows must lie partly in the fact that such confrontations with
material reality have become exotically unfamiliar. Many of us do work that feels
more surreal than real. Working in an office, you often find it difficult to see any
tangible result from your efforts. What exactly have you accomplished at the end
of any given day? Where the chain of cause and effect is opaque and responsibility
diffuse, the experience of individual agency can be elusive. Dilbert, The Office and
similar portrayals of cubicle life attest to the dark absurdism with which many
Americans have come to view their white-collar jobs.
Is there a more “real” alternative (short of inseminating turkeys)?
High-school shop-class programs were widely dismantled in the 1990s as
educators prepared students to become “knowledge workers.” The imperative of
the last 20 years to round up every warm body and send it to college, then to the
cubicle, was tied to a vision of the future in which we somehow take leave of
material reality and glide about in a pure information economy. This has not come
to pass. To begin with, such work often feels more enervating than gliding. More
fundamentally, now as ever, somebody has to actually do things: fix our cars, unclog
our toilets, build our houses.
When we praise people who do work that is straightforwardly useful, the praise
often betrays an assumption that they had no other options. We idealize them as
the salt of the earth and emphasize the sacrifice for others their work may entail.
Such sacrifice does indeed occur — the hazards faced by a lineman restoring power
during a storm come to mind. But what if such work answers as well to a basic
human need of the one who does it? I take this to be the suggestion of Marge
Piercy’s poem “To Be of Use,” which concludes with the lines “The pitcher longs
for water to carry / and a person for work that is real.” Beneath our gratitude for
the lineman may rest envy.
This seems to be a moment when the useful arts have an especially compelling economic rationale. A car mechanics’ trade association reports that repair

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 450

5

6/18/12 3:11 PM

cRAwFoRD • ThE cASE FoR woRKing wiTh YoUR hAnDS

451

shops have seen their business jump significantly in the current recession: people
aren’t buying new cars; they are fixing the ones they have. The current downturn
is likely to pass eventually. But there are also systemic changes in the economy,
arising from information technology, that have the surprising effect of making
the manual trades — plumbing, electrical work, car repair — more attractive as
careers. The Princeton economist Alan Blinder argues that the crucial distinction
in the emerging labor market is not between those with more or less education,
but between those whose services can be delivered over a wire and those who must
do their work in person or on site. The latter will find their livelihoods more secure
against outsourcing to distant countries. As Blinder puts it, “You can’t hammer a
nail over the Internet.” Nor can the Indians fix your car. Because they are in India.
If the goal is to earn a living, then, maybe it isn’t really true that 18-year-olds
need to be imparted with a sense of panic about getting into college (though they
certainly need to learn). Some people are hustled off to college, then to the cubicle,
against their own inclinations and natural bents, when they would rather be learning to build things or fix things. One shop teacher suggested to me that “in schools,
we create artificial learning environments for our children that they know to be
contrived and undeserving of their full attention and engagement. Without the
opportunity to learn through the hands, the world remains abstract and distant,
and the passions for learning will not be engaged.”
A gifted young person who chooses to become a mechanic rather than to accumulate academic credentials is viewed as eccentric, if not self-destructive. There is
a pervasive anxiety among parents that there is only one track to success for their
children. It runs through a series of gates controlled by prestigious institutions.
Further, there is wide use of drugs to medicate boys, especially, against their natural tendency toward action, the better to “keep things on track.” I taught briefly in
a public high school and would have loved to have set up a Ritalin fogger in my
classroom. It is a rare person, male or female, who is naturally inclined to sit still
for 17 years in school, and then indefinitely at work.
The trades suffer from low prestige, and I believe this is based on a simple mistake. Because the work is dirty, many people assume it is also stupid. This is not
my experience. I have a small business as a motorcycle mechanic in Richmond, Va.,
which I started in 2002. I work on Japanese and European motorcycles, mostly
older bikes with some “vintage” cachet that makes people willing to spend money
on them. I have found the satisfactions of the work to be very much bound up
with the intellectual challenges it presents. And yet my decision to go into this line
of work is a choice that seems to perplex many people.
After finishing a Ph.D. in political philosophy at the University of Chicago in
2000, I managed to stay on with a one-year postdoctoral fellowship at the university’s Committee on Social Thought. The academic job market was utterly bleak.
In a state of professional panic, I retreated to a makeshift workshop I set up in the
basement of a Hyde Park apartment building, where I spent the winter tearing down
an old Honda motorcycle and rebuilding it. The physicality of it, and the clear specificity of what the project required of me, was a balm. Stumped by a starter motor

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 451

6/18/12 3:11 PM

452

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

that seemed to check out in every way but wouldn’t work, I started asking around
at Honda dealerships. Nobody had an answer; finally one service manager told
me to call Fred Cousins of Triple O Service. “If anyone can help you, Fred can.”
I called Fred, and he invited me to come to his independent motorcyclerepair shop, tucked discreetly into an unmarked warehouse on Goose Island. He
told me to put the motor on a certain bench that was free of clutter. He checked
the electrical resistance through the windings, as I had done, to confirm there was
no short circuit or broken wire. He spun the shaft that ran through the center of
the motor, as I had. No problem: it spun freely. Then he hooked it up to a battery.
It moved ever so slightly but wouldn’t spin. He grasped the shaft, delicately, with
three fingers, and tried to wiggle it side to side. “Too much free play,” he said. He
suggested that the problem was with the bushing (a thick-walled sleeve of metal)
that captured the end of the shaft in the end of the cylindrical motor housing. It
was worn, so it wasn’t locating the shaft precisely enough. The shaft was free to
move too much side to side (perhaps a couple of hundredths of an inch), causing
the outer circumference of the rotor to bind on the inner circumference of the
motor housing when a current was applied. Fred scrounged around for a Honda
motor. He found one with the same bushing, then used a “blind hole bearing
puller” to extract it, as well as the one in my motor. Then he gently tapped the
new, or rather newer, one into place. The motor worked! Then Fred gave me an
impromptu dissertation on the peculiar metallurgy of these Honda starter-motor
bushings of the mid-’70s. Here was a scholar.
Over the next six months I spent a lot of time at Fred’s shop, learning, and
put in only occasional appearances at the university. This was something of a regression: I worked on cars throughout high school and college, and one of my early
jobs was at a Porsche repair shop. Now I was rediscovering the intensely absorbing nature of the work, and it got me thinking about possible livelihoods.
As it happened, in the spring I landed a job as executive director of a policy
organization in Washington. This felt like a coup. But certain perversities became
apparent as I settled into the job. It sometimes required me to reason backward,
from desired conclusion to suitable premise. The organization had taken certain
positions, and there were some facts it was more fond of than others. As its figurehead, I was making arguments I didn’t fully buy myself. Further, my boss seemed
intent on retraining me according to a certain cognitive style — that of the corporate world, from which he had recently come. This style demanded that I project
an image of rationality but not indulge too much in actual reasoning. As I sat in
my K Street office, Fred’s life as an independent tradesman gave me an image that
I kept coming back to: someone who really knows what he is doing, losing himself in work that is genuinely useful and has a certain integrity to it. He also
seemed to be having a lot of fun.
Seeing a motorcycle about to leave my shop under its own power, several days
after arriving in the back of a pickup truck, I don’t feel tired even though I’ve been
standing on a concrete floor all day. Peering into the portal of his helmet, I think

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 452

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

cRAwFoRD • ThE cASE FoR woRKing wiTh YoUR hAnDS

453

I can make out the edges of a grin on the face of a guy who hasn’t ridden his bike
in a while. I give him a wave. With one of his hands on the throttle and the other
on the clutch, I know he can’t wave back. But I can hear his salute in the exuberant
“bwaaAAAAP!” of a crisp throttle, gratuitously revved. That sound pleases me, as
I know it does him. It’s a ventriloquist conversation in one mechanical voice, and
the gist of it is “Yeah!”
After five months at the think tank, I’d saved enough money to buy some tools
I needed, and I quit and went into business fixing bikes. My shop rate is $40 per
hour. Other shops have rates as high as $70 per hour, but I tend to work pretty
slowly. Further, only about half the time I spend in the shop ends up being billable
(I have no employees; every little chore falls to me), so it usually works out closer
to $20 per hour — a modest but decent wage. The business goes up and down;
when it is down I have supplemented it with writing. The work is sometimes frustrating, but it is never irrational.
And it frequently requires complex thinking. In fixing motorcycles you come
up with several imagined trains of cause and effect for manifest symptoms, and
you judge their likelihood before tearing anything down. This imagining relies on
a mental library that you develop. An internal combustion engine can work in
any number of ways, and different manufacturers have tried different approaches.
Each has its own proclivities for failure. You also develop a library of sounds and
smells and feels. For example, the backfire of a too-lean fuel mixture is subtly different from an ignition backfire.
As in any learned profession, you just have to know a lot. If the motorcycle is
30 years old, from an obscure maker that went out of business 20 years ago, its
tendencies are known mostly through lore. It would probably be impossible to do
such work in isolation, without access to a collective historical memory; you have
to be embedded in a community of mechanic-antiquarians. These relationships are
maintained by telephone, in a network of reciprocal favors that spans the country.
My most reliable source, Fred, has such an encyclopedic knowledge of obscure
European motorcycles that all I have been able to offer him in exchange is deliveries
of obscure European beer.
There is always a risk of introducing new complications when working on
old motorcycles, and this enters the diagnostic logic. Measured in likelihood of
screw-ups, the cost is not identical for all avenues of inquiry when deciding which
hypothesis to pursue. Imagine you’re trying to figure out why a bike won’t start.
The fasteners holding the engine covers on 1970s-era Hondas are Phillips head, and
they are almost always rounded out and corroded. Do you really want to check
the condition of the starter clutch if each of eight screws will need to be drilled
out and extracted, risking damage to the engine case? Such impediments have to
be taken into account. The attractiveness of any hypothesis is determined in part by
physical circumstances that have no logical connection to the diagnostic problem
at hand. The mechanic’s proper response to the situation cannot be anticipated
by a set of rules or algorithms.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 453

15

6/18/12 3:11 PM

454

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

There probably aren’t many jobs that can be reduced to rule-following and
still be done well. But in many jobs there is an attempt to do just this, and the perversity of it may go unnoticed by those who design the work process. Mechanics
face something like this problem in the factory service manuals that we use. These
manuals tell you to be systematic in eliminating variables, presenting an idealized
image of diagnostic work. But they never take into account the risks of working
on old machines. So you put the manual away and consider the facts before you.
You do this because ultimately you are responsible to the motorcycle and its owner,
not to some procedure.
Some diagnostic situations contain a lot of variables. Any given symptom may
have several possible causes, and further, these causes may interact with one another
and therefore be difficult to isolate. In deciding how to proceed, there often comes
a point where you have to step back and get a larger gestalt. Have a cigarette and
walk around the lift. The gap between theory and practice stretches out in front of
you, and this is where it gets interesting. What you need now is the kind of judgment
that arises only from experience; hunches rather than rules. For me, at least, there
is more real thinking going on in the bike shop than there was in the think tank.
Put differently, mechanical work has required me to cultivate different intellectual habits. Further, habits of mind have an ethical dimension that we don’t
often think about. Good diagnosis requires attentiveness to the machine, almost a
conversation with it, rather than assertiveness, as in the position papers produced
on K Street. Cognitive psychologists speak of “metacognition,” which is the activity
of stepping back and thinking about your own thinking. It is what you do when
you stop for a moment in your pursuit of a solution, and wonder whether your
understanding of the problem is adequate. The slap of worn-out pistons hitting
their cylinders can sound a lot like loose valve tappets, so to be a good mechanic
you have to be constantly open to the possibility that you may be mistaken. This
is a virtue that is at once cognitive and moral. It seems to develop because the
mechanic, if he is the sort who goes on to become good at it, internalizes the
healthy functioning of the motorcycle as an object of passionate concern. How
else can you explain the elation he gets when he identifies the root cause of some
problem?
This active concern for the motorcycle is reinforced by the social aspects of
the job. As is the case with many independent mechanics, my business is based
entirely on word of mouth. I sometimes barter services with machinists and metal
fabricators. This has a very different feel than transactions with money; it situates
me in a community. The result is that I really don’t want to mess up anybody’s
motorcycle or charge more than a fair price. You often hear people complain about
mechanics and other tradespeople whom they take to be dishonest or incompetent. I am sure this is sometimes justified. But it is also true that the mechanic
deals with a large element of chance.
I once accidentally dropped a feeler gauge down into the crankcase of a Kawasaki Ninja that was practically brand new, while performing its first scheduled valve

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 454

20

6/18/12 3:11 PM

cRAwFoRD • ThE cASE FoR woRKing wiTh YoUR hAnDS

455

adjustment. I escaped a complete tear-down of the motor only through an operation that involved the use of a stethoscope, another pair of trusted hands and the
sort of concentration we associate with a bomb squad. When finally I laid my fingers on that feeler gauge, I felt as if I had cheated death. I don’t remember ever feeling so alive as in the hours that followed.
Often as not, however, such crises do not end in redemption. Moments of
elation are counterbalanced with failures, and these, too, are vivid, taking place
right before your eyes. With stakes that are often high and immediate, the manual
trades elicit heedful absorption in work. They are punctuated by moments of pleasure that take place against a darker backdrop: a keen awareness of catastrophe as
an always-present possibility. The core experience is one of individual responsibility, supported by face-to-face interactions between tradesman and customer.
Contrast the experience of being a middle manager. This is a stock figure of
ridicule, but the sociologist Robert Jackall spent years inhabiting the world of
corporate managers, conducting interviews, and he poignantly describes the “moral
maze” they feel trapped in. Like the mechanic, the manager faces the possibility
of disaster at any time. But in his case these disasters feel arbitrary; they are typically a result of corporate restructurings, not of physics. A manager has to make
many decisions for which he is accountable. Unlike an entrepreneur with his own
business, however, his decisions can be reversed at any time by someone higher
up the food chain (and there is always someone higher up the food chain). It’s
important for your career that these reversals not look like defeats, and more generally you have to spend a lot of time managing what others think of you. Survival
depends on a crucial insight: you can’t back down from an argument that you
initially made in straightforward language, with moral conviction, without seeming to lose your integrity. So managers learn the art of provisional thinking and
feeling, expressed in corporate doublespeak, and cultivate a lack of commitment
to their own actions. Nothing is set in concrete the way it is when you are, for
example, pouring concrete.
Those who work on the lower rungs of the information-age office hierarchy
face their own kinds of unreality, as I learned some time ago. After earning a master’s
degree in the early 1990s, I had a hard time finding work but eventually landed a
job in the Bay Area writing brief summaries of academic journal articles, which
were then sold on CD-ROMs to subscribing libraries. When I got the phone call
offering me the job, I was excited. I felt I had grabbed hold of the passing world —
miraculously, through the mere filament of a classified ad — and reeled myself
into its current. My new bosses immediately took up residence in my imagination, where I often surprised them with my hidden depths. As I was shown to my
cubicle, I felt a real sense of being honored. It seemed more than spacious enough.
It was my desk, where I would think my thoughts — my unique contribution to a
common enterprise, in a real company with hundreds of employees. The regularity
of the cubicles made me feel I had found a place in the order of things. I was to be
a knowledge worker.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 455

25

6/18/12 3:11 PM

456

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

But the feel of the job changed on my first day. The company had gotten its
start by providing libraries with a subject index of popular magazines like Sports
Illustrated. Through a series of mergers and acquisitions, it now found itself offering not just indexes but also abstracts (that is, summaries), and of a very different
kind of material: scholarly works in the physical and biological sciences, humanities, social sciences and law. Some of this stuff was simply incomprehensible to
anyone but an expert in the particular field covered by the journal. I was reading
articles in Classical Philology where practically every other word was in Greek.
Some of the scientific journals were no less mysterious. Yet the categorical difference between, say, Sports Illustrated and Nature Genetics seemed not to have
impressed itself on the company’s decision makers. In some of the titles I was
assigned, articles began with an abstract written by the author. But even in such
cases I was to write my own. The reason offered was that unless I did so, there
would be no “value added” by our product. It was hard to believe I was going to
add anything other than error and confusion to such material. But then, I hadn’t
yet been trained.
My job was structured on the supposition that in writing an abstract of an
article there is a method that merely needs to be applied, and that this can be done
without understanding the text. I was actually told this by the trainer, Monica, as
she stood before a whiteboard, diagramming an abstract. Monica seemed a perfectly sensible person and gave no outward sign of suffering delusions. She didn’t
insist too much on what she was telling us, and it became clear she was in a position similar to that of a veteran Soviet bureaucrat who must work on two levels
at once: reality and official ideology. The official ideology was a bit like the factory
service manuals I mentioned before, the ones that offer procedures that mechanics
often have to ignore in order to do their jobs.
My starting quota, after finishing a week of training, was 15 articles per day.
By my 11th month at the company, my quota was up to 28 articles per day (this was
the normal, scheduled increase). I was always sleepy while at work, and I think
this exhaustion was because I felt trapped in a contradiction: the fast pace demanded
complete focus on the task, yet the pace also made any real concentration impossible. I had to actively suppress my own ability to think, because the more you
think, the more the inadequacies in your understanding of an author’s argument
come into focus. This can only slow you down. To not do justice to an author who
had poured himself into the subject at hand felt like violence against what was best
in myself.
The quota demanded, then, not just dumbing down but also a bit of moral
re-education, the opposite of the kind that occurs in the heedful absorption of
mechanical work. I had to suppress my sense of responsibility to the article itself,
and to others — to the author, to begin with, as well as to the hapless users of the
database, who might naïvely suppose that my abstract reflected the author’s work.
Such detachment was made easy by the fact there was no immediate consequence
for me; I could write any nonsense whatever.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 456

6/18/12 3:11 PM

cRAwFoRD • ThE cASE FoR woRKing wiTh YoUR hAnDS

457

Now, it is probably true that every job entails some kind of mutilation. I used
to work as an electrician and had my own business doing it for a while. As an electrician you breathe a lot of unknown dust in crawl spaces, your knees get bruised,
your neck gets strained from looking up at the ceiling while installing lights or
ceiling fans and you get shocked regularly, sometimes while on a ladder. Your
hands are sliced up from twisting wires together, handling junction boxes made
out of stamped sheet metal and cutting metal conduit with a hacksaw. But none
of this damage touches the best part of yourself.
You might wonder: Wasn’t there any quality control? My supervisor would
periodically read a few of my abstracts, and I was sometimes corrected and told
not to begin an abstract with a dependent clause. But I was never confronted with
an abstract I had written and told that it did not adequately reflect the article. The
quality standards were the generic ones of grammar, which could be applied without my supervisor having to read the article at hand. Rather, my supervisor and I
both were held to a metric that was conjured by someone remote from the work
process — an absentee decision maker armed with a (putatively) profit-maximizing
calculus, one that took no account of the intrinsic nature of the job. I wonder
whether the resulting perversity really made for maximum profits in the long term.
Corporate managers are not, after all, the owners of the businesses they run.
At lunch I had a standing arrangement with two other abstracters. One was
from my group, a laconic, disheveled man named Mike whom I liked instantly.
He did about as well on his quota as I did on mine, but it didn’t seem to bother him
too much. The other guy was from beyond the partition, a meticulously groomed
Liberian named Henry who said he had worked for the C.I.A. He had to flee Liberia very suddenly one day and soon found himself resettled near the office parks
of Foster City, Calif. Henry wasn’t going to sweat the quota. Come 12:30, the three
of us would hike to the food court in the mall. This movement was always thrilling. It involved traversing several “campuses,” with ponds frequented by oddly real
seagulls, then lunch itself, which I always savored. (Marx writes that under conditions of estranged labor, man “no longer feels himself to be freely active in any but
his animal functions.”) Over his burrito, Mike would recount the outrageous things
he had written in his abstracts. I could see my own future in such moments of
sabotage — the compensating pleasures of a cubicle drone. Always funny and
gentle, Mike confided one day that he was doing quite a bit of heroin. On the job.
This actually made some sense.
How was it that I, once a proudly self-employed electrician, had ended up
among these walking wounded, a “knowledge worker” at a salary of $23,000? I had
a master’s degree, and it needed to be used. The escalating demand for academic
credentials in the job market gives the impression of an ever-more-knowledgeable
society, whose members perform cognitive feats their unschooled parents could
scarcely conceive of. On paper, my abstracting job, multiplied a millionfold, is
precisely what puts the futurologist in a rapture: we are getting to be so smart! Yet
my M.A. obscures a more real stupidification of the work I secured with that

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 457

30

6/18/12 3:11 PM

458

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

credential, and a wage to match. When I first got the degree, I felt as if I had been
inducted to a certain order of society. But despite the beautiful ties I wore, it
turned out to be a more proletarian existence than I had known as an electrician.
In that job I had made quite a bit more money. I also felt free and active, rather
than confined and stultified.
A good job requires a field of action where you can put your best capacities to
work and see an effect in the world. Academic credentials do not guarantee this.
Nor can big business or big government — those idols of the right and the
left — reliably secure such work for us. Everyone is rightly concerned about economic growth on the one hand or unemployment and wages on the other, but the
character of work doesn’t figure much in political debate. Labor unions address
important concerns like workplace safety and family leave, and management looks
for greater efficiency, but on the nature of the job itself, the dominant political
and economic paradigms are mute. Yet work forms us, and deforms us, with broad
public consequences.
The visceral experience of failure seems to have been edited out of the career
trajectories of gifted students. It stands to reason, then, that those who end up
making big decisions that affect all of us don’t seem to have much sense of their
own fallibility, and of how badly things can go wrong even with the best of intentions (like when I dropped that feeler gauge down into the Ninja). In the boardrooms of Wall Street and the corridors of Pennsylvania Avenue, I don’t think you’ll
see a yellow sign that says “Think Safety!” as you do on job sites and in many
repair shops, no doubt because those who sit on the swivel chairs tend to live
remote from the consequences of the decisions they make. Why not encourage
gifted students to learn a trade, if only in the summers, so that their fingers will
be crushed once or twice before they go on to run the country?
There is good reason to suppose that responsibility has to be installed in the
foundation of your mental equipment — at the level of perception and habit.
There is an ethic of paying attention that develops in the trades through hard
experience. It inflects your perception of the world and your habitual responses
to it. This is due to the immediate feedback you get from material objects and to
the fact that the work is typically situated in face-to-face interactions between
tradesman and customer.
An economy that is more entrepreneurial, less managerial, would be less subject to the kind of distortions that occur when corporate managers’ compensation is tied to the short-term profit of distant shareholders. For most entrepreneurs,
profit is at once a more capacious and a more concrete thing than this. It is a calculation in which the intrinsic satisfactions of work count — not least, the exercise of your own powers of reason.
Ultimately it is enlightened self-interest, then, not a harangue about humility
or public-spiritedness, that will compel us to take a fresh look at the trades. The
good life comes in a variety of forms. This variety has become difficult to see; our
field of aspiration has narrowed into certain channels. But the current perplexity
in the economy seems to be softening our gaze. Our peripheral vision is perhaps

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 458

35

6/18/12 3:11 PM

cRAwFoRD • ThE cASE FoR woRKing wiTh YoUR hAnDS

459

recovering, allowing us to consider the full range of lives worth choosing. For anyone who feels ill suited by disposition to spend his days sitting in an office, the
question of what a good job looks like is now wide open.

Exploring the Text
1. What does Matthew B. Crawford mean by “such confrontations with material
reality”? Do you agree that “[m]any of us do work that feels more surreal than
real” (para. 1)?
2. In paragraph 4, Crawford quotes the last two lines of Marge Piercy’s poem, “To
Be of Use.” How effective is his use of the poem?
3. What is the nature of economist Alan Blinder’s “crucial distinction” (para. 5)? What
implications does it have for the world of work?
4. Do you agree with Crawford’s characterization of schooling and learning (paras.
6–7)? Does it fit with your own experience and observation? To what extent? If it
doesn’t, explain why.
5. How does Crawford build his ethos in paragraph 7?
6. Note the particular detail with which Crawford characterizes Fred (para. 10). Do you
agree with Crawford’s conclusion about Fred: “Here was a scholar”? Why or why not?
7. What is ironic about Crawford’s job at the policy organization in Washington
(para. 12)? How does that irony contribute to Crawford’s characterization of work?
8. Crawford writes, “The attractiveness of any hypothesis is determined in part by
physical circumstances that have no logical connection to the diagnostic problem
at hand” (para. 17). Two paragraphs later he writes, “For me, at least, there is more
real thinking going on in the bike shop than there was in the think tank.” How
does this humorous remark relate to the meaning of the first statement?
9. What is the virtue that, according to Crawford, is “at once cognitive and moral”
(para. 20)? Do you agree with his claim?
10. Think of an experience you have had that in some way resembles the one Crawford
describes in paragraph 22. Were your feelings similar to Crawford’s? How effectively does the writer appeal to the experience of his audience?
11. Paragraph 24 concludes with a claim about managers. Explain how Crawford
develops his argument, using the Toulmin model described and demonstrated in
Chapter 3.
12. What did Crawford learn from his job as a writer of abstracts (paras. 25–32)? How
does that experience support the claims he makes earlier in the essay?
13. Paragraph 30 concludes, “But none of this damage touches the best part of yourself.” What, as implied by Crawford, is “the best part of yourself ”? Do you agree?
14. How effective is the rhetorical question that concludes paragraph 36?
15. Crawford concludes that the economy will be improved by “enlightened selfinterest” (para. 39). Do you agree with his assessment?
16. In an interview about his book Shop Class as Soulcraft: An Inquiry into the Value
of Work, Crawford has said,

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 459

6/18/12 3:11 PM

460

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

There’s knowledge work and there’s manual work, and the idea that these are two very
different things seemed very bogus to me. I needed to make the case for how much
thinking goes on in the trades. And that this can be a life worth choosing — if
you’re someone who likes to use your brain at work. And once you get into that, it
becomes a very interesting question of psychology: how using your hands and using
your mind are connected. Another thing that prompted the book is the year that I
spent teaching high school Latin, which I was barely qualified to do. There’s some
simile here to be made with fools rushing in. At any rate, the kids were being told
that they had to take this course to get their SAT scores up — because everyone has
to get into college. The class was something of a disaster: Half of them were jacked
up on Ritalin just trying to stay awake. I felt like if I had been able to take some of
these kids aside and say, “Hey, let’s build a deck,” or, “Let’s overhaul an engine,” they
would have perked right up.

How effectively does this essay serve as a response to the situation Crawford
describes in the interview?

How to Restore the American Dream
Fareed Zakaria
Fareed Zakaria was born in 1964 in Mumbai (then Bombay), where he attended the
cathedral and John connon School before moving to the United States. he earned
a BA from Yale University and a PhD in political science from harvard University.
Esquire magazine has called him “one of the 21 most important people of the 21st
century,” and Foreign Policy named him one of the top 100 global thinkers. After
spending ten years overseeing all of Newsweek’s editions abroad, Zakaria became
Time magazine’s Editor at large in 2010. his cover stories and columns on economics and politics have received many awards, including a 2010 national Magazine Award, and reach more than twenty-five million readers weekly. Before joining
Newsweek in 2000, he spent eight years as managing editor of Foreign Affairs, a
post he took on at only twenty-eight years of age. Prior to joining Foreign Affairs,
Zakaria managed a major research project on American foreign policy at harvard
University, where he taught international relations and political philosophy. he is
the author of From Wealth to Power: The Unusual Origins of America’s World Role
(1998), which has been translated into several languages, and The Future of Freedom (2003), a New York Times best seller. “how to Restore the American Dream”
appeared in Time magazine on october 21, 2010.

T

he American dream for me, growing up in India in the 1970s, looked
something like the opening credits of Dallas. The blockbuster TV series
began with a kaleidoscope of big, brassy, sexy images — tracts of open land,
shiny skyscrapers, fancy cars, cowboy businessmen and the very dreamy Victoria

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 460

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ZAKARiA • how To RESToRE ThE AMERicAn DREAM

461

Principal. We watched bootlegged copies of the show, passed around on old
Betamax cassettes. America (certainly the CBS soap-opera version of America)
seemed dazzling and larger than life, especially set against the stagnant backdrop
of India in the 1970s. Everyone I knew was fascinated by the U.S., whether they
admitted it or not. Politicians who denounced the country by day would go home
in the evenings and plot to send their kids to college in “the States.”
Of course, the 1970s were actually tough times in America — stagflation,1
malaise, the aftermath of Vietnam and Watergate — but they were brutal in the
rest of the world. Hyperinflation racked most third-world countries; coups and
martial law were familiar occurrences, even affecting staunchly democratic India,
where emergency rule was enforced from 1975 to 1977. Set against this atmosphere of despair, the U.S. looked like a shining city on a hill.
A few years later, when I got to America on a college scholarship, I realized
that the real American Dream was somewhat different from Dallas. I visited college friends in their hometowns and was struck by the spacious suburban houses
and the gleaming appliances — even when their parents had simple, modest jobs.
The modern American Dream, for me, was this general prosperity and well-being
for the average person. European civilization had produced the great cathedrals
of the world. America had the two-car garage. And this middle-class contentment
created a country of optimists. Compared with the fatalism and socialist lethargy
that was pervasive in India in those days, Americans had a sunny attitude toward
life that was utterly refreshing.
But when I travel from America to India these days, as I did recently, it’s as if
the world has been turned upside down. Indians are brimming with hope and
faith in the future. After centuries of stagnation, their economy is on the move,
fueling animal spirits and ambition. The whole country feels as if it has been
unlocked. Meanwhile, in the U.S., the mood is sour. Americans are glum, dispirited and angry. The middle class, in particular, feels under assault. In a Newsweek
poll in September, 63% of Americans said they did not think they would be able
to maintain their current standard of living. Perhaps most troubling, Americans
are strikingly fatalistic about their prospects. The can-do country is convinced
that it can’t.
Americans have good reasons to worry. We have just gone through the worst
recession since the Great Depression. The light at the end of the tunnel is dim at
best. Sixteen months into the recovery, the unemployment rate is higher than it was
in the depths of all but one of the postwar recessions. And as government spending is being pared back, the economy is showing new signs of weakness.
Some experts say that in every recession Americans get gloomy and then
recover with the economy. This slump is worse than most; so is the mood. Once
demand returns, they say, jobs will come back and, with them, optimism. But
Americans are far more apprehensive than usual, and their worries seem to go

5

1Stagnant economic growth combined with a high rate of inflation. — Eds.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 461

6/18/12 3:11 PM

462

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

beyond the short-term debate over stimulus vs. deficit reduction. They fear that we
are in the midst of not a cyclical downturn but a structural shift, one that poses huge
new challenges to the average American job, pressures the average American wage
and endangers the average American Dream. The middle class, many Americans
have come to believe, is being hollowed out. I think they are right.

Going Global
For a picture of the global economy, look at America’s great corporations, which
are thriving. IBM, Coca-Cola, PepsiCo, Google, Microsoft, Apple, Intel and Caterpillar are all doing well. And they share a strategy that is becoming standard for success. First, technology has produced massive efficiencies over the past decade. Jack
Welch explained the process succinctly on CNBC last September. “Technology
has changed the game in jobs,” he said. “We had technology bumping around for
years in the ’80s and ’90s, and [we were] trying to make it work. And now it’s
working. . . . You couple the habits [of efficiency] from a deep recession [with] an
exponential increase in technology, and you’re not going to see jobs for a long,
long time.” Welch gave as an example a company owned by the private-equity
firm with which he is affiliated. In 2007 the business had 26,000 employees and
generated $12 billion in revenue. It will return to those revenue numbers by 2013
but with only 14,000 employees. “Companies have learned to do more with less,”
Welch said.
Next, companies have truly gone global. The companies on the S&P 500 generate 46% of their profits outside the U.S., and for many of the biggest American
names, the proportion is much higher. You might think of Coca-Cola as the quintessentially American company. In fact it is a vast global enterprise, operating in
206 countries. “We have a factory in Ramallah that employs 2,000 people. We have
a factory in Afghanistan. We have factories everywhere,” explains Muhtar Kent,
the CEO of Coke. Nearly 80% of Coca-Cola’s revenue comes from outside the U.S.,
and an even greater percentage of its employees are in foreign countries. “We are
a global company that happens to be headquartered in Atlanta,” says Kent.
America’s great corporations access global markets, easy credit, new technologies and high-quality labor at a low price. Many have had to cut jobs at home,
where demand is weak, and have added them in the emerging markets that are
booming. They are not “outsourcing” jobs. That word makes little sense anymore.
They simply invest in growth areas and cut back in places where the economy is
weak. None of them will ever give up on the American market — it is too large,
too profitable and too central to their businesses — but the marginal dollar is
more likely to be invested abroad than in the U.S.
While businesses have a way to navigate this new world of technological
change and globalization, the ordinary American worker does not. Capital and
technology are mobile; labor isn’t. American workers are located in America. And
this is a country with one of the highest wages in the world, because it is one of

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 462

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ZAKARiA • how To RESToRE ThE AMERicAn DREAM

463

the richest countries in the world. That makes it more difficult for the American
middle-class worker to benefit from technology and global growth in the same
way that companies do.
At this point, economists will protest. Historically, free trade has been beneficial to rich and poor. By forcing you out of industries in which you are inefficient,
trade makes you strengthen those industries in which you are world-class. That’s
right in theory, and it has been right in practice. As countries have traded with one
another over the past two centuries, they have prospered, and average living standards in those countries (primarily in the Western world) have soared. Those places
that kept themselves protected (mostly communist and third-world nations) found
that they had crappy industries, shoddy goods, massive corruption and slow growth.
And yet something feels different this time. Technology and globalization are
working together at warp speed, creating a powerful new reality. Many more goods
and services can now be produced anywhere on the globe. China and India have
added literally hundreds of millions of new workers to the global labor pool, producing the same goods and services as Western workers at a fraction of the price.
Far from being basket-case economies and banana republics, many developing
economies are now stable and well managed, and companies can do business in
them with ease. At some point, all these differences add up to mean that global
competition is having quite a new impact on life in the U.S.
Two weeks ago, for example, I sat in a Nano, the revolutionary car being produced by Tata Motors in India. It’s a nice, comfortable midgetmobile, much like
Mercedes-Benz’s Smart car, except that rather than costing $22,000, it costs about
$2,400. Tata plans to bring it to the U.S. in two to three years. Properly equipped
with air bags and other safety features, it will retail at $7,000. Leave aside the car
itself, whose price will surely put a downward pressure on U.S. carmakers. Just think
about car parts. Every part in the Nano is made to global standards but manufactured in India at about a tenth of what it would cost in America. When Ford orders
its next set of car parts, will they be made in Michigan or Mumbai?
This is not a hypothetical. Steven Rattner, who helped restructure the automobile industry, tells the story of getting a new General Motors plant online in
Michigan by bringing management and unions together. “The unions agreed to
allow 40% of the new plant to operate at $14-an-hour wages,” he says, “which is half
of GM’s normal wages. The management agreed to invest in this new plant. But
here’s the problem: workers at GM’s Mexican operations make $7 an hour, and
today they are as productive as American workers. And think of this: $14 an hour
translates into about $35,000 a year. That’s below the median family income. The
whole experience left me frightened about the fate of the American worker.”
Alan Blinder is also worried. A distinguished economist and Princeton professor, Blinder is a former vice chairman of the board of governors of the Federal
Reserve. In a now famous essay in Foreign Affairs, he argues that while we recognize
the pressures placed on manufacturing jobs by international competition, technology ensures that service jobs are now similarly exposed. Since the service sector

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 463

15

6/18/12 3:11 PM

464

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

is a much larger part of the economy, Blinder estimates that 28 million to 42 million jobs will be “susceptible” to being shipped offshore — jobs such as customerservice representative and stock analyst, which we tend to think of as local. Blinder
understands the benefits of free trade but worries that the new wave of offshoring
is so big and fast that Western societies will have difficulty adjusting. The crucial
distinction for the future, he argues, might be not between highly educated and
less educated workers but between those jobs that can be done abroad and those —
such as nurse or pilot — that cannot.
You can divide the American workforce in many ways, but any way you slice
it, you see the same trend. People who get paid a decent wage for skilled but routine work in manufacturing or services are getting squeezed by a pincer movement of technology and globalization. David Autor, an MIT economist, has done
an important study on what he calls “the polarization of job opportunities” in
America. Autor finds that job growth divides neatly into three categories. On one
side are managerial, professional and technical occupations, held by highly educated workers who are comfortable in the global economy. Jobs have been plentiful
in this segment for the past three decades. On the other end are service occupations, those that involve “helping, caring for or assisting others,” such as security
guard, cook and waiter. Most of these workers have no college education and get
hourly wages that are on the low end of the scale. Jobs in this segment too have
been growing robustly.
In between are the skilled manual workers and those in white collar operations
like sales and office management. These jobs represent the beating heart of the
middle class. Those in them make a decent living, usually above the median family
income ($49,777), and they mostly did fine in the two decades before 2000. But
since then, employment growth has lagged the economy in general. And in the
Great Recession, it has been these middle-class folks who have been hammered.
Why? Autor is cautious and tentative, but it would seem that technology, followed
by global competition, has played the largest role in making less valuable the routine tasks that once epitomized middle-class work.

Recapturing the Dream
So what is the solution? It’s easier to identify the wrong answer than the right one.
It would be pointless and damaging to try to go down a protectionist route,
though polls show a stunning drop of support for free trade, even among collegeeducated professionals, its usual cheerleaders. But technology is a much larger
driver of the hollowing out than trade. You cannot shut down this new world.
How would you stop people from sending one another e-mails, which is what a
lot of offshoring comes down to these days? Nor can you help a modern economy
by shielding industries from world-class competitors, which just encourages
greater inefficiency. I grew up in an economy made up of those kinds of industries, all tightly protected from “foreign exploitation and domination.” It added
up to stagnation and backwardness.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 464

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ZAKARiA • how To RESToRE ThE AMERicAn DREAM

465

There are solutions, but they are hard and involve painful changes — in companies, government programs and personal lifestyles. For more than a generation,
Americans have been unwilling to make these adjustments. Instead, we found an
easier way to goose the economy: expand consumption. During the early 1950s,
personal consumer expenditures made up 60% to 65% of the U.S.’s GDP.2 But
starting in the early 1980s, facing slower growth, we increased our personal spending substantially, giving rise to new economic activity in the country. Consumption grew to 70% of GDP by 2001 and has stayed there ever since. Unfortunately,
this rise in consumption was not triggered by a rise in income. Wages have been
largely stagnant. It was facilitated, rather, by an increase in credit, so that now the
average American family has no fewer than 13 credit cards. Household debt rose
from $680 billion in 1974 to $14 trillion in 2008. This pattern repeated itself in
government, except on a much larger scale. People everywhere — from California
to New Jersey — wanted less taxes but more government. Local, state and federal
governments obliged, taking on massive debts. A generation’s worth of economic
growth has been generated by an unsustainable expansion of borrowing.
That is why the current economic debate between another stimulus and deficit
reduction is frustrating. Right now, there is a strong case for government stimulus,
since no one else is doing much spending. But then what? What happens after another
year of federal spending? Consumers still might be cautious; do we really want them
to spend like they did in the old days? Is the strategy simply to reinflate the housing
bubble? In recent years, the left and the right in America have conspired in feeding
consumption spending. The left expands government, much of which means more
consumption (pensions, health care). The right focuses obsessively on tax cuts,
which have a similar effect. The political system, pandering to today’s constituents,
encourages both tendencies. But when will we invest for our children’s economy?

20

What We Need to Do Now
Ultimately American jobs are created from the bottom up by companies, not from
the top down by government fiat. But there are measures we can take that will
encourage the process. Here are the key ones:
Shift from consumption to investment. Fundamentally, America needs to move
from consumption to investment. Everyone agrees that the best way to create good
jobs in the U.S. is to create new industries and companies and to innovate within
old ones. This means large investments in research, technology and development.
As a society, this needs to become our strongest focus.
Despite substantial increases and important new projects under the Obama
Administration, the federal government is still not spending as much on R&D as a

2Gross Domestic Product — The value of the goods produced and services rendered in a single
year. — Eds.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 465

6/18/12 3:11 PM

466

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

percentage of GDP as it did in the 1950s. I would argue that it should be spending
twice that level, which would be 6% of GDP. In the 1950s, the U.S. had a huge manufacturing base that could absorb millions of semiskilled workers. Today, manufacturing is a small part of the economy and faces intense global competition. The
only good jobs that will stay in the U.S. are jobs related to knowledge and innovation. Additionally, in the 1950s, America was the only research lab in town,
accounting for the vast majority of global scientific spending. Today, countries
around the world are entering the arena. Two weeks ago, South Korea — a country
of just 50 million people! — announced plans to invest $35 billion in renewableenergy projects. We should pay for this with a 5% national sales tax — call it an
American innovation tax — which would be partly offset by a small reduction in
income taxes. This would have the twin benefits of tamping down consumption
and yielding some additional funds. All the proceeds from the tax should be focused
on future generations, because we need to invest massively in growth.
The often overlooked aspect of investment is investment in people. America
has been able to create the future in large measure because it has tapped into the
energies and work of immigrants. It has managed to invest in human capital by taking smart, motivated people from around the globe, educating them in the planet’s
best higher-education system and then unleashing them in a dynamic economy. In
this crucial realm, the U.S. is now disinvesting. After training the world’s best and
brightest — often at public expense — we don’t find ways to make sure they stay
here by giving them a green card but rather insist that they leave and take their
knowledge to another country, where they will invent, inspire, and build and pay
taxes. Every year, we send tens of thousands of the smartest Indians and Chinese
back home, which is a great investment — in the future of those countries.
Training and education. “Most jobs that will have good prospects in the future
will be complicated,” says Louis Gerstner, the former CEO of American Express
and IBM. “They will involve being able to juggle data, symbols, computer programs in some way or the other, no matter what the task. To do this, workers will
need to be educated and often retrained.” We need more and better education at
every level, especially job retraining. So far, most retraining efforts in the U.S.
have not worked very well. But they have worked in countries that have been able to
retain a manufacturing base, like Germany and parts of Northern Europe. There,
some of the most successful programs are apprenticeships — which cover only
0.3% of the total U.S. workforce.
There are advantages to the U.S. system. We don’t stream people too early in
their lives, and we allow for more creative thinking. But the path to good jobs for
the future is surely to expand apprenticeship programs substantially so industry can
find the workers it needs. This would require a major initiative, a training triangle
in which the government funds, the education system teaches and industry
hires — though to have an effect, the program would have to be on the scale of the
GI Bill.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 466

25

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ZAKARiA • how To RESToRE ThE AMERicAn DREAM

467

Fiscal sanity. To pay for such initiatives, the government needs to get its house in
order. The single most important aspect of this is getting health care costs under
control, followed by other entitlement programs, especially pensions at the state
level. Government today spends vast sums of money on current consumption —
health care and pensions being a massive chunk of it — which leaves little money
for anything else. We need a radical rebalancing of American government so it can
free up resources to fund future growth.
Benchmark, benchmark, benchmark. There is now global competition for growth,
which means the U.S. has to constantly ask itself what other countries are doing
well and how it might adapt — looking, for example, at what other countries are
doing with their corporate tax rates or their health care systems and asking why
and where we fall short. Americans have long resisted such an approach, but if
someone else is doing tax policy, tort litigation, health care or anything else better,
we have to ask why.
There are things the U.S. does well. Most new jobs in America are created by
start-ups and small companies, so the ease of doing business is crucial — and there’s
good news there. The World Bank has a ranking of countries measured by the
“ease of doing business,” and the U.S. is No. 4. That’s very good, but there’s a catch.
Those rankings are divided into several categories. In most, like “starting a business,” the U.S. does well. But in one category it’s only 61st in the world, and that
is “paying taxes.”
The American tax code is a monstrosity, cumbersome and inefficient. It is
16,000 pages long and riddled with exemptions and loopholes, specific favors to
special interests. As such, it represents the deep, institutionalized corruption at the
heart of the American political process, in which it is now considered routine to
buy a member of Congress’s support for a particular, narrow provision that will
be advantageous for your business.

30

The Work Ahead
My proposals are inherently difficult because they ask the left and right to come
together, cut some spending, pare down entitlements, open up immigration for
knowledge workers, rationalize the tax code — and then make large investments
in education and training, research and technology, innovation and infrastructure. But the fact that it is a solution that crosses political borders should make it
more palatable, not less. And time is crucial. The U.S. has considerable advantages, but every day other countries try to find ways to attract growth within their
borders. People often note that America’s political system is broken. Perhaps the
truth is more awkward: America needs radical change, and it has an 18th century system determined to check and balance the absolute power of a monarchy.
It is designed for gridlock at a moment when quick and large-scale action is our
only hope.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 467

6/18/12 3:11 PM

468

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

When I left India, the marginal tax rate was 97.5%, corporate taxation was
punitive, and business was stifled or went underground. Were I to move from New
York City to Mumbai today, my personal tax rate would drop, as would every other
rate, from corporate to capital-gains taxes. (The long-term capital-tax rate in India
is zero.) Singapore now ranks as the No. 1 country for ease of doing business, with
a top tax rate of 20%. I know permanent residents working in the U.S. who are
thinking of giving up their green cards to move to Singapore. To an Indian of my
generation, this would have been unthinkable. The green card was a passport to the
American Dream. But for young Indians, there are many new dreams out there,
and new passports.
But there are reasons for optimism. The U.S. faces huge challenges, but it also
has enormous advantages. “I’ve always been bullish on America,” says Coke’s Kent.
“It’s the largest, richest market in the world. Look at the demographics alone.
North America is the only part of the industrialized world that will be growing in
people. It now has a higher birthrate than Mexico, for the first time in history.” Or
listen to Alcoa’s German-born Klaus Kleinfeld, previously the head of Siemens:
“I know the things that America has that are unique. The openness, the diversity,
the dynamism — you don’t have it anywhere else. If you keep all these things,
build on them, I still believe in the American Dream.”
The term American Dream was coined during the Great Depression. The historian James Truslow Adams published The Epic of America in 1931, in an atmosphere of even greater despair than today’s. He wanted to call his book The American
Dream, but his publishers objected. No one will pay $3.50 for a book about a
“dream,” they said. Still, Adams used the phrase so often that it entered the lexicon. The American Dream, he said, was of “a better, richer and happier life for all
our citizens of every rank, which is the greatest contribution we have made to the
thought and welfare of the world. That dream or hope has been present from the
start. Ever since we became an independent nation, each generation has seen an
uprising of ordinary Americans to save the American Dream from the forces which
appear to be overwhelming it.”
Today, those forces really do look overwhelming. But challenges like them have
been beaten back before — and can be again.

35

Exploring the Text
1. How does Fareed Zakaria’s characterization of the American Dream compare
with your own?
2. What is the rhetorical shift that Zakaria uses between paragraphs 3 and 4? How
does it prepare the reader for what he says about “the experts” in paragraph 6?
3. What are the consequences of technology that Zakaria discusses at the beginning
of the second section, “Going Global”? Research the Luddites, who rebelled against
mechanization in the textile industry in nineteenth-century England. To what
extent are we now facing a problem similar to the one that they faced?

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 468

6/18/12 3:11 PM

PiERcY • To BE oF USE

469

4. Zakaria makes the claim that “none of them [corporations] will ever give up on
the American market” (para. 9). Analyze his argument according to the Toulmin
model that you learned about in Chapter 3.
5. What is the crucial distinction that Zakaria makes in paragraph 15? Compare and
contrast this distinction with the one that Matthew B. Crawford makes in “The
Case for Working with Your Hands” (p. 449).
6. How does Zakaria describe the relationship between consumerism and credit?
What does he suggest the consequences will be?
7. As he concludes the second section of the essay, how does Zakaria appeal to logos
and pathos? Which is the stronger appeal?
8. How does Zakaria compare the advantages and disadvantages of economic
approaches in the United States as opposed to Europe and Asia (paras. 21–30)?
What is the approach that Americans have resisted? Why has that been the case?
9. What is the nature of the complaint Zakaria makes in paragraph 31? Does his
strong characterization help or hinder his case? Explain.
10. Zakaria begins many of his paragraphs with short, simple sentences, and then he
develops them with varied syntax. Identify three paragraphs in which this is the
case. How does such a style contribute to his essay as a whole?
11. What do you find most surprising in Zakaria’s essay? Most compelling?
12. Zakaria ends on an optimistic note. Do you share his optimism? Why or why not?

To Be of Use
Marge Piercy
Born in Detroit, Michigan, in 1936, Marge Piercy is a poet, novelist, and social
activist. She was the first member of her family to go to college. After attending the
University of Michigan on a scholarship, she went on to earn a master’s degree from
northwestern University. her first volume of poems, Breaking Camp, was published
in 1968. She has published over a dozen books of poetry, including Colors Passing
through Us (2003), The Art of Blessing the Day: Poems with a Jewish Theme (1999),
What Are Big Girls Made Of? (1997), Available Light (1988), The Moon Is Always
Female (1980), and To Be of Use (1973). She is also the author of more than a
dozen novels, in which she explores science fiction, feminism, history, and social
issues. Among these works are Three Women (1999), Storm Tide (written with her
husband, ira wood in 1998), Woman on the Edge of Time (1976), and the bestselling Gone to Soldiers (1988), an epic story of world war ii. Piercy lives on cape
cod in Massachusetts.

The people I love the best
jump into work head first
without dallying in the shallows
and swim off with sure strokes almost out of sight.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 469

6/18/12 3:11 PM

470

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

They seem to become natives of that element,
the black sleek heads of seals
bouncing like half-submerged balls.
I love people who harness themselves, an ox to a heavy cart,
who pull like water buffalo, with massive patience,
who strain in the mud and the muck to move things forward,
who do what has to be done, again and again.
I want to be with people who submerge
in the task, who go into the fields to harvest
and work in a row and pass the bags along,
who are not parlor generals and field deserters
but move in a common rhythm
when the food must come in or the fire be put out.
The work of the world is common as mud.
Botched, it smears the hands, crumbles to dust.
But the thing worth doing well done
has a shape that satisfies, clean and evident.
Greek amphoras for wine or oil,
Hopi vases that held corn, are put in museums
but you know they were made to be used.
The pitcher cries for water to carry
and a person for work that is real.

5

10

15

20

25

Exploring the Text
1. What is the effect of the extended metaphor that Marge Piercy develops in the first
seven lines of the poem? What is the effect of the shift to a new metaphor for the
following four lines?
2. After the word “submerge” (l. 12), the poem shifts from figurative to literal language
through line 17. How does this shift express Piercy’s attitude?
3. What are “parlor generals” and “field deserters” (l. 15)? What function do they serve
in the poem?
4. What does Piercy suggest through the juxtaposed phrases “the food must come in”
and “the fire be put out” (l. 17)?
5. How would you describe the speaker’s attitude toward the amphoras and vases
that we see in museums?
6. In “The Case for Working with Your Hands” (p. 449), Matthew B. Crawford refers
to Piercy’s poem, specifically its two concluding lines. How does the poem inform
Crawford’s position regarding work? Find another section of the poem that would
likely appeal to Crawford. Explain your selection.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 470

6/18/12 3:11 PM

PARKER • ThE gREAT gAPSBY SociETY

471

The Great GAPsby Society
Jeff Parker
Jeff Parker (b. 1959) is an editorial cartoonist for Florida Today. A member of the
national cartoonists Society and the Association of American Editorial cartoonists,
he was nominated in 1997 and 1998 for the ncS Reuben Award for editorial cartooning. his cartoons have been included in many editions of Pelican Books’ Best Editorial
Cartoons of the Year.

Exploring the Text
1. The title of this cartoon alludes to the novel The Great Gatsby by F. Scott Fitzgerald.
Why is the allusion appropriate? If you haven’t read the novel to which the title
alludes, does the cartoon still make sense?
2. Try summarizing the point, or message, of the cartoon. How does the verbal summary change the impact of the visual?
3. What does the audience have to know in order to get the full impact of the cartoon?
Will readers who have jobs at the “quickee mart” or places such as McDonald’s feel
insulted or mocked? Explain.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 471

6/18/12 3:11 PM

472

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

4. What is the purpose of the expression “old sport”? How does it contribute to the
characterization of the man in the suit?
5. How do you think Barbara Ehrenreich, whose “from Serving in Florida” appears
on page 394, would respond to this cartoon? Would the cartoon effectively illustrate her work? Which other readings from this chapter would the cartoon
enhance?

This Modern World: A “Handy”
Guide to the Housing Market
Tom Tomorrow
Tom Tomorrow is the pen name of political cartoonist Dan Perkins, creator of the
weekly feature “This Modern world,” which appears in approximately eighty newspapers across the United States and on the web site Salon.com. his work has
appeared in publications including the New York Times, the New Yorker, Spin,
Mother Jones, Esquire, the Economist, the Nation, U.S. News and World Report,
and the American Prospect. in 2009, he created the cover art for the Pearl Jam
album Backspacer. he is also the author of a book for children, The Very Silly Mayor
(2009). he received the first place Robert F. Kennedy Award for Excellence in Journalism in 1998 and in 2003. The cartoon on the facing page features The invisible
hand, a character based on the notion that an invisible hand guides the marketplace so that the pursuit of profit ultimately ensures the greater good. The phrase
“invisible hand” derives from the following passage from Adam Smith’s highly
influential book The Wealth of Nations (1776):
But it is only for the sake of profit that any man employs a capital in the support of
industry; and he will always, therefore, endeavour to employ it in the support of that
industry of which the produce is likely to be of the greatest value, or to exchange
for the greatest quantity either of money or of other goods. . . .
As every individual, therefore, endeavours as much as he can both to employ
his capital in the support of domestic industry, and so to direct that industry that its
produce may be of the greatest value; every individual necessarily labours to render
the annual revenue of the society as great as he can. he generally, indeed, neither
intends to promote the public interest, nor knows how much he is promoting it. By
preferring the support of domestic to that of foreign industry, he intends only his own
security; and by directing that industry in such a manner as its produce may be of
the greatest value, he intends only his own gain, and he is in this, as in many other
cases, led by an invisible hand to promote an end which was no part of his intention.
nor is it always the worse for the society that it was no part of it. By pursuing his
own interest he frequently promotes that of the society more effectually than when
he really intends to promote it. i have never known much good done by those who
affected to trade for the public good. it is an affectation, indeed, not very common
among merchants, and very few words need be employed in dissuading them from it.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 472

6/18/12 3:11 PM

ToMoRRow • ThiS MoDERn woRlD

473

(See insert for color version.)

Exploring the Text
1. The main character of the cartoon is modeled on economist Adam Smith’s “invisible
hand.” How well does the hand in the cartoon express what Smith says in the quotation on the facing page?
2. How would you characterize the tone of The Invisible Hand — that is, the main
speaker in the cartoon? How does his diction contribute to that tone?
3. What is Tom Tomorrow’s attitude toward The Invisible Hand? Is he critical? Is he
supportive? How can you tell?
4. What is the rhetorical function of the statement following “ER” in frame 5?
5. Why is the secondary character a young boy? What is his rhetorical function?
6. What is ironic about the “solution” posed in frames 7 and 8? What does Tomorrow
suggest about the contemporary relationship between government and business?
7. What does the cartoon suggest about the free market economy?
8. Compare this cartoon with Jonathan Swift’s essay (p. 404). Are they rhetorically
similar? Thematically similar? Explain.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 473

6/18/12 3:11 PM

Conversation
Materialism in American Culture
Each of the following texts presents a viewpoint on materialism in American
culture:

Sources
1. Henry David Thoreau, from Economy
2. John Kenneth Galbraith, from The Dependence Effect
3. Phyllis Rose, Shopping and Other Spiritual Adventures in America Today
4. Wendell Berry, Waste
5. Juliet Schor, The New Consumerism
6. Joan Smith, Shop-happy
7. Virginia Postrel, In Praise of Chain Stores
8. Scott DeCarlo, Forbes Price Index of Luxury Goods Keeps Pace with Inflation
(table)
After you have read, studied, and synthesized these pieces, enter the conversation
by responding to one of the prompts on page 500–01.

1. from Economy
Henry David Thoreau
in the following excerpt from “Economy,” the first chapter of his classic book
Walden (1854), henry David Thoreau discusses the necessities of life.

Let us consider for a moment what most of the trouble and anxiety which I have
referred to is about, and how much it is necessary that we be troubled, or, at least,
careful. It would be some advantage to live a primitive and frontier life, though in the
midst of an outward civilization, if only to learn what are the gross necessaries of life
and what methods have been taken to obtain them; or even to look over the old daybooks of the merchants, to see what it was that men most commonly bought at the
stores, what they stored, that is, what are the grossest groceries. For the improvements of ages have had but little influence on the essential laws of man’s existence;
as our skeletons, probably, are not to be distinguished from those of our ancestors.
By the words, necessary of life, I mean whatever, of all that man obtains by his
own exertions, has been from the first, or from long use has become, so important
to human life that few, if any, whether from savageness, or poverty, or philosophy,
ever attempt to do without it. To many creatures there is in this sense but one necessary of life, Food. To the bison of the prairie it is a few inches of palatable grass,
with water to drink; unless he seeks the Shelter of the forest or the mountain’s shadow.

474

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 474

6/18/12 3:11 PM

convERSATion

475

None of the brute creation requires more than Food and Shelter. The necessaries of
life for man in this climate may, accurately enough, be distributed under the several heads of Food, Shelter, Clothing, and Fuel; for not till we have secured these
are we prepared to entertain the true problems of life with freedom and a prospect of success. Man has invented, not only houses, but clothes and cooked food;
and possibly from the accidental discovery of the warmth of fire, and the consequent use of it, at first a luxury, arose the present necessity to sit by it. We observe
cats and dogs acquiring the same second nature. By proper Shelter and Clothing
we legitimately retain our own internal heat; but with an excess of these, or of
Fuel, that is, with an external heat greater than our own internal, may not cookery
properly be said to begin? Darwin, the naturalist, says of the inhabitants of Tierra
del Fuego,1 that while his own party, who were well clothed and sitting close to a
fire, were far from too warm, these naked savages, who were farther off, were
observed, to his great surprise, “to be streaming with perspiration at undergoing
such a roasting.” So, we are told, the New Hollander2 goes naked with impunity,
while the European shivers in his clothes. Is it impossible to combine the hardiness of these savages with the intellectualness of the civilized man? According to
Liebig,3 man’s body is a stove, and food the fuel which keeps up the internal combustion in the lungs. In cold weather we eat more, in warm less. The animal heat is
the result of a slow combustion, and disease and death take place when this is too
rapid; or for want of fuel, or from some defect in the draught, the fire goes out. Of
course the vital heat is not to be confounded with fire; but so much for analogy.
It appears, therefore, from the above list, that the expression, animal life, is nearly
synonymous with the expression, animal heat; for while Food may be regarded as
the Fuel which keeps up the fire within us, — and Fuel serves only to prepare that
Food or to increase the warmth of our bodies by addition from without, — Shelter
and Clothing also serve only to retain the heat thus generated and absorbed.
The grand necessity, then, for our bodies, is to keep warm, to keep the vital
heat in us. What pains we accordingly take, not only with our Food, and Clothing,
and Shelter, but with our beds, which are our nightclothes, robbing the nests and
breasts of birds to prepare this shelter within a shelter, as the mole has its bed of
grass and leaves at the end of its burrow! The poor man is wont to complain that
this is a cold world; and to cold, no less physical than social, we refer directly a
great part of our ails. The summer, in some climates, makes possible to man a sort
of Elysian4 life. Fuel, except to cook his Food, is then unnecessary; the sun is his
fire, and many of the fruits are sufficiently cooked by its rays; while Food generally
is more various, and more easily obtained, and Clothing and Shelter are wholly or
1

The southernmost tip of South America. — Eds.
Native Australian. — Eds.
3Justus von Leibig (1803–1873), German chemist and author of Animal Chemistry (1842). — Eds.
4In Greek mythology, a paradise in the afterlife. — Eds.
2

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 475

6/18/12 3:11 PM

476

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

half unnecessary. At the present day, and in this country, as I find by my own
experience, a few implements, a knife, an axe, a spade, a wheelbarrow, &c., and for
the studious, lamplight, stationery, and access to a few books, rank next to necessaries, and can all be obtained at a trifling cost. Yet some, not wise, go to the other
side of the globe, to barbarous and unhealthy regions, and devote themselves to
trade for ten or twenty years, in order that they may live, — that is, keep comfortably
warm, — and die in New England at last. The luxuriously rich are not simply kept
comfortably warm, but unnaturally hot; as I implied before, they are cooked, of
course à la mode.
Most of the luxuries, and many of the so called comforts of life, are not only
not indispensable, but positive hinderances to the elevation of mankind. With
respect to luxuries and comforts, the wisest have ever lived a more simple and
meagre life than the poor. The ancient philosophers, Chinese, Hindoo, Persian,
and Greek, were a class than which none has been poorer in outward riches, none
so rich in inward. We know not much about them. It is remarkable that we know
so much of them as we do. The same is true of the more modern reformers and
benefactors of their race. None can be an impartial or wise observer of human life
but from the vantage ground of what we should call voluntary poverty. Of a life
of luxury the fruit is luxury, whether in agriculture, or commerce, or literature, or
art. There are nowadays professors of philosophy, but not philosophers. Yet it is
admirable to profess because it was once admirable to live. To be a philosopher is
not merely to have subtle thoughts, nor even to found a school, but so to love wisdom as to live according to its dictates, a life of simplicity, independence, magnanimity, and trust. It is to solve some of the problems of life, not only theoretically,
but practically. The success of great scholars and thinkers is commonly a courtierlike success, not kingly, not manly. They make shift to live merely by conformity,
practically as their fathers did, and are in no sense the progenitors of a nobler race
of men. But why do men degenerate ever? What makes families run out? What is
the nature of the luxury which enervates and destroys nations? Are we sure that
there is none of it in our own lives? The philosopher is in advance of his age even
in the outward form of his life. He is not fed, sheltered, clothed, warmed, like his
contemporaries. How can a man be a philosopher and not maintain his vital heat
by better methods than other men?
When a man is warmed by the several modes which I have described, what
does he want next? Surely not more warmth of the same kind, as more and richer
food, larger and more splendid houses, finer and more abundant clothing, more
numerous incessant and hotter fires, and the like. When he has obtained those
things which are necessary to life, there is another alternative than to obtain the
superfluities; and that is, to adventure on life now, his vacation from humbler toil
having commenced. The soil, it appears, is suited to the seed, for it has sent its
radicle5 downward, and it may now send its shoot upward also with confidence.

5

5

The first shoot that emerges from a seed during germination. — Eds.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 476

6/18/12 3:11 PM

convERSATion

477

Why has man rooted himself thus firmly in the earth, but that he may rise in the
same proportion into the heavens above? — for the nobler plants are valued for
the fruit they bear at last in the air and light, far from the ground, and are not
treated like the humbler esculents,6 which, though they may be biennials, are cultivated only till they have perfected their root, and often cut down at top for this
purpose, so that most would not know them in their flowering season.
I do not mean to prescribe rules to strong and valiant natures, who will mind
their own affairs whether in heaven or hell, and perchance build more magnificently and spend more lavishly than the richest, without ever impoverishing themselves, not knowing how they live, — if, indeed, there are any such, as has been
dreamed; nor to those who find their encouragement and inspiration in precisely
the present condition of things, and cherish it with the fondness and enthusiasm
of lovers, — and, to some extent, I reckon myself in this number; I do not speak
to those who are well employed, in whatever circumstances, and they know whether
they are well employed or not; — but mainly to the mass of men who are discontented, and idly complaining of the hardness of their lot or of the times, when
they might improve them. There are some who complain most energetically and
inconsolably of any, because they are, as they say, doing their duty. I also have in
my mind that seemingly wealthy, but most terribly impoverished class of all, who
have dross,7 but know not how to use it, or get rid of it, and thus have forged their
own golden or silver fetters.

Questions
1. Thoreau makes much use of analogy and metaphor, saying, in fact, at one point,
“So much for analogy” (para. 2). Select three examples of analogy and/or metaphor
from this selection, and explain how they contribute to Thoreau’s argument.
2. Being extremely economical in his assessment even for his own time, Thoreau denotes
what he calls “grand necessity” and what he considers near necessities (para. 3). And
he writes, “Most of the luxuries, and many of the so called comforts of life, are not
only not indispensable, but positive hinderances to the elevation of mankind”
(para. 4). Do you agree with this statement? What would you add to his list today?
Which things that Thoreau would consider luxuries do we now deem as necessities?
3. Thoreau writes, “There are nowadays professors of philosophy, but not philosophers. Yet it is admirable to profess because it was once admirable to live” (para. 4).
What does he mean? To what extent does he speak to our time as well as his own?
4. How would you describe Thoreau’s tone in the first two sentences of paragraph 5?
How is his attitude relevant to our current economy?
5. Who is Thoreau’s intended audience? How does he characterize that audience in
paragraph 6? Is such an audience living today?
6

Edible things. — Eds.
Waste matter. — Eds.

7

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 477

6/18/12 3:11 PM

478

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

2. from The Dependence Effect
John Kenneth Galbraith
in the following chapter from the Fortieth Anniversary Edition of his 1958
book, The Affluent Society, John Kenneth galbraith discusses the nature of
consumerism in America.

The notion that wants do not become less urgent the more amply the individual
is supplied is broadly repugnant to common sense. It is something to be believed
only by those who wish to believe. Yet the conventional wisdom must be tackled
on its own terrain. Intertemporal comparisons of an individual’s state of mind do
rest on technically vulnerable ground. Who can say for sure that the deprivation
which afflicts him with hunger is more painful than the deprivation which afflicts
him with envy of his neighbor’s new car? In the time that has passed since he was
poor, his soul may have become subject to a new and deeper searing. And where
a society is concerned, comparisons between marginal satisfactions when it is poor
and those when it is affluent will involve not only the same individual at different
times but different individuals at different times. The scholar who wishes to believe
that with increasing affluence there is no reduction in the urgency of desires and
goods is not without points for the debate. However plausible the case against
him, it cannot be proven. In the defense of the conventional wisdom, this amounts
almost to invulnerability.
However, there is a flaw in the case. If the individual’s wants are to be urgent,
they must be original with himself. They cannot be urgent if they must be contrived for him. And above all, they must not be contrived by the process of production by which they are satisfied. For this means that the whole case for the
urgency of production, based on the urgency of wants, falls to the ground. One cannot defend production as satisfying wants if that production creates the wants.
Were it so that a man on arising each morning was assailed by demons which
instilled in him a passion sometimes for silk shirts, sometimes for kitchenware,
sometimes for chamber pots, and sometimes for orange squash, there would be
every reason to applaud the effort to find the goods, however odd, that quenched
this flame. But should it be that his passion was the result of his first having cultivated the demons, and should it also be that his effort to allay it stirred the demons
to ever greater and greater effort, there would be question as to how rational was
his solution. Unless restrained by conventional attitudes, he might wonder if the
solution lay with more goods or fewer demons.
So it is that if production creates the wants it seeks to satisfy, or if the wants
emerge pari passu1 with the production, then the urgency of the wants can no
longer be used to defend the urgency of the production. Production only fills a
void that it has itself created.
1Latin, “on equal footing.” — Eds.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 478

6/18/12 3:11 PM

convERSATion

479

II
The point is so central that it must be pressed. Consumer wants can have bizarre,
frivolous or even immoral origins, and an admirable case can still be made for a
society that seeks to satisfy them. But the case cannot stand if it is the process of
satisfying wants that creates the wants. For then the individual who urges the
importance of production to satisfy these wants is precisely in the position of the
onlooker who applauds the efforts of the squirrel to keep abreast of the wheel that
is propelled by his own efforts.
That wants are, in fact, the fruit of production will now be denied by few serious scholars. And a considerable number of economists, though not always in full
knowledge of the implications, have conceded the point. In the observation cited
at the end of the preceding chapter, Keynes noted that needs of “the second class,”
i.e., those that are the result of efforts to keep abreast or ahead of one’s fellow
being, “may indeed be insatiable; for the higher the general level, the higher still
are they.2 And emulation has always played a considerable role in the views of
other economists of want creation. One man’s consumption becomes his neighbor’s wish. This already means that the process by which wants are satisfied is also
the process by which wants are created. The more wants that are satisfied, the
more new ones are born. . . .

5

III
The even more direct link between production and wants is provided by the institutions of modern advertising and salesmanship. These cannot be reconciled with
the notion of independently determined desires, for their central function is to
create desires — to bring into being wants that previously did not exist.3 This is
accomplished by the producer of the goods or at his behest. A broad empirical
relationship exists between what is spent on production of consumer goods and
what is spent in synthesizing the desires for that production. A new consumer product must be introduced with a suitable advertising campaign to arouse an interest
in it. The path for an expansion of output must be paved by a suitable expansion
in the advertising budget. Outlays for the manufacturing of a product are not more
important in the strategy of modern business enterprise than outlays for the
2J. M. Keynes, Essays in Persuasion, “Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren” (London:

Macmillan, 1931), p. 365.
3Advertising is not a simple phenomenon. It is also important in competitive strategy and want

creation is, ordinarily, a complementary result of efforts to shift the demand curve of the individual firm at the expense of others or (less importantly, I think) to change its shape by increasing
the degree of product differentiation. Some of the failure of economists to identify advertising
with want creation may be attributed to the undue attention that its use in purely competitive
strategy has attracted. It should be noted, however, that the competitive manipulation of consumer
desire is only possible, at least on any appreciable scale, when such need is not strongly felt.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 479

6/18/12 3:11 PM

480

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

manufacturing of demand for the product. None of this is novel. All would be
regarded as elementary by the most retarded student in the nation’s most primitive school of business administration. The cost of this want formation is formidable. In 1987, total advertising expenditure — though, as noted, not all of it may
be assigned to the synthesis of wants — amounted to approximately one hundred
and ten billion dollars. The increase in previous years was by an estimated six billion dollars a year. Obviously, such outlays must be integrated with the theory of
consumer demand. They are too big to be ignored.
But such integration means recognizing that wants are dependent on production. It accords to the producer the function both of making the goods and of making the desires for them. It recognizes that production, not only passively through
emulation, but actively through advertising and related activities, creates the wants
it seeks to satisfy.
The businessman and the lay reader will be puzzled over the emphasis which
I give to a seemingly obvious point. The point is indeed obvious. But it is one which,
to a singular degree, economists have resisted. They have sensed, as the layman
does not, the damage to established ideas which lurks in these relationships. As a
result, incredibly, they have closed their eyes (and ears) to the most obtrusive of
all economic phenomena, namely, modern want creation.
This is not to say that the evidence affirming the dependence of wants on
advertising has been entirely ignored. It is one reason why advertising has so long
been regarded with such uneasiness by economists. Here is something which cannot be accommodated easily to existing theory. More pervious scholars have
speculated on the urgency of desires which are so obviously the fruit of such
expensively contrived campaigns for popular attention. Is a new breakfast cereal
or detergent so much wanted if so much must be spent to compel in the consumer the sense of want? But there has been little tendency to go on to examine
the implications of this for the theory of consumer demand and even less for the
importance of production and productive efficiency. These have remained sacrosanct. More often, the uneasiness has been manifested in a general disapproval of
advertising and advertising men, leading to the occasional suggestion that they
shouldn’t exist. Such suggestions have usually been ill received in the advertising
business.
And so the notion of independently determined wants still survives. In the
face of all the forces of modern salesmanship, it still rules, almost undefiled, in the
textbooks. And it still remains the economist’s mission — and on few matters is
the pedagogy so firm — to seek unquestionably the means for filling these wants.
This being so, production remains of prime urgency. We have here, perhaps, the
ultimate triumph of the conventional wisdom in its resistance to the evidence of
the eyes. To equal it, one must imagine a humanitarian who was long ago persuaded of the grievous shortage of hospital facilities in the town. He continues
to importune the passersby for money for more beds and refuses to notice that
the town doctor is deftly knocking over pedestrians with his car to keep up the
occupancy.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 480

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

convERSATion

481

And in unraveling the complex, we should always be careful not to overlook
the obvious. The fact that wants can be synthesized by advertising, catalyzed by
salesmanship, and shaped by the discreet manipulations of the persuaders shows
that they are not very urgent. A man who is hungry need never be told of his need
for food. If he is inspired by his appetite, he is immune to the influence of Messrs.
Batten, Barton, Durstine & Osborn. The latter are effective only with those who
are so far removed from physical want that they do not already know what they
want. In this state alone, men are open to persuasion.
IV
The general conclusion of these pages is of such importance for this essay that it had
perhaps best be put with some formality. As a society becomes increasingly affluent,
wants are increasingly created by the process by which they are satisfied. This may
operate passively. Increases in consumption, the counterpart of increases in production, act by suggestion or emulation to create wants. Expectation rises with
attainment. Or producers may proceed actively to create wants through advertising
and salesmanship. Wants thus come to depend on output. In technical terms, it can
no longer be assumed that welfare is greater at an all-round higher level of production than at a lower one. It may be the same. The higher level of production
has, merely, a higher level of want creation necessitating a higher level of want
satisfaction. There will be frequent occasion to refer to the way wants depend on the
process by which they are satisfied. It will be convenient to call it the Dependence
Effect.

Questions
1. Why is the proposition that Galbraith explains at the beginning of the essay
“repugnant to common sense”? Why is it true nonetheless?
2. What is the presumed answer to the rhetorical question that Galbraith poses in
paragraph 1? How would you answer?
3. Galbraith writes, “Production only fills a void that it has itself created” (para. 4).
What might be the consequences of such a paradox as he describes? Where in the
essay does Galbraith return to this same paradox? Explain.
4. In paragraph 12, Galbraith writes, “In this state alone men are open to persuasion.”
What is the state to which he refers?
5. In his final paragraph, Galbraith describes what he calls the “Dependence Effect.”
Paraphrase what he means by that phrase. What implications does it have for your
idea of the American Dream?
6. Galbraith wrote this essay over fifty years ago. To what extent do you think his ideas
still apply to our economy today?

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 481

6/18/12 3:11 PM

482

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

3. Shopping and Other Spiritual Adventures
in America Today
Phyllis Rose
in the following selection, which originally appeared in the New York Times in
1984, Phyllis Rose discusses the role that shopping plays in our lives.

Last year a new Waldbaum’s Food Mart opened in the shopping mall on Route 66.
It belongs to the new generation of superduper-markets open twenty-four hours
that have computerized checkout. I went to see the place as soon as it opened and
I was impressed. There was trail mix in Lucite bins. There was freshly made pasta.
There were coffee beans, four kinds of tahini, ten kinds of herb teas, raw shrimp
in shells and cooked shelled shrimp, fresh-squeezed orange juice. Every sophistication known to the big city, even goat’s cheese covered with ash, was now available in Middletown, Conn. People raced from the warehouse aisle to the bagel bin
to the coffee beans to the fresh fish market, exclaiming at all the new things. Many
of us felt elevated, graced, complimented by the presence of this food palace in
our town.
This is the wonderful egalitarianism of American business. Was it Andy Warhol
who said that the nice thing about Coke is, no can is any better or worse than any
other? Some people may find it dull to cross the country and find the same chain
stores with the same merchandise from coast to coast, but it means that my town
is as good as yours, my shopping mall as important as yours, equally filled with
wonders.
Imagine what people ate during the winter as little as seventy-five years ago.
They ate food that was local, long-lasting, and dull, like acorn squash, turnips, and
cabbage. Walk into an American supermarket in February and the world lies before
you: grapes, melons, artichokes, fennel, lettuce, peppers, pistachios, dates, even
strawberries, to say nothing of ice cream. Have you ever considered what a triumph of civilization it is to be able to buy a pound of chicken livers? If you lived
on a farm and had to kill a chicken when you wanted to eat one, you wouldn’t
ever accumulate a pound of chicken livers.
Another wonder of Middletown is Caldor, the discount department store.
Here is man’s plenty: tennis racquets, panty hose, luggage, glassware, records,
toothpaste. Timex watches, Cadbury’s chocolate, corn poppers, hair dryers,
warm-up suits, car wax, light bulbs, television sets. All good quality at low prices
with exchanges cheerfully made on defective goods. There are worse rules to live
by. I feel good about America whenever I walk into this store, which is almost
every mid-winter Sunday afternoon, when life elsewhere has closed down. I go to
Caldor the way English people go to pubs: out of sociability. To get away from my
house. To widen my horizons. For culture’s sake. Caldor provides me too with a
welcome sense of seasonal change. When the first outdoor grills and lawn furniture appear there, it’s as exciting a sign of spring as the first crocus or robin.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 482

6/18/12 3:11 PM

convERSATion

483

Someone told me about a Soviet émigré who practices English by declaiming,
at random, sentences that catch his fancy. One of his favorites is, “Fifty percent off
all items today only.” Refugees from Communist countries appreciate our supermarkets and discount department stores for the wonders they are. An Eastern European scientist visiting Middletown wept when she first saw the meat counter at
Waldbaum’s. On the other hand, before her year in America was up, her pleasure
turned sour. She wanted everything she saw. Her approach to consumer goods
was insufficiently abstract, too materialistic. We Americans are beyond a simple,
possessive materialism. We’re used to abundance and the possibility of possessing
things. The things, and the possibility of possessing them, will still be there next
week, next year. So today we can walk the aisles calmly.
It is a misunderstanding of the American retail store to think we go there
necessarily to buy. Some of us shop. There’s a difference. Shopping has many purposes, the least interesting of which is to acquire new articles. We shop to cheer
ourselves up. We shop to practice decision-making. We shop to be useful and
productive members of our class and society. We shop to remind ourselves how
much is available to us. We shop to remind ourselves how much is to be striven
for. We shop to assert our superiority to the material objects that spread themselves before us.
Shopping’s function as a form of therapy is widely appreciated. You don’t
really need, let’s say, another sweater. You need the feeling of power that comes
with buying or not buying it. You need the feeling that someone wants something
you have — even if it’s just your money. To get the benefit of shopping, you needn’t
actually purchase the sweater, any more than you have to marry every man you
flirt with. In fact, window-shopping, like flirting, can be more rewarding, the same
high without the distressing commitment, the material encumbrance. The purest
form of shopping is provided by garage sales. A connoisseur goes out with no goal
in mind, open to whatever may come his or her way, secure that it will cost very
little. Minimum expense, maximum experience. Perfect shopping.
I try to think of the opposite, a kind of shopping in which the object is allimportant, the pleasure of shopping at a minimum. For example, the purchase of
blue jeans. I buy new blue jeans as seldom as possible because the experience is so
humiliating. For every pair that looks good on me, fifteen look grotesque. But
even shopping for blue jeans at Bob’s Surplus on Main Street — no frills, barebones shopping — is an event in the life of the spirit. Once again I have to come
to terms with the fact that I will never look good in Levi’s. Much as I want to be
mainstream, I never will be.
In fact, I’m doubly an oddball, neither Misses nor Junior, but Misses Petite. I
look in the mirror, I acknowledge the disparity between myself and the ideal, I
resign myself to making the best of it: I will buy the Lee’s Misses Petite. Shopping
is a time of reflection, assessment, spiritual self-discipline.

5

It is appropriate, I think, that Bob’s Surplus has a communal dressing room.
I used to shop only in places where I could count on a private dressing room with

10

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 483

6/18/12 3:11 PM

484

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

a mirror inside. My impulse then was to hide my weaknesses. Now I believe in
sharing them. There are other women in the dressing room at Bob’s Surplus trying on blue jeans who look as bad as I do. We take comfort from one another.
Sometimes a woman will ask me which of two items looks better. I always give a
definite answer. It’s the least I can do. I figure we are all in this together, and I emerge
from the dressing room not only with a new pair of jeans but with a renewed
sense of belonging to a human community.
When a Solzhenitsyn1 rants about American materialism, I have to look at
my digital Timex and check what year this is. Materialism? Like conformism, a
hot moral issue of the fifties, but not now. How to spread the goods, maybe.
Whether the goods are the Good, no. Solzhenitsyn, like the visiting scientist who
wept at the beauty of Waldbaum’s meat counter but came to covet everything she
saw, takes American materialism too materialistically. He doesn’t see its spiritual
side. Caldor, Waldbaum’s, Bob’s Surplus — these, perhaps, are our cathedrals.

Questions
1. Read once again the title of the essay. What assumption underlies the title? If, as
Rose says, Caldor, Waldbaum’s, and Bob’s Surplus were the “cathedrals” (para. 11)
of her time — the 1980s — what are our “cathedrals” now? Consider the impact of
online shopping. How has that phenomenon changed the economic landscape
that Rose describes?
2. How does Rose go about undermining our conventional attitudes concerning
materialism? Does she consider Americans to be too materialistic? Explain.
3. How does Rose characterize buying and shopping in paragraphs 6 and 7? Do you
agree with her?
4. How does Rose’s use of analogy and self-characterization appeal to her audience?
How does it contribute to her argument?
5. Writing in 1984, Rose saw materialism and conformism as issues from the 1950s,
already dated thirty years in the past; now, another thirty years later, to what extent
does Rose speak to the economic issues of our time?

4. Waste
Wendell Berry
in the following essay from his 1990 collection, What Are People For?, wendell
Berry discusses the waste that we produce as a result of production and
consumption.
1Russian author Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn (1918–2008) gave a famous commencement address
at Harvard University in 1978, in which he warned of the moral and spiritual dangers of having
a national ethos based primarily on material gain. — Eds.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 484

6/18/12 3:11 PM

convERSATion

485

As a country person, I often feel that I am on the bottom end of the waste problem.
I live on the Kentucky River about ten miles from its entrance into the Ohio. The
Kentucky, in many ways a lovely river, receives an abundance of pollution from the
eastern Kentucky coal mines and the central Kentucky cities. When the river rises, it
carries a continuous raft of cans, bottles, plastic jugs, chunks of styrofoam, and other
imperishable trash. After the floods subside, I, like many other farmers, must pick
up the trash before I can use my bottomland fields. I have seen the Ohio, whose
name (Oyo in Iroquois) means “beautiful river,” so choked with this manufactured
filth that an ant could crawl dry-footed from Kentucky to Indiana. The air of both
river valleys is seriously polluted. Our roadsides and roadside fields lie under a
constant precipitation of cans, bottles, the plastic-ware of fast food joints, soiled
plastic diapers, and sometimes whole bags of garbage. In our county we now have
a “sanitary landfill” which daily receives, in addition to our local production, fifty
to sixty large truckloads of garbage from Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and New York.
Moreover, a close inspection of our countryside would reveal, strewn over it
from one end to the other, thousands of derelict and worthless automobiles,
house trailers, refrigerators, stoves, freezers, washing machines, and dryers; as well
as thousands of unregulated dumps in hollows and sink holes, on streambanks
and roadsides, filled not only with “disposable” containers but also with broken
toasters, television sets, toys of all kinds, furniture, lamps, stereos, radios, scales,
coffee makers, mixers, blenders, corn poppers, hair dryers, and microwave ovens.
Much of our waste problem is to be accounted for by the intentional flimsiness and
unrepairability of the labor-savers and gadgets that we have become addicted to.
Of course, my sometime impression that I live on the receiving end of this problem is false, for country people contribute their full share. The truth is that we Americans, all of us, have become a kind of human trash, living our lives in the midst of
a ubiquitous damned mess of which we are at once the victims and the perpetrators.
We are all unwilling victims, perhaps; and some of us even are unwilling perpetrators, but we must count ourselves among the guilty nonetheless. In my household
we produce much of our own food and try to do without as many frivolous “necessities” as possible — and yet, like everyone else, we must shop, and when we shop
we must bring home a load of plastic, aluminum, and glass containers designed to
be thrown away, and “appliances” designed to wear out quickly and be thrown away.
I confess that I am angry at the manufacturers who make these things. There
are days when I would be delighted if certain corporation executives could somehow be obliged to eat their products. I know of no good reason why these containers and all other forms of manufactured “waste” — solid, liquid, toxic, or
whatever — should not be outlawed. There is no sense and no sanity in objecting
to the desecration of the flag while tolerating and justifying and encouraging as a
daily business the desecration of the country for which it stands.
But our waste problem is not the fault only of producers. It is the fault of an
economy that is wasteful from top to bottom — a symbiosis of an unlimited greed
at the top and a lazy, passive, and self-indulgent consumptiveness at the bottom —

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 485

5

6/18/12 3:11 PM

486

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

and all of us are involved in it. If we wish to correct this economy, we must be careful to understand and to demonstrate how much waste of human life is involved in
our waste of the material goods of Creation. For example, much of the litter that
now defaces our country is fairly directly caused by the massive secession or exclusion of most of our people from active participation in the food economy. We have
made a social ideal of minimal involvement in the growing and cooking of food.
This is one of the dearest “liberations” of our affluence. Nevertheless, the more
dependent we become on the industries of eating and drinking, the more waste we
are going to produce. The mess that surrounds us, then, must be understood not
just as a problem in itself but as a symptom of a greater and graver problem: the
centralization of our economy, the gathering of the productive property and power
into fewer and fewer hands, and the consequent destruction, everywhere, of the
local economies of household, neighborhood, and community.
This is the source of our unemployment problem, and I am not talking just
about the unemployment of eligible members of the “labor force.” I mean also the
unemployment of children and old people, who, in viable household and local
economies, would have work to do by which they would be useful to themselves
and to others. The ecological damage of centralization and waste is thus inextricably involved with human damage. For we have, as a result, not only a desecrated,
ugly, and dangerous country in which to live until we are in some manner poisoned by it, and a constant and now generally accepted problem of unemployed
or unemployable workers, but also classrooms full of children who lack the experience and discipline of fundamental human tasks, and various institutions full
of still capable old people who are useless and lonely.
I think that we must learn to see the trash on our streets and roadsides, in our
rivers, and in our woods and fields, not as the side effects of “more jobs” as its
manufacturers invariably insist that it is, but as evidence of good work not done
by people able to do it.

Questions
1. What is the rhetorical effect of the long lists in the sentence that makes up most of
paragraph 2?
2. What is ironic about the “unwilling” addiction that Berry talks about in paragraphs 2–4? How does the repetition of “must” contribute to this irony?
3. Berry writes, “There is no sense and no sanity in objecting to the desecration of the
flag while tolerating and justifying and encouraging as a daily business the desecration of the country for which it stands (para. 4).” What allusion does the statement make? What is the major assumption that underlies its claim? Do you agree
with Berry’s position? Why or why not?
4. Rather than say “consumerism,” Berry refers to our “consumptiveness,” which he
describes as “lazy, passive, and self-indulgent” (para. 5). What is the rhetorical effect
of such diction?

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 486

6/18/12 3:11 PM

convERSATion

487

5. According to Berry, what is the damage — both ecological and psychological —
caused by centralization and waste? Do you agree with his concluding assessment
of modern America? Why or why not?

5. The New Consumerism
Juliet Schor
in the following selection from her 1999 essay in the Boston Review, “The new
Politics of consumption,” Juliet Schor discusses consumer culture in the United
States.

A new politics of consumption should begin with daily life, and recent developments in the sphere of consumption. I describe these developments as “the new
consumerism,” by which I mean an upscaling of lifestyle norms; the pervasiveness of conspicuous, status goods and of competition for acquiring them; and the
growing disconnect between consumer desires and incomes.
Social comparison and its dynamic manifestation — the need to “keep up” —
have long been part of American culture. My term is “competitive consumption,”
the idea that spending is in large part driven by a comparative or competitive process in which individuals try to keep up with the norms of the social group with
which they identify — a “reference group.” Although the term is new, the idea is
not. Thorstein Veblen, James Duesenberry, Fred Hirsch, and Robert Frank have all
written about the importance of relative position as a dominant spending motive.
What’s new is the redefinition of reference groups: today’s comparisons are less
likely to take place between or among households of similar means. Instead, the
lifestyles of the upper middle class and the rich have become a more salient point
of reference for people throughout the income distribution. Luxury, rather than
mere comfort, is a widespread aspiration.
One reason for this shift to “upscale emulation” is the decline of the neighborhood as a focus of comparison. Economically speaking, neighborhoods are
relatively homogeneous groupings. In the 1950s and ’60s, when Americans were
keeping up with the Joneses down the street, they typically compared themselves
to other households of similar incomes. Because of this focus on neighbors, the
gap between aspirations and means tended to be moderate.
But as married women entered the workforce in larger numbers — particularly
in white collar jobs — they were exposed to a more economically diverse group of
people, and became more likely to gaze upward. Neighborhood contacts correspondingly declined, and the workplace became a more prominent point of reference. Moreover, as people spent less time with neighbors and friends, and more
time on the family-room couch, television became more important as a source of
consumer cues and information. Because television shows are so heavily skewed to
the “lifestyle of the rich and upper middle class,” they inflate the viewer’s perceptions

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 487

6/18/12 3:11 PM

488

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

of what others have, and by extension what is worth acquiring — what one must
have in order to avoid being “out of it.”
Trends in inequality also helped to create the new consumerism. Since the
1970s, the distribution of income and wealth have shifted decisively in the direction of the top 20 percent. The share of after-tax family income going to the top
20 percent rose from 41.4 percent in 1979 to 46.8 percent in 1996. The share of
wealth controlled by the top 20 percent rose from 81.3 percent in 1983 to 84.3 percent in 1997. This windfall resulted in a surge in conspicuous spending at the top.
Remember the 1980s — the decade of greed and excess? Beginning with the superrich, whose gains have been disproportionately higher, and trickling down to the
merely affluent, visible status spending was the order of the day. Slowed down
temporarily by the recession during the early 1990s, conspicuous luxury consumption has intensified during the current boom. Trophy homes, diamonds of a carat
or more, granite countertops, and sport utility vehicles are the primary consumer
symbols of the late 1990s. Television, as well as films, magazines, and newspapers,
ensures that the remaining 80 percent of the nation is aware of the status purchasing that has swept the upper echelons.
In the meantime, upscale emulation had become well established. Researchers
Susan Fournier and Michael Guiry found that 35 percent of their sample aspired
to reach the top 6 percent of the income distribution, and another 49 percent
aspired to the next 12 percent. Only 15 percent reported that they would be satisfied with “living a comfortable life”— that is, being middle class. But 85 percent
of the population cannot earn the six-figure incomes necessary to support uppermiddle-class lifestyles. The result is a growing aspirational gap: with desires persistently outrunning incomes, many consumers find themselves frustrated. One
survey of U.S. households found that the level of income needed to fulfill one’s
dreams doubled between 1986 and 1994, and is currently more than twice the
median household income.
The rapid escalation of desire and need, relative to income, also may help to
explain the precipitous decline in the savings rate — from roughly 8 percent in
1980, to 4 percent in the early 1990s, to the current level of zero. (The stock market boom may also be inducing households not to save; but financial assets are
still highly concentrated, with half of all households at net worths of $10,000 or
less, including the value of their homes.) About two-thirds of American households do not save in a typical year. Credit card debt has skyrocketed, with unpaid
balances now averaging about $7,000 and the typical household paying $1,000
each year in interest and penalties. These are not just low-income households.
Bankruptcy rates continue to set new records, rising from 200,000 a year in 1980
to 1.4 million in 1998.
*

*

5

*

The new consumerism, with its growing aspirational gap, has begun to jeopardize
the quality of American life. Within the middle class — and even the upper middle

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 488

6/18/12 3:11 PM

convERSATion

489

class — many families experience an almost threatening pressure to keep up, both
for themselves and their children. They are deeply concerned about the rigors of
the global economy, and the need to have their children attend “good” schools.
This means living in a community with relatively high housing costs. For some
households this also means providing their children with advantages purchased
on the private market (computers, lessons, extra-curriculars, private schooling).
Keeping two adults in the labor market — as so many families do, to earn the
incomes to stay middle class — is expensive, not only because of the second car,
child-care costs, and career wardrobe. It also creates the need for time-saving, but
costly, commodities and services, such as take-out food and dry cleaning, as well
as stress-relieving experiences. Finally, the financial tightrope that so many households walk — high expenses, low savings — is a constant source of stress and
worry. While precise estimates are difficult to come by, one can argue that somewhere between a quarter and half of all households live paycheck-to-paycheck.
These problems are magnified for low-income households. Their sources of
income have become increasingly erratic and inadequate, on account of employment instability, the proliferation of part-time jobs, and restrictions on welfare
payments. Yet most low-income households remain firmly integrated within consumerism. They are targets for credit card companies, who find them an easy mark.
They watch more television, and are more exposed to its desire-creating properties.
Low-income children are more likely to be exposed to commercials at school, as
well as home. The growing prominence of the values of the market, materialism,
and economic success make financial failure more consequential and painful.
These are the effects at the household level. The new consumerism has also
set in motion another dynamic: it siphons off resources that could be used for
alternatives to private consumption. We use our income in four basic ways: private consumption, public consumption, private savings, and leisure. When consumption standards can be met easily out of current income, there is greater
willingness to support public goods, save privately, and cut back on time spent at
work (in other words, to “buy leisure”). Conversely, when lifestyle norms are
upscaled more rapidly than income, private consumption “crowds out” alternative uses of income. That is arguably what happened in the 1980s and 1990s:
resources shifting into private consumption, and away from free time, the public
sector, and saving. Hours of work have risen dramatically, saving rates have plummeted, public funds for education, recreation, and the arts have fallen in the wake
of a grass-roots tax revolt. The timing suggests a strong coincidence between
these developments and the intensification of competitive consumption — though
I would have to do more systematic research before arguing causality. Indeed, this
scenario makes good sense of an otherwise surprising finding: that indicators of
“social health” or “genuine progress” (i.e., basic quality-of-life measures) began to
diverge from Gross Domestic Product in the mid-1970s, after moving in tandem
for decades. Can it be that consuming and prospering are no longer compatible
states?

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 489

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

490

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

Questions
1. Of the three developments of the “new consumerism” that Schor explains, which
is the most subjective?
2. Do you agree with Schor that “luxury, rather than mere comfort, is a widespread
aspiration” (para. 2)? Identify the three reasons she offers to explain this paradigm
shift. Which, in your view, is the most important? Why?
3. Provide three examples of statistical information that Schor uses. What effect does
such data have on the cogency of her argument?
4. What is the nature of the “disconnect” that Schor discusses in paragraphs 6 and 7?
5. How accurate is Schor’s characterization of modern American family life? Has it
changed since she wrote this article in 1999? Do her descriptions still apply?
Explain.
6. In paragraph 10, Schor makes several claims without offering specific evidence. How
persuasive are her arguments? Why does she not offer substantive data to support
her assertions?
7. Analyze the argument Schor develops in the final paragraph. How effectively does
her evidence support her claims? How does she appeal to ethos? How persuasive is
her argument?

6. Shop-happy
Joan Smith
in the following selection from the May 11, 2000, edition of Salon, Joan Smith
responds to the ideas of Juliet Schor.

The other night, my 3-year-old nephew and I received an unexpected economics
lesson in the form of a picture book called “Rainbow Fish.” The plot is deceptively
simple: Rainbow Fish is an underwater denizen distinguished by a set of unusually attractive silver scales. A small, blue fish asks R.F. to give him one of his scales
and R.F. refuses. Shunned, as a result, by all of the other fish, R.F. consults a wise
old octopus, who encourages him to reconsider. Give your scales away, the octopus advises. You won’t be as pretty, but the other fish will like you and you’ll be
happy. So he does and he is. The end.
My nephew understood immediately that the book was about sharing, but he
is also at the age of the perpetual “why?” and trying to answer his whys about
R.F.’s epiphany, I felt queasy. It’s important that children learn to share, but this
clumsy little book’s more prominent message is that people will like you if you
give them your possessions, particularly the possessions they envy. The unwitting
moral of “Rainbow Fish” is that you can buy love.
Anyone who reads to children knows that such ill-conceived homilies abound,
but what’s interesting about these sloppily reasoned kids books is what they tell

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 490

6/18/12 3:11 PM

convERSATion

491

us about our own atavistic beliefs. It seems to me that “Rainbow Fish” unwittingly
exposes the confusion inherent in one of our most deep-seated convictions — that
materialism, the love and acquisition of things, is intrinsically evil.
In her interesting new book, “Do Americans Shop Too Much?” Harvard
economist Juliet Schor laments what she calls the “new consumerism,” a frenzy
for “high-status” goods she attributes to the increased concentration of wealth at
the top of the economic ladder: “Trophy homes, diamonds of a carat or more,
granite countertops, and sport utility vehicles are the primary consumer symbols
of the late 1990s.” This rampant consumption is unfortunate, she argues, not only
because it squanders environmental resources but because it forces people on the
lower rungs of the income ladder to try to keep up.
Schor believes that we consume competitively, with an eye on the consumption
habits of the proverbial Joneses — except that the Joneses, who used to live down
the street and were probably our socioeconomic peers, are no longer our frames
of reference. Now, because of television, more sophisticated marketing techniques
and the fact that most women are working in jobs, our new frame of reference,
she argues, is Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous.
This, Schor says, explains one of the more disturbing trends of the past 30
years: that while our buying power has doubled, we are increasingly dissatisfied.
Her solution? To limit consumption by taxing luxury goods. This, she believes,
would take the pressure off those of us struggling so hard to keep up with all the
new stock-market and dot-com millionaires.
But the urge to buy is so much more complicated than Schor — perhaps limited by the brevity of her essay, perhaps by an academic discipline whose theories
have often proved irrelevant in the real world — even begins to suggest. Status is
clearly not the main reason most people buy things. Just because I see the Joneses’
SUV and think, “I, too, would love to own an SUV,” doesn’t mean that I am competing with them. It could simply be that I think owning an SUV seems like a pretty
good idea.
Personally, I can’t stand SUVs because they guzzle gas, block my view and
represent a transportation menace. But I don’t have children; both of my sisters,
who own Chevy Suburbans, do. One borrowed a Suburban for a vacation with
her husband, his mother and the couple’s three small daughters and became
addicted to all of that wonderful space. The other has a weakness for laborsaving devices and imagined easily carting her two sons and all of their friends
to Little League games and having plenty of room in the back to stash their
equipment.
Wanting to acquire the things that we see and like is as natural as breathing.
Babies want to touch things, taste them, bash them against the wall. We appease
them with shining objects, distract them with new toys. When one child sees another
child playing with a toy, he or she wants it not because of envy of the other child’s
relative social position but because it looks like fun. When we see other people
having sex, eating an ice-cream cone, setting a table with pretty dishes or using a

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 491

5

6/18/12 3:11 PM

492

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

clever new tool and want to do the same, it’s not necessarily because we’re jockeying for position. It could be that we, too, just want to have fun.
Of course, we do sometimes buy things with status in mind — a nice suit for
a job interview, a cool pair of shoes in junior high, a certain kind of car or house
because we imagine it contributing to our allure. But the mundane truth is that
things, especially new things, just please us. Examining something, taking it home,
rearranging our homes to accommodate it — it’s all part of what social psychologists describe as the human need to affect (and be affected by) our surroundings.
Even the urge to create is connected to the urge to acquire.
If, as Schor notes, “the level of income needed to fulfill one’s dreams doubled
between 1986 and 1994,” it’s because there are so many more interesting and relatively affordable things to dream about. Some of them didn’t even exist in 1986,
and others — personal computers and cars, for instance — are so much cheaper now.
The most compelling reason to buy these new things is not the status they afford
but their promise to make life easier and/or more fun. Parents are using pagers
and cellphones to keep in touch with their teenagers. Teenagers are using them to
keep in constant contact with their friends.
And if SUVs are mainly status symbols, why has there never been the same
sudden widespread interest in acquiring Mercedeses? SUVs are more the equivalent of the 1950s station wagon, an updated version of a car with enough space to
accommodate a family. With gas almost obscenely cheap and car companies building light trucks that are both comfortable and easy to drive, the popularity of SUVs
seems in retrospect almost inevitable.
And if we are breaking records in running up credit card debt and declaring
bankruptcy, isn’t it less because we are trying to keep up with rich people than
because credit has never been so widely available or collective economic optimism
so high? One of the most profound cultural gaps in contemporary America is
between my generation — people in their 40s and 50s — and our parents, whose
formative experience was the Great Depression. A growing number of us have never
experienced widespread poverty and unemployment without the security of a government safety net. If this were the fable of the grasshopper and the ant, we would
be grasshoppers who had never experienced winter.
Schor calls for controlling consumption — thus protecting us from the
“new” emphasis on “luxury, expensiveness, exclusivity, rarity, uniqueness, and
distinction” — by taxing “high-end versions” of products. “Why not stand for consumption that is democratic, egalitarian, and available to all?” It’s ironic that
Ralph Nader is the author of an enthusiastic foreword to Schor’s essay when the
consumer movement he launched some 30 years ago is, along with the counterculture of the 1960s, at least in part responsible for our hunger for high-quality
goods.
Paul Hawken, co-founder of upscale garden tool company Smith & Hawken,
predicted in his 1983 book, “The Next Economy,” both the growing gap between
rich and poor and an increased demand (among the new rich) for quality. Should

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 492

10

15

6/18/12 3:11 PM

convERSATion

493

we penalize people for buying fine art when reproductions are so much cheaper?
For buying hardcover books instead of mass-market paperbacks? For paying more
for whole wheat when they could be surviving on Wonder Bread?
Of the nine responses by an assortment of scholars that follow Schor’s essay,
the most compelling are (unexpectedly) from an assistant professor of advertising
at the University of Illinois, Douglas Holt, and an associate professor of marketing at the University of Wisconsin, Craig J. Thompson. Holt argues that it’s almost
impossible to control consumption anyway, given today’s market in which companies compete to appropriate every new idea the instant it becomes popular. “The
market would find the nonstatus values that Schor’s agenda encourages and turn
them into salable goods,” writes Holt, citing businesses that have already exploited
symbols of the counterculture, from Benetton to the Nature Company to Ben &
Jerry’s.
And in his essay, “A New Puritanism?” Thompson maintains that any “moral
critique of consumerism is steeped in a phobia of feminization and an infatuation with puritanical asceticism. It effects a rejection of the sensual and emotive
aspects of human experience and an extreme suspicion of ‘unproductive’ pleasures.” He suggests that if sex sells at least in part because it is a forbidden pleasure,
we might become less compulsive shoppers if we allowed ourselves to truly savor
the shopping experience.
Yet the real weakness of Schor’s approach is her assumption that happiness is
a function of relative affluence and the pressure to consume. In Schor’s world,
Rainbow Fish can indeed buy happiness — for everyone — by giving up whatever
he has that might provoke envy. (Never mind that people envy all sorts of things
they can’t buy — good looks and good health, talent, confidence, charisma.) While
it’s clear that unfettered consumption is a threat to the planet, and it’s well established that, despite our unprecedented affluence, Americans are increasingly
unhappy, a far more satisfying analysis of this crisis is David G. Myers’ “The
American Paradox: Spiritual Hunger in an Age of Plenty.”
A professor of psychology at Hope College in Holland, Mich., Myers helped
pioneer the study of happiness (as opposed to the discipline’s traditional focus on
psychopathology), and he has spent most of his career deconstructing the components of psychological well-being. One of the most interesting things researchers
like Myers have discovered is that the old saw is true: Money does not buy happiness. Subjective well-being has no relation to income once people can afford the
basic necessities of life.
Myers argues that the true source of our new dissatisfaction is embedded in
American culture — and in the same free market that has made us wealthy. Both
encourage a radical individualism that lies “at the heart of the American dream.”
On the one hand, he says, people who live in democratic countries that guarantee
basic individual freedoms tend to be happier than people who don’t. “Yet for
today’s radical individualism, we pay a price: a social recession that imperils children [Myers reports that the teen suicide rate has tripled over the past 30 years],

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 493

20

6/18/12 3:11 PM

494

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

corrodes civility, and diminishes happiness. When individualism is taken to an
extreme, individuals becomes its ironic casualties.”
In Myers’ view, the problem is cultural, not economic, and therefore requires a
constellation of social and political corrections. We have allowed the free market,
which has benefited us in many ways, to determine values — and the free market
values only one thing: money. “Pretend some devil wanted to design a program
to corrode families,” he writes. “They might begin by lowering the job prospects
and earning power of young men. To accomplish this they might encourage corporate CEO’s to act like yesteryear’s robber barons and redirect rewards to themselves. Justifying their actions with talk of freedom, they might also deregulate
television, legalize gambling, structure taxes to penalize marriage, and shrink the
value of the minimum wage (which was created to be a ‘family living wage’ that
protected families and children).” Sound familiar?
Not that Myers wants to abolish the free market. “Capitalism, as Winston
Churchill might have put it, is the worst economic system, except for all the others,” he writes. But citing studies showing that people who believe in God and/or
participate in community activities tend to be happier than people who don’t,
Myers sees the solution in an emerging communitarian movement that transcends
the culture wars: “one that affirms liberals’ indictment of the demoralizing effects
of poverty and conservatives’ indictment of toxic media models.” People who feel
connected to others — through their churches and other community activities —
are more likely to take responsibility for one another and for the culture as a whole,
he argues.
We have a long tradition of changing the way we do things even without
market incentives, Myers points out. We do it when enough people come to believe
that we are being hurt in ways that can’t be calculated on a balance sheet. Thus,
we’ve abolished slavery, regulated polluters and outlawed child labor and sexual
harassment. Already, we’ve begun to encourage the auto industry to redesign SUVs
to make them less dangerous to other vehicles, and we are moving to hold them
to the same fuel efficiency standards that apply to cars.
Myers is an optimist, perhaps, but he sees people coming together “on the
common ground of concern for our children and their future” — more of them
going to church, more (both liberal and conservative) speaking the same language
when they talk about the family and about moral values. In Myers’ world, Rainbow Fish would find happiness not by renouncing his material good fortune but
by recognizing that (no matter his momentary status) he is inescapably responsible for and connected to all the other fish in the sea.

Questions
1. What are the purpose and effect of the opening paragraphs about Rainbow Fish?
How effective are they?
2. In paragraph 7, Smith writes, “But the urge to buy is so much more complicated
than Schor . . . even begins to suggest.” Identify three counterarguments that Smith

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 494

6/18/12 3:11 PM

convERSATion

495

develops. How effectively does she use them to support her claim about Schor?
Explain with specific references to both articles.
3. Smith refers to Ralph Nader and Paul Hawken (paras. 14–15). What is the purpose
for each reference? Which one more effectively supports her argument?
4. How does Smith respond to Schor’s idea of a new luxury tax? Explain.
5. What do you consider Smith’s most compelling claim? Do you agree with her?
Explain.

7. In Praise of Chain Stores
Virginia Postrel
in the following essay from the December 2006 issue of the Atlantic, virginia
Postrel discusses the advantages of chain stores.

Every well-traveled cosmopolite knows that America is mind-numbingly monotonous — “the most boring country to tour, because everywhere looks like everywhere else,” as the columnist Thomas Friedman once told Charlie Rose. Boston
has the same stores as Denver, which has the same stores as Charlotte or Seattle
or Chicago. We live in a “Stepford world,” says Rachel Dresbeck, the author of
Insiders’ Guide to Portland, Oregon. Even Boston’s historic Faneuil Hall, she complains, is “dominated by the Gap, Anthropologie, Starbucks, and all the other
usual suspects. Why go anywhere? Every place looks the same.” This complaint is
more than the old worry, dating back to the 1920s, that the big guys are putting
Mom and Pop out of business. Today’s critics focus less on what isn’t there — Mom
and Pop — than on what is. Faneuil Hall actually has plenty of locally owned
businesses, from the Geoclassics store selling minerals and jewelry, to Pizzeria
Regina (“since 1926”). But you do find the same chains everywhere.
The suburbs are the worst. Take Chandler, Arizona, just south of Phoenix. At
Chandler Fashion Center, the area’s big shopping mall, you’ll find P. F. Chang’s,
California Pizza Kitchen, Chipotle Mexican Grill, and the Cheesecake Factory.
Drive along Chandler’s straight, flat boulevards, and you’ll see Bed Bath & Beyond
and Linens-n-Things; Barnes & Noble and Borders; PetSmart and Petco; Circuit
City and Best Buy; Lowe’s and Home Depot; CVS and Walgreens. Chandler has
the Apple Store and Pottery Barn, the Gap and Ann Taylor, Banana Republic and
DSW, and, of course, Target and Wal-Mart, Starbucks and McDonald’s. For people
allergic to brands, Chandler must be hell — even without the 110-degree days.
One of the fastest-growing cities in the country, Chandler is definitely the kind
of place urbanists have in mind as they intone, “When every place looks the same,
there is no such thing as place anymore.” Like so many towns in America, it has
lost much of its historic character as a farming community. The annual Ostrich
Festival still honors one traditional product, but these days Chandler raises more
subdivisions and strip malls than ostrich plumes or cotton, another former staple.
Yet it still refutes the common assertion that national chains are a blight on the

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 495

6/18/12 3:11 PM

496

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

landscape, that they’ve turned American towns into an indistinguishable “geography of nowhere.”
The first thing you notice in Chandler is that, as a broad empirical claim, the
cliché that “everywhere looks like everywhere else” is obvious nonsense. Chandler’s
land and air and foliage are peculiar to the desert Southwest. The people dress
differently. Even the cookie-cutter housing developments, with their xeriscaping1
and washed-out desert palette, remind you where you are. Forget New England
clapboard, Carolina columns, or yellow Texas brick. In the intense sun of Chandler, the red-tile roofs common in California turn a pale, pale pink.
Stores don’t give places their character. Terrain and weather and culture do.
Familiar retailers may take some of the discovery out of travel — to the consternation of journalists looking for obvious local color — but by holding some of the
commercial background constant, chains make it easier to discern the real differences that define a place: the way, for instance, that people in Chandler come out
to enjoy the summer twilight, when the sky glows purple and the dry air cools.
Besides, the idea that America was once filled with wildly varied business
establishments is largely a myth. Big cities could, and still can, support more retail
niches than small towns. And in a less competitive national market, there was
certainly more variation in business efficiency — in prices, service, and merchandise quality. But the range of retailing ideas in any given town was rarely that
great. One deli or diner or lunch counter or cafeteria was pretty much like every
other one. A hardware store was a hardware store, a pharmacy a pharmacy. Before
it became a ubiquitous part of urban life, Starbucks was, in most American cities,
a radically new idea.
Chains do more than bargain down prices from suppliers or divide fixed costs
across a lot of units. They rapidly spread economic discovery — the scarce and
costly knowledge of what retail concepts and operational innovations actually work.
That knowledge can be gained only through the expensive and time-consuming
process of trial and error. Expecting each town to independently invent every new
business is a prescription for real monotony, at least for the locals. Chains make a
large range of choices available in more places. They increase local variety, even as
they reduce the differences from place to place. People who mostly stay put get to
have experiences once available only to frequent travelers, and this loss of exclusivity is one reason why frequent travelers are the ones who complain. When
Borders was a unique Ann Arbor institution, people in places like Chandler — or,
for that matter, Philadelphia and Los Angeles — didn’t have much in the way of
bookstores. Back in 1986, when California Pizza Kitchen was an innovative local
restaurant about to open its second location, food writers at the L.A. Daily News
declared it “the kind of place every neighborhood should have.” So what’s wrong
if the country has 158 neighborhood CPKs instead of one or two?

5

1Landscaping designed to minimize water consumption. — Eds.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 496

6/18/12 3:11 PM

convERSATion

497

The process of multiplication is particularly important for fast-growing towns
like Chandler, where rollouts of established stores allow retail variety to expand
as fast as the growing population can support new businesses. I heard the same
refrain in Chandler that I’ve heard in similar boomburgs elsewhere, and for similar reasons. “It’s got all the advantages of a small town, in terms of being friendly,
but it’s got all the things of a big town,” says Scott Stephens, who moved from Manhattan Beach, California, in 1998 to work for Motorola. Chains let people in a city
of 250,000 enjoy retail amenities once available only in a huge metropolitan center. At the same time, familiar establishments make it easier for people to make a
home in a new place. When Nissan recently moved its headquarters from Southern California to Tennessee, an unusually high percentage of its Los Angeles–area
employees accepted the transfer. “The fact that Starbucks are everywhere helps
make moving a lot easier these days,” a rueful Greg Whitney, vice president of business development for the Los Angeles County Economic Development Corporation, told the Los Angeles Times reporter John O’Dell. Orth Hedrick, a Nissan
product manager, decided he could stay with the job he loved when he turned off
the interstate near Nashville and realized, “You could really be Anywhere, U.S.A.
There’s a great big regional shopping mall, and most of the stores and restaurants
are the same ones we see in California. Yet a few miles away you’re in downtown,
and there’s lots of local color, too.”
Contrary to the rhetoric of bored cosmopolites, most cities don’t exist primarily to please tourists. The children toddling through the Chandler mall hugging their soft Build-A-Bear animals are no less delighted because kids can also
build a bear in Memphis or St. Louis. For them, this isn’t tourism; it’s life — the
experiences that create the memories from which the meaning of a place arises
over time. Among Chandler’s most charming sights are the business-casual dads
joining their wives and kids for lunch in the mall food court. The food isn’t the
point, let alone whether it’s from Subway or Dairy Queen. The restaurants merely
provide the props and setting for the family time. When those kids grow up, they’ll
remember the food court as happily as an older generation recalls the diners and
motels of Route 66 — not because of the businesses’ innate appeal but because of
the memories they evoke.
The contempt for chains represents a brand-obsessed view of place, as if
store names were all that mattered to a city’s character. For many critics, the name
on the store really is all that matters. The planning consultant Robert Gibbs works
with cities that want to revive their downtowns, and he also helps developers find
space for retailers. To his frustration, he finds that many cities actually turn away
national chains, preferring a moribund downtown that seems authentically local.
But, he says, the same local activists who oppose chains “want specialty retail that
sells exactly what the chains sell — the same price, the same fit, the same qualities,
the same sizes, the same brands, even.” You can show people pictures of a Pottery
Barn with nothing but the name changed, he says, and they’ll love the store. So
downtown stores stay empty, or sell low-value tourist items like candles and kites,

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 497

10

6/18/12 3:11 PM

498

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

while the chains open on the edge of town. In the name of urbanism, officials and
activists in cities like Ann Arbor and Fort Collins, Colorado, are driving business
to the suburbs. “If people like shopping at the Banana Republic or the Gap, if that’s
your market — or Payless Shoes — why not?” says an exasperated Gibbs. “Why
not sell the goods and services people want?”

Questions
1. Do you agree with the characterization of America with which Postrel begins her
essay? Why or why not?
2. According to Postrel in paragraph 7, what are the main things that chain stores do?
Do her claims square with your own observations and experience? Explain.
3. What are the economic effects of chains, according to Postrel?
4. Postrel quotes Orth Hedrick, a Nissan product manager: “You could really be Anywhere, U.S.A. There’s a great big regional shopping mall, and most of the stores
and restaurants are the same ones we see in California. Yet a few miles away you’re
in downtown, and there’s lots of local color, too” (para. 8). What is Hedrick’s tone?
Rewrite the third sentence to give the speaker an entirely different tone and attitude
toward chains.
5. What does Postrel imply about people who are against chain stores?

8. Forbes Price Index of Luxury Goods
Keeps Pace with Inflation
Scott DeCarlo
The following chart is excerpted from one posted on the Forbes magazine web
site on September 23, 2010. Forbes is a business bi-weekly that is famous for
its lists, such as “The Forbes 400,” which identifies the richest Americans.

2010
PRicE

chANGE
FRoM
2009

$200,000

14%

$1,900

–21%

$495

0%

Shirts/1 dozen cotton, bespoke, Turnbull & Asser, London

$4,200

0%

Shoes/Men’s black calf wing tip, custom-made, John Lobb, London

$4,187

–11%

School/Preparatory, Groton, 1-year tuition, room, board

$48,895

4%

University/Harvard, 1-year tuition, room, board, insurance

$50,723

4%

iTEM

Coat/Natural Russian sable, Maximilian at Bloomingdale’s
Silk Dress/Bill Blass Ltd., classic
Loafers/Gucci

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 498

6/18/12 3:11 PM

convERSATion

499

Opera/Two tickets, six performances Metropolitan Opera, Saturday
night, parterre box

$4,265

–3%

Caviar/Imperial Special Reserve Stellatus, 1 kilo, Petrossian,
Los Angeles, CA & N.Y., N.Y.

$19,600

NA

Champagne/Dom Perignon vintage 2000, case, Sherry-Lehmann, N.Y.

$1,799

0%

Dinner at La Tour d’Argent*/Paris, estimated per person (including
wine and tip)

$426

–15%

Flowers in season/Arrangements for 6 rooms, changed weekly,
Christatos & Koster, N.Y., per month

$8,175

0%

Hotel/1-bedroom suite, Four Seasons, N.Y.

$4,650

0%

Face-lift/American Academy of Facial Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery

$17,000

0%

Lawyer/Established N.Y. firm, Schlesinger, Gannon & Lazetera LLP,
average hourly fee for estate planning by partner

$875

3%

Perfume/1 oz. Joy, by Jean Patou

$450

13%

Motor yacht/Hatteras 80 MY (with 1,550hp Caterpillar C-32 engines)

$5,281,600

0%

Shotguns*/Pair of James Purdey & Sons (12 gauge Side-by-Side),
Griffin & Howe, Bernardsville, NJ & Greenwich, CT

$185,954

–1%

Swimming pool/Olympic (50 meters), Mission Pools, Escondido, CA

$1,476,000

–5%

Tennis court/Clay, Putnam, Tennis and Recreation, Harwinton, CT

$55,000

0%

Automobile/Rolls-Royce Phantom

$380,000

0%

$60

0%

Duffel Bag/Louis Vuitton, Keepall Bandouliere, 55 centimeters

$1,225

0%

Watch/Patek Philippe classic men’s in gold (Calatrava), alligator strap

$17,400

NA

Purse/Hermes, Kelly Bag, calfskin, rigid, 28 centimeters

$7,300

NA

Magazine/Forbes, 1-year subscription

*Currency exchange as of Aug. 31, 2010.

Questions
1. Which item on the list is the most surprising to you? Which is the least? Why?
2. Which items on the list are within the grasp of the majority of consumers? Which
are completely out of range? What do you consider luxuries in your own life? How
do they compare with those on the list?
3. In his Philosophical Dictionary (1764), the French author Voltaire wrote, “People
have declaimed against luxury for two thousand years, in verse and in prose, and
people have always delighted in it.” Do more people declaim or delight in luxury?
Which do you find yourself doing more? How does this chart affect your view of
luxury? Of wealth? Of consumerism and materialism? Of the economy? Refer to
Voltaire’s epigrammatic statement in your response.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 499

6/18/12 3:11 PM

500

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

4. Do you think people should pay more in taxes — pay what we call a “luxury tax” —
on purchases of items such as those on this list? Why or why not?

Making connections
1. In her essay “In Praise of Chain Stores,” Virginia Postrel quotes consultant
Robert Gibbs: “‘If people like shopping at the Banana Republic or the Gap, if
that’s your market — or Payless Shoes — why not?’ says an exasperated Gibbs.
‘Why not sell the goods and services people want?’” (para. 10). How would
Wendell Berry reply to Gibbs’s question? Juliet Schor? John Kenneth Galbraith?
Henry David Thoreau? Joan Smith? Provide a brief response of a sentence or
two for each.
2. How might Thoreau, Berry, Galbraith, Schor, Smith, Phyllis Rose, or Postrel
respond to the Forbes Price Index of Luxury Goods? Write a one- to two-sentence response from each.
3. Why are the words “necessities” and “liberations” in quotation marks in “Waste”
by Berry? How would Thoreau regard Berry’s use of “necessities”? How would
Rose regard his use of “liberations”? Explain.
4. Compare Schor’s concluding rhetorical question with Galbraith’s main idea.
How would he answer her question?
5. Thoreau describes luxuries and “comforts” as “hinderances to the elevation of
mankind” (para. 4). Rose sees the “spiritual side of shopping” and views it as a
“time of reflection, assessment, spiritual self-discipline” (para. 9). Imagine a
brief dialogue between the two writers. What would each say?
6. How would Rose respond to Smith’s argument?
7. Smith remarks, “The most compelling reason to buy these new things is not
the status they afford but their promise to make life easier and/or more fun”
(para. 11). Which of the writers in this Conversation would agree? Which
would disagree? Why? Do you agree?
8. Compare what Postrel says in paragraph 9 with the main ideas in the piece by
Rose (p. 482).

Entering the conversation
As you respond to the following prompts, support your argument with references to at
least three sources in this Conversation on materialism in American culture. For help
using sources, see Chapter 4.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 500

6/18/12 3:11 PM

STUDEnT wRiTing

501

1. Write an essay identifying the major issues discussed in the selections and taking
a position on what you view as the most important idea. Which of the selections most nearly share a perspective on the topic? Which ones most obviously
present opposing positions?
2. Paraphrase the basic argument advanced by John Kenneth Galbraith (p. 478).
Then, in an essay in which you refer to three of the other selections in the
Conversation, carefully support, refute, or qualify his position.
3. Are Americans overly materialistic? Or is such a claim too simplistic? Which of
the writers in the Conversation would agree with either position? What is your
position? Write an essay that answers that question, using as sources at least
three of the selections in the Conversation.
4. You have read Smith’s response to Schor. Now write an answer from Schor to
Smith. Quote at least two other voices from the chapter in your response.
5. In “Economy,” Thoreau writes, “Most of the luxuries, and many of the so called
comforts of life, are not only not indispensable, but positive hinderances to
the elevation of mankind” (para. 4). He also poses two questions that address
both microeconomics and macroeconomics: “What is the nature of the luxury
which enervates and destroys nations?” and “Are we sure there is none of it in
our own lives?” (para. 4). Write an essay in which you take a position on his
first statement and also answer the questions that he poses. Refer to other
selections in the chapter as well as to your own observations and experience as
you develop your essay.

Student Writing
Rhetorical Analysis:
Analyzing a Prose Passage
The following prompt calls for a close analysis of a passage from Lars Eighner’s
essay, “On Dumpster Diving,” on page 421 of this chapter.
Paragraphs 1 through 7 serve as an introduction to Lars Eighner’s “Dumpster Diving.”
Read the passage carefully and write an essay explaining how Eighner uses rhetorical
strategies to introduce his subject to his reader.

Here is the first draft of an essay from student Jonathan Ellis in response to the
prompt. Read the draft carefully, thinking about ways that it could be improved
through revision. Consider rhetoric and style as well as content. Then respond to
the questions that follow.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 501

6/18/12 3:11 PM

502

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

Draft
Lars Eighner’s essay “Dumpster Diving” serves as a driving force for Eighner’s
extensive memoir, Travels with Lizbeth (1993). The larger piece chronicles a three-year
period of Eighner’s life during which he was homeless. “Dumpster Diving” details a core
aspect of his homelessness, explaining the means by which Eighner obtained his food,
clothing, and other necessities. The first seven paragraphs of the essay underscore not
only the carelessness of the consumer but also the mindfulness of those who depend on
the consumer’s refuse to survive. Throughout the introduction of “Dumpster Diving,”
Eighner conveys a message to the reader that individuals should make much more utility
of their possessions and stop taking them for granted. This message is then reiterated in
the rest of the passage as Eighner “put[s] . . . what I have learned down here [in the
essay], beginning with the practical art of Dumpster diving and proceeding to the abstract.”
Eighner begins the passage by mentioning the origins of the term “Dumpster.”
Eighner enlightens the reader on the roots of the word as a trademark of the Dempster
Dumpster company (para. 1). This is a rather unusual way to begin the piece because a
word such as “Dumpster” is rarely deemed interesting enough to research or explore.
However, this insight given to the reader emphasizes the lack of knowledge that people
really have about Dumpsters. Often, people view “Dumpster” as a quite negative term
because of its association with waste items. The fact that “Dumpster” is merely a
proprietary word of a company that specializes in garbage disposal seldom crosses the
mind. Instead, “Dumpster” is treated with ill repute — the same ill repute that consumers
treat their personal items with when they discard them into Dumpsters. Eighner gives
“Dumpster” a more favorable portrayal, even “dutifully capitaliz[ing] the word although
it was lowercased in almost all of the citations Merriam-Webster photocopied for me”
(para. 2). Through this “dutiful capitalization” he divulges a more accurate meaning of
Dumpsters as seen through the eyes of the “wino[s]” and “hobo[s]” (para. 2) who rely on
them for sustenance and supplies; for the homeless view a Dumpster in the same way
that those with housing view a refrigerator — as primary food storage.
Eighner is also very particular with the phrase “Dumpster diving.” Despite the
attractive alliteration, Eighner states that this depiction of the process by which he
amasses his essentials “seems to me to be a little too cute and, in my case, inaccurate
because I lack the athletic ability to lower myself into the Dumpsters as the true divers
do, much to their increased profit” (para. 4). Rather than “diving,” Eighner broaches
some more fitting terms within the fourth paragraph, such as “scavenging,” “scrounging,”
and “foraging.” These terms commensurately capture the reality of the activity rather
than giving a euphemism such as “diving.” Dumpster diving is not an athlete leaping
into a Dumpster with style or grace. Dumpster diving is the way of life for those who
have no place to live and no other means of obtaining provisions. Eighner is not coy in
his description, later delivering a fairly sordid illustration followed by a one-two punch
of concise parallel statements: “I like the frankness of the word ‘scavenging,’ which I can
hardly think of without picturing a big black snail on an aquarium wall. I live from the

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 502

6/18/12 3:11 PM

STUDEnT wRiTing

503

refuse of others. I am a scavenger” (para. 5). The author reveals to the reader the cold,
hard truth of Dumpster diving by being direct and guileless — no smoke and mirrors.
The fact that Eighner takes pride in his “scavenger” status accentuates value in
what would otherwise be an unenviable position. Eighner writes, “I think it a sound and
honorable niche, although if I could I would naturally prefer to live the comfortable
consumer life, perhaps — and only perhaps — as a slightly less wasteful consumer owing
to what I have learned as a scavenger” (para. 5). As a scavenger, he is much thriftier with
what he has than the “consumer.” He has come to appreciate his belongings more than
the lavish consumer, who is unaware of how it feels to be homeless, and has no apparent
reason to be mindful with his property. Eighner stresses how wasteful the consumer
truly is when he provides a laundry list of necessities that he acquired from Dumpsters —
a list that includes a few luxury items as well: “Except for jeans, all my clothes came from
Dumpsters. Boom boxes, candles, bedding, toilet paper, medicine, books, a typewriter, a
virgin male love doll, change sometimes amounting to many dollars: I acquired many
things from the Dumpsters” (para. 6). Such indulgences, Eighner reveals, as boom boxes,
a typewriter, and even money are discarded for the “scavengers” to dig out of the
Dumpsters. By stating that he extracted the “necessities of daily life” from Dumpsters
and then proceeding to list items that are not essential and yet are thrown away
encapsulates the improvident nature of the larger culture. Eighner’s powerful paradox
imparts the lessons he learned without a roof over his head to the readers with a roof
over theirs.
Lars Eighner and his dog, Lizbeth, suffered a great deal on the streets, relying
on the litter of others. While they were destitute of a home, however, they were not
destitute of frugality. The opening seven paragraphs detail the misconceived gentler
notions on Dumpster diving and provide a striking critique of society for the reader to
mull over as he or she reads the rest of the essay. “On Dumpster Diving” is a life lesson
to the extravagant users, misusers, and abusers of objects. The narrator Eighner had his
home, his savings, and ultimately his lifestyle stripped away from him. The same can
happen to anyone, especially to the person who takes his or her own life for granted.
However, it is better to read about Eighner’s experiences and alter one’s ways than to
undergo Eighner’s experiences.

Questions
1. What are the chief strengths of the draft?
2. What do you see as its deficiencies?
3. How can the essay be revised for improvement?

Revision
Now read Jonathan’s revision, and answer the questions that follow.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 503

6/18/12 3:11 PM

504

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

Rhetorical Analysis of “Dumpster Diving”
Jonathan Ellis
Lars Eighner’s essay “On Dumpster Diving” details a core aspect of the three-year
period when the author and his canine companion were homeless. The text explains the
means by which Eighner obtained his food, clothing, and other necessities. The first
seven paragraphs of the essay underscore not only the carelessness of the consumer but
also the mindfulness of those who depend on the consumer’s refuse to survive. In
addition, these paragraphs uncover the truth and allay the misconceptions that people
have about the disgusting activity of Dumpster diving. Throughout the introduction of
“On Dumpster Diving,” Eighner conveys a message to the reader that individuals should
make much more utility of their possessions and stop taking them for granted. He
communicates this primarily with his attitude toward the audience, his high-class diction,
and his personal storytelling. With these rhetorical strategies, Eighner makes the topic
of Dumpster diving interesting rather than nauseating.
From the very onset of the passage, Lars Eighner utilizes a jocular voice with
the reader. He begins the passage by mentioning the origins of the term “Dumpster,”
enlightening the reader on the roots of the word as a trademark of the Dempster Dumpster
company (para. 1). Eighner then goes on to note how he “dutifully capitalized the word
although it was lowercased in almost all of the citations Merriam-Webster photocopied
for me” (para. 2). On one level, this excerpt is quite comical considering that Eighner is
both deeply researching the name of a waste receptacle and paying special attention to
capitalizing the term in his writing. On a second level, however, this sentence has a very
grave connotation. The effect of this sentence is to glorify dumpsters, which are in fact
the sources of property for the homeless. Through his “dutiful capitalization” he divulges
a more accurate meaning of Dumpsters as seen through the eyes of the “wino[s]” and
“hobo[s]” that rely on them for sustenance and supplies. His hybrid tone allows the
reader to enjoy Eighner’s passage without worry over the squalor of Dumpster diving, the
matter Eighner is addressing. The humor gives readers an opportunity to audibly chortle
along with the essay and thus sustain interest in the piece; the gravity of his tone shows
a different side of dumpster diving — not as something degrading, but as a way of life.
This double-edged sword that is Eighner’s tone is evident throughout the rest of the
introduction and the rest of the entire piece.
Eighner is also very particular with his diction, as well as the phrase “Dumpster
diving.” The expression itself “seems to me [Eighner] to be a little too cute and, in my
case, inaccurate because I lack the athletic ability to lower myself into the Dumpsters as
the true divers do, much to their increased profit” (para. 4). A very funny line indeed
this is; in addition to sounding droll, however, Eighner sounds deadly serious in his
mention of dumpster diving as not merely a recreational art form, but a lifestyle and
necessary skill for the homeless to have in order to survive. Eighner broaches some more
“fitting” terms for this activity within the fourth paragraph, such as “scavenging,”
“scrounging,” and “foraging”— and even these are used in partial jest. Nevertheless,

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 504

6/18/12 3:11 PM

STUDEnT wRiTing

505

Eighner’s humor is not to be confused with coyness on the subject. The narrator later
delivers a fairly sordid illustration bolstered by the use of anaphora: “I like the frankness
of the word ‘scavenging,’ which I can hardly think of without picturing a big black snail
on an aquarium wall. I live from the refuse of others. I am a scavenger” (para. 5). The
author reveals to the reader the cold, hard truth of Dumpster diving by being direct and
guileless — no smoke and mirrors. In doing this he continues to change the attitude of
his audience about Dumpster diving for the better, showing his readers a more practical
and less repugnant side of the story. Surely after reading Eighner’s piece, the reader will
no longer simply look at a Dumpster and retch; for he or she will know the true value of
the Dumpster and the importance of Dumpster diving as told by the author.
The fact that Eighner takes pride in his “scavenger” status accentuates worth in
what would otherwise be an unenviable position. Eighner writes, “I think it a sound and
honorable niche, although if I could I would naturally prefer to live the comfortable
consumer life, perhaps — and only perhaps — as a slightly less wasteful consumer owing
to what I have learned as a scavenger” (para. 5). The “perhaps — and only perhaps”
double qualifier is important. Without the “and only perhaps” portion of this sentence,
Eighner risks estranging the reader early in his essay. The last thing he desires to do is
sound preachy and condescending, and the extra qualifier prevents him from doing so.
As a man who already knows how it feels to be without a home, Eighner has already
established great ethos in his essay; he does not want to lose it here. Rather than sounding
overbearing, Eighner comes across as humble and cordial to his audience, allowing his
audience to feel comfortable with Eighner as a narrator.
However, regardless of how amiable Eighner tries to be with his readers, the fact
is this: as a scavenger, he is much thriftier with what he has than the “consumer.” He
has come to appreciate his belongings more than the lavish consumer, who is unaware of
how it feels to be homeless and has no apparent reason to be mindful with his property.
Eighner stresses how wasteful the consumer truly is when he provides a laundry list of
necessities that he acquired from Dumpsters — a list that includes a few luxury items
as well: “Except for jeans, all my clothes came from Dumpsters. Boom boxes, candles,
bedding, toilet paper, medicine, books, a typewriter, a virgin male love doll, change
sometimes amounting to many dollars: I acquired many things from the Dumpsters”
(para. 6). Such indulgences, Eighner reveals, as boom boxes, a typewriter, and even
money are discarded for the “scavengers” to dig out of the Dumpsters. Eighner’s powerful
paradox — stating that he extracted the “necessities of life” from Dumpsters and then
proceeding to list items that are not essential and yet are thrown away — imparts the
lessons he learned without a roof over his head to the readers with a roof over theirs.
Through this rhetorical strategy he encapsulates the profligate nature of the larger
culture. Eighner hopes that, by giving such an astounding exposition, those spendthrifts
who might be reading his essay will go forth and be less prodigal with their personal
belongings.
Lars Eighner and his dog, Lizbeth, suffered a great deal on the streets, relying on
the litter of others. While they were destitute of a home, however, they were not destitute

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 505

6/18/12 3:11 PM

506

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

of frugality. The opening seven paragraphs detail the misconceived gentler notions on
Dumpster diving and provide a striking critique of society for the reader to mull over as he
or she reads the rest of the essay. “On Dumpster Diving” is a life lesson to the extravagant
users, misusers, and abusers of objects. The narrator Eighner had his home, his savings,
and ultimately his lifestyle stripped away from him. The same can happen to anyone,
especially to the person who takes his or her own life for granted. However, it is better
to read about Eighner’s experiences and alter one’s ways than to undergo Eighner’s
experiences.

Questions
1. What are three minor changes in the revision?
2. What are three major changes in the revision?
3. Write a brief essay that discusses the changes made in this final draft in terms of
content, rhetoric, and style and then evaluates the success of the revision.

Grammar as Rhetoric and Style
Short Simple Sentences and Fragments
Short Simple Sentences
A simple sentence, strictly defined, has a subject and verb: it consists of one independent clause. A simple sentence may have a compound subject, a compound
verb, a modifier, and an object or a complement, but it still is one independent
clause.
The following examples of simple sentences appear in Barbara Ehrenreich’s
“Serving in Florida.”
There is a problem, though.
But the chances of this are minuscule.
This must be Phillip’s theory, anyway.
Finally she tells me not to take her wrong.
What had I been thinking?

Sometimes simple sentences can be rather long:
The e-mails and phone messages addressed to my former self come from a distant race
of people with exotic concerns and far too much time on their hands.

This example from Ehrenreich consists of twenty-eight words.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 506

6/18/12 3:11 PM

grammar as rhetoric and style

507

Sentence Fragments
A sentence fragment is an incomplete sentence, often the result of careless writing;
an effective fragment, however, is an incomplete sentence that readers understand
to be complete. Some fragments are missing a subject, a verb, or both; other fragments have a subject and verb but are dependent clauses. Consider the fragment
in blue from Dubner and Levitt’s “What the Bagel Man Saw.”
Despite all the attention paid to companies like Enron, academics know
very little about the practicalities of white-collar crime. The reason? There
aren’t enough data.
This fragment, which asks a question, has neither a subject nor a verb. If we added
a subject and verb to make it a complete sentence, it might read like this:
Despite all the attention paid to companies like Enron, academics know
very little about the practicalities of white-collar crime. And what is the
reason for this? There aren’t enough data.
Posing a question is a common use for fragments, but they can also be used
to express doubt, surprise, shock, or perhaps outrage, as in this example from
Fareed Zakaria:
And in the Great Recession, it has been these middle-class folks who have
been hammered. Why?
This one-word fragment, another question, has neither a subject nor a verb. If we
added a subject and verb to make it a complete sentence, it might read like this:
And in the Great Recession, it has been these middle-class folks who have
been hammered. Why is this the case?
In the following example, Phyllis Rose poses a rhetorical question with a
fragment:
When a Solzhenitsyn rants about American materialism, I have to look at
my digital Timex and check what year this is. Materialism?
Lest you think that fragments are more common to contemporary than classic
writing, consider this example from Thoreau:
When a man is warmed by the several modes which I have described, what
does he want next? Surely not more warmth of the same kind, as more and
richer food, larger and more splendid houses, finer and more abundant
clothing, more numerous incessant and hotter fires, and the like.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 507

6/20/12 10:16 AM

508

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

Here the fragment is used not to ask, but to answer a rhetorical question. The
missing subject, he, and verb, would [not] want, are understood. The fragment
creates a sense of impatience that conveys Thoreau’s tone of exasperation.
The following example from John Ruskin shows how fragments can provide
both economy of expression and emphasis:
And the duty of all these men is, on due occasion, to die for it.
“On due occasion,” namely:
The Soldier, rather than leave his post in battle.
The Physician, rather than leave his post in plague.
The Pastor, rather than teach Falsehood.
The lawyer, rather than countenance Injustice.

The antecedent of “it” is “every civilized nation.” Rewritten as a complete sentence, the first fragment would read: “The due occasion for the soldier would be
to die for his civilized nation rather than leave his post in battle.” And so on for
the others. (You will doubtless notice that “And so on for the others” is a fragment
that we hope you will agree is deliberately and effectively used.)
Fragments also suggest the rhythm and patterns of natural speech. Read the
following sentences from “The Case for Working with Your Hands,” by Matthew B.
Crawford, in which Crawford relates Fred’s attempt to fix a starter motor.
He spun the shaft that ran through the center of the motor, as I had. No problem: it
spun freely. Then he hooked it up to a battery. It moved ever so slightly but wouldn’t
spin. He grasped the shaft, delicately, with three fingers, and tried to wiggle it side to
side. “Too much free play,” he said.

The first fragment delivers the natural mental response to the activity; the second
one, quoted, delivers Fred’s natural expression. “‘There is too much free play,’ he
said,” simply would not ring true.

Using Short Sentences Rhetorically
A series of simple sentences can become monotonous, but one or two short simple
sentences can be rhetorically effective in a number of situations:
• after several long sentences
• as a summary of what the writer has just said
• as a transition between sentences or paragraphs
Essentially, one or two short simple sentences create emphasis by contrast. As a
writer, when you juxtapose one or two short simple sentences with several longer
ones, you call attention to the short simple ones. Consider this example from
Dubner and Levitt:

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 508

6/18/12 3:11 PM

gRAMMAR AS RhEToRic AnD STYlE

509

A key fact of white-collar crime is that we hear about only the very slim fraction of
people who are caught. Most embezzlers lead quiet and theoretically happy lives;
employees who steal company property are rarely detected. With street crime, meanwhile, that is not the case. A mugging or a burglary or a murder is usually counted
whether or not the criminal is caught. A street crime has a victim, who typically reports
the crime to the police, which generates data, which in turn generate thousands of
academic papers by criminologists, sociologists and economists. But white-collar
crime presents no obvious victim. Whom, exactly, did the masters of Enron steal from?
And how can you measure something if you don’t know to whom it happened, or
with what frequency, or in what magnitude?
Paul F.’s bagel business was different. It did present a victim. The victim was
Paul F.

Notice how the short simple sentences of the second paragraph (each structured
simply as subject + adjective, subject + direct object, and subject + complement)
stand out after the longer sentences of the previous paragraph. Their similar
structure adds even more emphasis.
In some instances, writers choose to use sentence fragments, especially short
ones. Although most of the time you will avoid fragments, occasionally you might
use one for effect. What’s important is that you use the fragment as you would use
a short simple sentence — deliberately, for a special reason:
• to make a transition
• to signal a conclusion
• to economize expression
• to emphasize an important point
A word of caution, however. Use both short simple sentences and fragments
sparingly. Used intentionally and infrequently, both can be effective. Overused,
they lose their punch or become more of a gimmick than a valuable technique.
Also, consider whether your audience will interpret a fragment as a grammatical
error. If you are confident that your audience will recognize your deliberate use
of a fragment, then use it. But if you think your instructor or reader will assume
you made a mistake, then it’s better to write a complete sentence. Again, if you use
fragments infrequently, then your audience is more likely to know you’re deliberately choosing what is technically an incomplete sentence.

• ExERCiSE 1 •
Identify the simple sentences in the following selection from “In the Strawberry
Fields” by Eric Schlosser.
The few remaining labor camps for single men are grim places. I toured
one that was a group of whitewashed buildings surrounded by chain-link

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 509

6/18/12 3:11 PM

510

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

fences and barbed wire. Desolate except for a rosebush in front of the manager’s office, it looked like a holding pen or an old minimum-security
prison. A nearby camp was reputed to be one of the best of its kind.
Inside the barracks, the walls were freshly painted and the concrete floor
was clean. A typical room was roughly twelve feet by ten feet, unheated,
and occupied by four men. Sheets of plywood separated the steel cots. For
$80 a week, a price far too high for most migrants, you got a bed and two
meals a day. I’ve seen nicer horse barns.
Nevertheless, the labor camps are often preferable to the alternatives.
When migrants stay in residential neighborhoods, they must pool their
resources. In Watsonville three to four families will share a small house,
seven or eight people to a room. Migrants routinely pay $100 to $200 a
month to sleep in a garage with anywhere from four to ten other people.
A survey of garages in Soledad found 1,500 inhabitants — a number
roughly equal to one-eighth of the town’s official population. At the peak
of the harvest the housing shortage becomes acute. Migrants at the labor
camps sometimes pay to sleep in parked cars. The newest migrant workers,
who lack family in the area and haven’t yet learned the ropes, often sleep
outdoors in the wooded sections of Prunedale, trespassing, moving to a
different hiding place each night. On hillsides above the Salinas Valley, hundreds of strawberry pickers have been found living in caves.

• ExERCiSE 2 •
Revise the selection in Exercise 1 by turning it into a series of short simple
sentences. Then revise it again to eliminate the simple sentences entirely by
turning every sentence into a compound, complex, or compound-complex
sentence. How do your revisions change the effect? Read the original excerpt;
then read your revisions aloud, and listen to the difference.

• ExERCiSE 3 •
Identify the short simple sentences and fragments in the following passage
from “Shopping and Other Spiritual Adventures in America Today” by Phyllis
Rose. Discuss their effect.
Someone told me about a Soviet émigré who practices English by declaiming, at random, sentences that catch his fancy. One of his favorites is,
“Fifty percent off all items today only.” Refugees from Communist countries appreciate our supermarkets and discount department stores for

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 510

6/18/12 3:11 PM

gRAMMAR AS RhEToRic AnD STYlE

511

the wonders they are. An Eastern European scientist visiting Middletown
wept when she first saw the meat counter at Waldbaum’s. On the other
hand, before her year in America was up, her pleasure turned sour. She
wanted everything she saw. Her approach to consumer goods was insufficiently abstract, too materialistic. We Americans are beyond a simple,
possessive materialism. We’re used to abundance and the possibility of
possessing things. The things, and the possibility of possessing them, will
still be there next week, next year. So today we can walk the aisles calmly.
It is a misunderstanding of the American retail store to think we go
there necessarily to buy. Some of us shop. There’s a difference. Shopping
has many purposes, the least interesting of which is to acquire new articles.
We shop to cheer ourselves up. We shop to practice decision-making. We
shop to be useful and productive members of our class and society. We
shop to remind ourselves how much is available to us. We shop to remind
ourselves how much is to be striven for. We shop to assert our superiority
to the material objects that spread themselves before us.
Shopping’s function as a form of therapy is widely appreciated. You
don’t really need, let’s say, another sweater. You need the feeling of power
that comes with buying or not buying it. You need the feeling that someone wants something you have — even if it’s just your money. To get the
benefit of shopping, you needn’t actually purchase the sweater, any more
than you have to marry every man you flirt with. In fact, window-shopping,
like flirting, can be more rewarding, the same high without the distressing commitment, the material encumbrance. The purest form of shopping
is provided by garage sales. A connoisseur goes out with no goal in mind,
open to whatever may come his or her way, secure that it will cost very
little. Minimum expense, maximum experience. Perfect shopping.

• ExERCiSE 4 •
Find six examples of short simple sentences or fragments in the selections
presented in this chapter. Explain their effect in the context of the paragraphs
in which you find them.

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 511

6/18/12 3:11 PM

512

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

Suggestions for Writing
The Economy
Now that you have examined a number of texts focusing on economics, explore
one dimension of this topic by synthesizing your own ideas and those in the readings. You might want to do more research or use readings from other classes as
you prepare for the following assignments.
1. In The Souls of Black Folk (1903), African American intellectual W. E. B.
DuBois took Booker T. Washington to task. Acknowledging that Washington
“stands as the one recognized spokesman of his ten million fellows and
one of the most notable figures in a nation of seventy million,” DuBois criticizes him for promoting “a gospel of Work and Money to such an extent as
apparently almost completely to overshadow the higher aims of life.” Read
Chapter 3 of DuBois’s The Souls of Black Folk called “Of Mr. Booker T. Washington and Others,” and then explain whether you agree with Washington or
DuBois. You might also want to read Dudley Randall’s poem “Booker T. and
W.E.B.,” which captures and comments on the debate between Washington
and DuBois. The selections by DuBois and Randall can both be found at
bedfordstmartins.com/languageofcomp.
2. How has the economy been portrayed in popular culture, either in the past
or today? You might consider films such as Wall Street: Money Never Sleeps
(2010), Inside Job (2010), and Margin Call (2011), periodicals such as the
Onion, or television programs such as The Colbert Report. Select one genre,
such as movies, comedy shows, or cartoons. Do they extol the virtues of
labor? Do they ennoble work? Do they satirize economics and economists?
Explain using examples.
3. In City of God, St. Augustine tells the story of a pirate captured by Alexander
the Great. “The Emperor asked him, ‘How dare you molest the seas?’ The pirate
replied, ‘How dare you molest the whole world? Because I do it with a small
boat, I am called a pirate and a thief. You, with a great fleet, molest the world
and are called an emperor.’” St. Augustine “approved of the pirate’s response.”
In our time, there are many who bemoan the greed with which our financial
system is riddled, while observing at the same time the punishments meted
out to the poor for minor offenses. Consider the implications of the pirate’s
response and St. Augustine’s thought. Write an essay in which you evaluate
the application of the story to our nation’s current economic situation, using
the works presented in this chapter for support.
4. In “The Singer Solution to World Poverty” (p. 369), first published in the New
York Times Magazine in 1999, philosopher and bioethicist Peter Singer writes,

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 512

6/18/12 3:11 PM

SUggESTionS FoR wRiTing

513

“So how does my philosophy break down in dollars and cents? An American
household with an income of $50,000 spends around $30,000 annually on
necessities, according to the Conference Board, a nonprofit economic research
organization. Therefore, for a household bringing in $50,000 a year, donations to help the world’s poor should be as close as possible to $20,000. The
$30,000 required for necessities holds for higher incomes as well. So a household making $100,000 a year could cut a yearly check for $70,000. Again, the
formula is simple: whatever money you’re spending on luxuries, not necessities, should be given away” (para. 22). What effect would Singer’s solution have
on the economy? Write a response to Singer in which you refer to the “Forbes
Price Index of Luxury Goods” (p. 498) and at least two other selections from
this chapter.
5. Write a response to Barbara Ehrenreich, Eric Schlosser, or Fareed Zakaria in
the voice of a financially successful or powerful contemporary person, such
as Donald Trump or Bill Gates. Indicate areas of common ground as well as
disagreement.
6. John Ruskin, whom you have read in this chapter, wrote about duty and responsibility as those values relate to business. To what extent do his views relate to
our contemporary economy? Focus on both the microeconomic and macroeconomic implications.
7. In “The Arts of Selling,” one of the essays in Brave New World Revisited (1958),
Aldous Huxley, author of the dystopian novel Brave New World, wrote about
advertising. Read the following paragraph from that work, and compare
Huxley’s ideas with those presented in John Kenneth Galbraith’s contemporaneous piece, “The Dependence Effect.” Write an essay in which you compare the two and evaluate which one comments more cogently and eloquently
on our nation’s economy. Refer to at least two other selections in this chapter
for support.
Effective rational propaganda becomes possible only when there is a clear understanding, on the part of all concerned, of the nature of symbols and of their relations to the things and events symbolized. Irrational propaganda depends for its
effectiveness on the general failure to understand the nature of symbols. Simpleminded people tend to equate the symbol with what it stands for, to attribute to
things and events some of the qualities expressed by the words in terms of which
the propagandist has chosen, for his own purposes, to talk about them. Consider
a simple example. Most cosmetics are made of lanolin, which is a mixture of
purified wool fat and water beaten up into an emulsion. This emulsion has many
valuable properties: it penetrates the skin, it does not become rancid, it is mildly
antiseptic and so forth. But the commercial propagandists do not speak about
the genuine virtues of the emulsion. They give it some picturesquely voluptuous
name, talk ecstatically and misleadingly about feminine beauty and show pictures of gorgeous blondes nourishing their tissues with skin food. “The cosmetic

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 513

6/18/12 3:11 PM

514

chAPTER 7 • ThE EconoMY

manufacturers,” one of their number has written, “are not selling lanolin, they are
selling hope.” For this hope, this fraudulent implication of a promise that they
will be transfigured, women will pay ten or twenty times the value of the emulsion which the propagandists have so skillfully related, by means of misleading
symbols, to a deep-seated and almost universal feminine wish — the wish to be
more attractive to members of the opposite sex. The principles underlying this
kind of propaganda are extremely simple. Find some common desire, some
widespread unconscious fear or anxiety; think out some way to relate this wish
or fear to the product you have to sell; then build a bridge of verbal or pictorial
symbols over which your customer can pass from fact to compensatory dream,
and from the dream to the illusion that your product, when purchased, will
make the dream come true. “We no longer buy oranges, we buy vitality. We do not
buy just an auto, we buy prestige.” And so with all the rest. In toothpaste, for
example, we buy, not a mere cleanser and antiseptic, but release from the fear of
being sexually repulsive. In vodka and whisky we are not buying a protoplasmic
poison which, in small doses, may depress the nervous system in a psychologically valuable way; we are buying friendliness and good fellowship, the warmth
of Dingley Dell and the brilliance of the Mermaid Tavern. With our laxatives we
buy the health of a Greek god, the radiance of one of Diana’s nymphs. With the
monthly best seller we acquire culture, the envy of our less literate neighbors and
the respect of the sophisticated. In every case the motivation analyst has found
some deep-seated wish or fear, whose energy can be used to move the customer
to part with cash and so, indirectly, to turn the wheels of industry. Stored in the
minds and bodies of countless individuals, this potential energy is released by,
and transmitted along, a line of symbols carefully laid out so as to bypass rationality and obscure the real issue.

8. Write an argument defending or challenging the large salaries paid to athletes,
movie stars, or corporate executives. Develop a logical argument with clearly
drawn reasons — or write your response as a satire.
9. In the following excerpts, Adam Smith and Henry David Thoreau consider
price and cost as features of economy. Write an essay in which you compare the
two and evaluate which speaks more accurately and eloquently to our time.
In your essay, refer to at least three of the selections presented in this chapter
as support.
The real price of everything, what everything is really worth to the man who has
acquired it, and who wants to dispose of it or exchange for something else, is the
toil and trouble which it can save for himself, and which it can impose on other
people.
— Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations, 1776
If it is asserted that civilization is a real advance on the condition of man, —
and I think that it is, though only the wise improve their advantages, — it must

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 514

6/18/12 3:11 PM

SUggESTionS FoR wRiTing

515

be shown that it has produced better dwellings without making them more costly;
and the cost of a thing is the amount of what I will call life which is required to
be exchanged for it, immediately or in the long run.
— Henry David Thoreau, Walden, 1854

10. Which of the following quotations most accurately captures your attitude
toward work and the economy? Write an essay about why the quotation
speaks to you. In your essay, refer to the selections presented in this chapter.
• Never work just for money or for power. They won’t save your soul or help
you sleep at night.
— Marian Wright Edelman

• Work for something because it is good, not just because it stands a chance
to succeed.
— Vaclav Havel

• There is no way of keeping profits up but by keeping wages down.
— David Ricardo

• Every man is rich or poor according to the degree to which he can afford
the necessaries, conveniences, and amusements of human life.
— Adam Smith

• It is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle, than for a rich
man to enter into the kingdom of God.
— Matthew 19:24

• Capital is dead labor that, vampire-like, lives only by sucking living labor,
and lives the more, the more labor it sucks.
— Karl Marx

• I am opposed to millionaires, but it would be dangerous to offer me the
position.
— Mark Twain

• I’d like to live as a poor man with lots of money.
— Pablo Picasso

07_SHE_67650_Ch07_393_516.indd 515

6/18/12 3:11 PM

this page left intentionally blank

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 36

6/18/12 3:09 PM

8
Gender
What is the impact of the gender roles that society creates
and enforces?

“W

hy can’t a woman be more like a man?” asks the exasperated Henry
Higgins in My Fair Lady when he fails to understand his indomitable
pupil, Eliza Doolittle. Why, indeed! The question of gender differences and roles
has baffled and angered us, delighted and confused us.
What is the distinction between sex and gender? The former refers to biologi­
cal identity; the latter has come to mean behavior that is learned. Some “socially
constructed” gender roles result from beliefs about the proper way to behave. When
do gender roles become stereotypes of what it means to be a woman or a man?
These ideas vary according to culture and time. A look at men in the eighteenth
century wearing wigs of curls tells us that what is considered appropriate in one
context is wholly inappropriate in another.
What other forces define gender roles? How does ethnicity contribute to the
expectations of what is masculine or feminine behavior? How does setting — a
small town, an athletic field, a formal dinner — affect a group’s expectations?
Such issues take on even greater importance in the context of bias. When do
socially constructed roles hinder individual expression or choice? Why are certain
professions dominated by men and others by women? How do beliefs about sex
or gender affect public policy, including education?
These are the questions taken up in this chapter, starting with an exploration
into what “scientific evidence” has been marshaled to “prove” the intellectual supe­
riority of men over women. Other selections focus on the social pressure to behave
“like a man” and the communication differences between men and women. The
serious economic and even medical consequences of beliefs about gender are also
considered.
The fictional Professor Higgins was, in fact, asking a rhetorical question, but
the authors presented in this chapter answer his question in specific and provoca­
tive ways that are bound to challenge — and deepen — our thinking about gender
roles.

517

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 517

6/18/12 3:12 PM

Women’s Brains
Stephen Jay Gould
Paleontologist and evolutionary biologist Stephen Jay Gould (1941–
2002) was a professor of geology and zoology at Harvard University
from 1967 until his death. His major scientific work was the theory of
punctuated equilibrium, a theory of evolutionary biology that builds on
the work of Charles Darwin by suggesting that evolution occurs spo­
radically, rather than gradually over a long period of time. Gould is the
author of numerous scientific texts, including The Mismeasure of Man
(1981); Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History
(1989); his magnum opus, The Structure of Evolutionary Theory (2002); and The
Hedgehog, the Fox, and the Magister’s Pox: Mending the Gap between Science and
the Humanities (2003). Gould also wrote for a more general audience in his column
in Natural History, where the following essay originally appeared in 1980.

I

n the Prelude to Middlemarch, George Eliot lamented the unfulfilled lives
of talented women:

Some have felt that these blundering lives are due to the inconvenient indefiniteness
with which the Supreme Power has fashioned the natures of women: if there were one
level of feminine incompetence as strict as the ability to count three and no more, the
social lot of women might be treated with scientific certitude.

Eliot goes on to discount the idea of innate limitation, but while she wrote in
1872, the leaders of European anthropometry were trying to measure “with sci­
entific certitude” the inferiority of women. Anthropometry, or measurement of
the human body, is not so fashionable a field these days, but it dominated the
human sciences for much of the nineteenth century and remained popular until
intelligence testing replaced skull measurement as a favored device for making
invidious comparisons among races, classes, and sexes. Craniometry, or measure­
ment of the skull, commanded the most attention and respect. Its unquestioned
leader, Paul Broca (1824–80), professor of clinical surgery at the Faculty of Medi­
cine in Paris, gathered a school of disciples and imitators around himself. Their
work, so meticulous and apparently irrefutable, exerted great influence and won
high esteem as a jewel of nineteenth­century science.
Broca’s work seemed particularly invulnerable to refutation. Had he not mea­
sured with the most scrupulous care and accuracy? (Indeed, he had. I have the
greatest respect for Broca’s meticulous procedure. His numbers are sound. But sci­
ence is an inferential exercise, not a catalog of facts. Numbers, by themselves, specify
nothing. All depends upon what you do with them.) Broca depicted himself as an
apostle of objectivity, a man who bowed before facts and cast aside superstition

518

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 518

6/18/12 3:12 PM

GoUlD • women’S brainS

519

and sentimentality. He declared that “there is no faith, however respectable, no inter­
est, however legitimate, which must not accommodate itself to the progress of
human knowledge and bend before truth.” Women, like it or not, had smaller
brains than men and, therefore, could not equal them in intelligence. This fact,
Broca argued, may reinforce a common prejudice in male society, but it is also a
scientific truth. L. Manouvrier, a black sheep in Broca’s fold, rejected the inferiority
of women and wrote with feeling about the burden imposed upon them by Broca’s
numbers:
Women displayed their talents and their diplomas. They also invoked philosophical
authorities. But they were opposed by numbers unknown to Condorcet or to John
Stuart Mill. These numbers fell upon poor women like a sledge hammer, and they
were accompanied by commentaries and sarcasms more ferocious than the most
misogynist imprecations of certain church fathers. The theologians had asked if women
had a soul. Several centuries later, some scientists were ready to refuse them a human
intelligence.

Broca’s argument rested upon two sets of data: the larger brains of men in mod­
ern societies, and a supposed increase in male superiority through time. His most
extensive data came from autopsies performed personally in four Parisian hospitals.
For 292 male brains, he calculated an average weight of 1,325 grams; 140 female
brains averaged 1,144 grams for a difference of 181 grams, or 14 percent of the male
weight. Broca understood, of course, that part of this difference could be attrib­
uted to the greater height of males. Yet he made no attempt to measure the effect
of size alone and actually stated that it cannot account for the entire difference
because we know, a priori, that women are not as intelligent as men (a premise that
the data were supposed to test, not rest upon):
We might ask if the small size of the female brain depends exclusively upon the small
size of her body. Tiedemann has proposed this explanation. But we must not forget that
women are, on the average, a little less intelligent than men, a difference which we
should not exaggerate but which is, nonetheless, real. We are therefore permitted to
suppose that the relatively small size of the female brain depends in part upon her
physical inferiority and in part upon her intellectual inferiority.

In 1873, the year after Eliot published Middlemarch, Broca measured the cra­
nial capacities of prehistoric skulls from L’Homme Mort cave. Here he found a dif­
ference of only 99.5 cubic centimeters between males and females, while modern
populations range from 129.5 to 220.7. Topinard, Broca’s chief disciple, explained
the increasing discrepancy through time as a result of differing evolutionary
pressures upon dominant men and passive women:

5

The man who fights for two or more in the struggle for existence, who has all the respon­
sibility and the cares of tomorrow, who is constantly active in combating the environ­
ment and human rivals, needs more brain than the woman whom he must protect and

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 519

6/18/12 3:12 PM

520

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

nourish, the sedentary woman, lacking any interior occupations, whose role is to raise
children, love, and be passive.

In 1879, Gustave Le Bon, chief misogynist of Broca’s school, used these data to
publish what must be the most vicious attack upon women in modern scientific
literature (no one can top Aristotle). I do not claim his views were representative
of Broca’s school, but they were published in France’s most respected anthropo­
logical journal. Le Bon concluded:
In the most intelligent races, as among the Parisians, there are a large number of women
whose brains are closer in size to those of gorillas than to the most developed male
brains. This inferiority is so obvious that no one can contest it for a moment; only its
degree is worth discussion. All psychologists who have studied the intelligence of women,
as well as poets and novelists, recognize today that they represent the most inferior forms
of human evolution and that they are closer to children and savages than to an adult,
civilized man. They excel in fickleness, inconstancy, absence of thought and logic, and
incapacity to reason. Without doubt there exist some distinguished women, very supe­
rior to the average man, but they are as exceptional as the birth of any monstrosity, as,
for example, of a gorilla with two heads; consequently, we may neglect them entirely.

Nor did Le Bon shrink from the social implications of his views. He was horri­
fied by the proposal of some American reformers to grant women higher education
on the same basis as men:
A desire to give them the same education, and, as a consequence, to propose the same
goals for them, is a dangerous chimera. . . . The day when, misunderstanding the infe­
rior occupations which nature has given her, women leave the home and take part in
our battles; on this day a social revolution will begin, and everything that maintains
the sacred ties of the family will disappear.

Sound familiar?1
I have reexamined Broca’s data, the basis for all this derivative pronounce­
ment, and I find his numbers sound but his interpretation ill­founded, to say the
least. The data supporting his claim for increased difference through time can be
easily dismissed. Broca based his contention on the samples from L’Homme Mort
alone — only seven male and six female skulls in all. Never have so little data yielded
such far­ranging conclusions.
In 1888, Topinard published Broca’s more extensive data on the Parisian hos­
pitals. Since Broca recorded height and age as well as brain size, we may use mod­
ern statistics to remove their effect. Brain weight decreases with age, and Broca’s
women were, on average, considerably older than his men. Brain weight increases
1

When I wrote this essay, I assumed that Le Bon was a marginal, if colorful, figure. I have since
learned that he was a leading scientist, one of the founders of social psychology, and best known
for a seminal study on crowd behavior, still cited today (La psychologie des foules, 1895), and for
his work on unconscious motivation.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 520

6/18/12 3:12 PM

GoUlD • women’S brainS

521

with height, and his average man was almost half a foot taller than his average
woman. I used multiple regression, a technique that allowed me to assess simulta­
neously the influence of height and age upon brain size. In an analysis of the data
for women, I found that, at average male height and age, a woman’s brain would
weigh 1,212 grams. Correction for height and age reduces Broca’s measured differ­
ence of 181 grams by more than a third, to 113 grams.
I don’t know what to make of this remaining difference because I cannot assess
other factors known to influence brain size in a major way. Cause of death has an
important effect: degenerative disease often entails a substantial diminution of brain
size. (This effect is separate from the decrease attributed to age alone.) Eugene
Schreider, also working with Broca’s data, found that men killed in accidents had
brains weighing, on average, 60 grams more than men dying of infectious diseases.
The best modern data I can find (from American hospitals) records a full 100­gram
difference between death by degenerative arteriosclerosis and by violence or accident.
Since so many of Broca’s subjects were very elderly women, we may assume that
lengthy degenerative disease was more common among them than among the men.
More importantly, modern students of brain size still have not agreed on a
proper measure for eliminating the powerful effect of body size. Height is partly
adequate, but men and women of the same height do not share the same body
build. Weight is even worse than height, because most of its variation reflects
nutrition rather than intrinsic size — fat versus skinny exerts little influence upon
the brain. Manouvrier took up this subject in the 1880s and argued that muscular
mass and force should be used. He tried to measure this elusive property in vari­
ous ways and found a marked difference in favor of men, even in men and women
of the same height. When he corrected for what he called “sexual mass,” women
actually came out slightly ahead in brain size.
Thus, the corrected 113­gram difference is surely too large; the true figure is
probably close to zero and may as well favor women as men. And 113 grams, by the
way, is exactly the average difference between a 5 foot 4 inch and a 6 foot 4 inch
male in Broca’s data. We would not (especially us short folks) want to ascribe greater
intelligence to tall men. In short, who knows what to do with Broca’s data? They
certainly don’t permit any confident claim that men have bigger brains than women.
To appreciate the social role of Broca and his school, we must recognize that
his statements about the brains of women do not reflect an isolated prejudice
toward a single disadvantaged group. They must be weighed in the context of a
general theory that supported contemporary social distinctions as biologically
ordained. Women, blacks, and poor people suffered the same disparagement, but
women bore the brunt of Broca’s argument because he had easier access to data on
women’s brains. Women were singularly denigrated but they also stood as surro­
gates for other disenfranchised groups. As one of Broca’s disciples wrote in 1881:
“Men of the black races have a brain scarcely heavier than that of white women.”
This juxtaposition extended into many other realms of anthropological argument,
particularly to claims that, anatomically and emotionally, both women and blacks

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 521

10

6/18/12 3:12 PM

522

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

were like white children — and that white children, by the theory of recapitulation,
represented an ancestral (primitive) adult stage of human evolution. I do not regard
as empty rhetoric the claim that women’s battles are for all of us.
Maria Montessori did not confine her activities to educational reform for
young children. She lectured on anthropology for several years at the University of
Rome, and wrote an influential book entitled Pedagogical Anthropology (English
edition, 1913). Montessori was no egalitarian. She supported most of Broca’s work
and the theory of innate criminality proposed by her compatriot Cesare Lombroso.
She measured the circumference of children’s heads in her schools and inferred
that the best prospects had bigger brains. But she had no use for Broca’s conclu­
sions about women. She discussed Manouvrier’s work at length and made much
of his tentative claim that women, after proper correction of the data, had slightly
larger brains than men. Women, she concluded, were intellectually superior, but
men had prevailed heretofore by dint of physical force. Since technology has abol­
ished force as an instrument of power, the era of women may soon be upon us:
“In such an epoch there will really be superior human beings, there will really be
men strong in morality and in sentiment. Perhaps in this way the reign of women is
approaching, when the enigma of her anthropological superiority will be deciphered.
Woman was always the custodian of human sentiment, morality and honor.”
This represents one possible antidote to “scientific” claims for the constitu­
tional inferiority of certain groups. One may affirm the validity of biological dis­
tinctions but argue that the data have been misinterpreted by prejudiced men
with a stake in the outcome, and that disadvantaged groups are truly superior. In
recent years, Elaine Morgan has followed this strategy in her Descent of Woman, a
speculative reconstruction of human prehistory from the woman’s point of view —
and as farcical as more famous tall tales by and for men.
I prefer another strategy. Montessori and Morgan followed Broca’s philosophy
to reach a more congenial conclusion. I would rather label the whole enterprise
of setting a biological value upon groups for what it is: irrelevant and highly inju­
rious. George Eliot well appreciated the special tragedy that biological labeling
imposed upon members of disadvantaged groups. She expressed it for people like
herself — women of extraordinary talent. I would apply it more widely — not only
to those whose dreams are flouted but also to those who never realize that they
may dream — but I cannot match her prose. In conclusion, then, the rest of Eliot’s
prelude to Middlemarch:

15

The limits of variation are really much wider than anyone would imagine from the
sameness of women’s coiffure and the favorite love stories in prose and verse. Here
and there a cygnet is reared uneasily among the ducklings in the brown pond, and never
finds the living stream in fellowship with its own oary­footed kind. Here and there is
born a Saint Theresa, foundress of nothing, whose loving heartbeats and sobs after an
unattained goodness tremble off and are dispersed among hindrances instead of center­
ing in some long­recognizable deed.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 522

6/18/12 3:12 PM

GoUlD • women’S brainS

523

Questions for Discussion
1. Stephen Jay Gould’s argument focuses on research about women’s brain size,
but — more important — what does he say about the nature of scientific inquiry —
that is, about how scientists think?
2. What does Gould mean when he says, “Women were singularly denigrated but they
also stood as surrogates for other disenfranchised groups” (para. 13)?
3. Why does Gould say, “I do not regard as empty rhetoric the claim that women’s
battles are for all of us” (para. 13)? Is he being patronizing? Does such a personal
comment undermine his scientific credibility? Explain.
4. Gould’s essay was published in 1980, and it centers on research conducted a cen­
tury before that. What case can you make that Gould’s true subject was not women,
but assumptions about the abilities of certain groups?
5. Would individuals accustomed to scientific texts have an easier time reading this
essay? Why or why not? How do your own experience and prior knowledge of a topic
affect your reading process?

Questions on Rhetoric and Style
1. What purposes do the quotations in this essay from George Eliot’s novel Middlemarch
serve? Why does Gould, when introducing the quotation from Broca in para­
graph 5, refer to Eliot? Why are quotations from Eliot, whose real name was Mary
Anne Evans, especially appropriate for Gould’s essay?
2. In paragraph 3, Gould states, “I have the greatest respect for Broca’s meticulous
procedure. His numbers are sound.” Despite this praise, Gould goes on to refute
Broca’s findings. What vulnerability does Gould find in Broca’s conclusions? Does
Gould’s praise of Broca strengthen or weaken his own argument? Explain.
3. Gould builds two parallel arguments: one on scientific method, another on specula­
tive conclusions. In which passages does he question the scientific method(s) rather
than the findings themselves? How does Gould weave these sources together in order
to make his own point?
4. How does each of the individuals Gould cites — Paul Broca, L. Manouvrier, Gustave
Le Bon, and Maria Montessori — contribute to the development of his argu­
ment? Does each make a separate point, or do they reinforce one another? Could
Gould have eliminated any of them without damaging his argument? Explain your
reasoning.
5. At the end of paragraph 7, Gould adds a footnote reassessing an earlier point. Does
this admission add or detract from his credibility?
6. Paragraphs 9 through 12 work as a unit to develop a single point that is integral to
the overall essay. What is this point? How do paragraphs 9–12 develop the point?
7. In paragraph 13, Gould shows how Broca and his colleagues extended their conclu­
sions to other groups. What is Gould’s purpose in developing this point as elabo­
rately as he does?

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 523

6/18/12 3:12 PM

524

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

8. Why is questioning Maria Montessori’s research and conclusions an effective
strategy? What criticism might Gould be guarding against in doing so?
9. In the final two paragraphs, how does Gould bring together both of his arguments —
that is, his argument against the actual scientific research and his argument about
the conclusions drawn from that research?
10. This essay has a strong appeal to logos, as would be expected of a scientific argu­
ment. How does Gould also appeal to pathos? How does that appeal add to the
persuasiveness of his argument?
11. Most of the time Gould writes in the third person, but he uses first person occa­
sionally. Explain why you think those shifts strengthen or weaken the essay.
12. How would you characterize the audience for whom Gould is writing? Do you think
fellow scientists are among them? Explain why or why not.

Suggestions for Writing
1. In paragraph 3, Gould asserts that “[n]umbers, by themselves, specify nothing.
All depends upon what you do with them.” Support, challenge, or qualify Gould’s
assertion by referring to statistics used in science, politics, economics, sports, or
another applicable field.
2. Find an essay written for a specialized audience (for example, an essay about tech­
nology in a scientific journal or a computer magazine). Rewrite it for a more gen­
eral audience.
3. In paragraph 13, Gould refers to “a general theory that supported contemporary
social distinctions as biologically ordained” in the late nineteenth century. In the
twenty­first century, many continue to argue for nature over nurture — that is,
for biology rather than socialization — as the causal agent for skills and talents of
specific groups of people. Write an essay explaining whether you believe heredity
or environment is the principal determinant of human characteristics. You may use
yourself as an example and may cite Gould’s essay, but you should also do research
in other sources to explore how the nature­nurture debate has fared in particular
historical contexts.
4. Write an essay using scientific data to develop an argument that has ethical or social
implications. For example, use statistical data to make (a) a case about the impact
of global warming or (b) a proposal to address what is being called the obesity epi­
demic in the United States. Frame the essay with a quotation (as Gould does), a
description, or an anecdote.
5. Consider another myth or stereotype about women based on biology that has pre­
vailed at some point in history — perhaps one that continues to have some credi­
bility, such as women are more emotional, more intuitive, better at child care, or
worse at math and science. Write an argument challenging the myth by using sci­
entific evidence.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 524

6/18/12 3:12 PM

Professions for Women
Virginia Woolf
a prolific novelist, critic, and essayist, Virginia woolf was born in lon­
don in 1882. Her novels, particularly Mrs. Dalloway (1925) and To the
Lighthouse (1927), are renowned for their penetrating psychological
insight. Her novels are known for their use of interior monologue, or
stream of consciousness. woolf is also noted for her nonfiction, espe­
cially for such works as The Common Reader (1925), A Room of One’s
Own (1929), and Three Guineas (1938). Having struggled with mental
illness for much of her life, she drowned herself in 1941. “Professions for
women,” delivered as a talk in 1931 to the women’s Service league, was included
in Death of a Moth and Other Essays (1942).

W

hen your secretary invited me to come here, she told me that your
Society is concerned with the employment of women and she sug­
gested that I might tell you something about my own professional experiences. It
is true I am a woman; it is true I am employed; but what professional experiences
have I had? It is difficult to say. My profession is literature; and in that profession
there are fewer experiences for women than in any other, with the exception of the
stage — fewer, I mean, that are peculiar to women. For the road was cut many years
ago — by Fanny Burney, by Aphra Behn, by Harriet Martineau, by Jane Austen, by
George Eliot — many famous women, and many more unknown and forgotten,
have been before me, making the path smooth, and regulating my steps. Thus, when
I came to write, there were very few material obstacles in my way. Writing was a
reputable and harmless occupation. The family peace was not broken by the scratch­
ing of a pen. No demand was made upon the family purse. For ten and sixpence
one can buy paper enough to write all the plays of Shakespeare — if one has a mind
that way. Pianos and models, Paris, Vienna and Berlin, masters and mistresses, are
not needed by a writer. The cheapness of writing paper is, of course, the reason
why women have succeeded as writers before they have succeeded in the other
professions.
But to tell you my story — it is a simple one. You have only got to figure to
yourselves a girl in a bedroom with a pen in her hand. She had only to move that
pen from left to right — from ten o’clock to one. Then it occurred to her to do what
is simple and cheap enough after all — to slip a few of those pages into an enve­
lope, fix a penny stamp in the corner, and drop the envelope into the red box at
the corner. It was thus that I became a journalist; and my effort was rewarded on the
first day of the following month — a very glorious day it was for me — by a letter
from an editor containing a cheque for one pound ten shillings and sixpence. But

525

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 525

6/18/12 3:12 PM

526

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

to show you how little I deserve to be called a professional woman, how little I
know of the struggles and difficulties of such lives, I have to admit that instead of
spending that sum upon bread and butter, rent, shoes and stockings, or butcher’s
bills, I went out and bought a cat — a beautiful cat, a Persian cat, which very soon
involved me in bitter disputes with my neighbours.
What could be easier than to write articles and to buy Persian cats with the
profits? But wait a moment. Articles have to be about something. Mine, I seem to
remember, was about a novel by a famous man. And while I was writing this
review, I discovered that if I were going to review books I should need to do battle
with a certain phantom. And the phantom was a woman, and when I came to know
her better I called her after the heroine of a famous poem, The Angel in the House.1
It was she who used to come between me and my paper when I was writing
reviews. It was she who bothered me and wasted my time and so tormented me
that at last I killed her. You who come of a younger and happier generation may
not have heard of her — you may not know what I mean by the Angel in the House.
I will describe her as shortly as I can. She was intensely sympathetic. She was
immensely charming. She was utterly unselfish. She excelled in the difficult arts
of family life. She sacrificed herself daily. If there was chicken, she took the leg; if
there was a draught she sat in it — in short she was so constituted that she never
had a mind or a wish of her own, but preferred to sympathize always with the minds
and wishes of others. Above all — I need not say it — she was pure. Her purity was
supposed to be her chief beauty — her blushes, her great grace. In those days — the
last of Queen Victoria — every house had its Angel. And when I came to write I
encountered her with the very first words. The shadow of her wings fell on my page;
I heard the rustling of her skirts in the room. Directly, that is to say, I took my pen
in my hand to review that novel by a famous man, she slipped behind me and
whispered: “My dear, you are a young woman. You are writing about a book that
has been written by a man. Be sympathetic; be tender; flatter; deceive; use all the arts
and wiles of our sex. Never let anybody guess that you have a mind of your own.
Above all, be pure.” And she made as if to guide my pen. I now record the one act
for which I take some credit to myself, though the credit rightly belongs to some
excellent ancestors of mine who left me a certain sum of money — shall we say five
hundred pounds a year? — so that it was not necessary for me to depend solely on
charm for my living. I turned upon her and caught her by the throat. I did my
best to kill her. My excuse, if I were to be had up in a court of law, would be that
I acted in self­defence. Had I not killed her she would have killed me. She would
have plucked the heart out of my writing. For, as I found, directly I put pen to
paper, you cannot review even a novel without having a mind of your own, with­
out expressing what you think to be the truth about human relations, morality,
sex. And all these questions, according to the Angel of the House, cannot be dealt
1“The Angel in the House” is a nineteenth­century poem about a self­sacrificing heroine; for
many, she represented the ideal Victorian woman. — Eds.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 526

6/18/12 3:12 PM

woolf • ProfeSSionS for women

527

with freely and openly by women; they must charm, they must conciliate, they
must — to put it bluntly — tell lies if they are to succeed. Thus, whenever I felt the
shadow of her wing or the radiance of her halo upon my page, I took up the ink­
pot and flung it at her. She died hard. Her fictitious nature was of great assistance
to her. It is far harder to kill a phantom than a reality. She was always creeping back
when I thought I had despatched her. Though I flatter myself that I killed her in
the end, the struggle was severe; it took much time that had better have been
spent upon learning Greek grammar; or in roaming the world in search of adven­
tures. But it was a real experience; it was an experience that was found to befall all
women writers at that time. Killing the Angel in the House was part of the occu­
pation of a woman writer.
But to continue my story. The Angel was dead; what then remained? You may
say that what remained was a simple and common object — a young woman in a
bedroom with an inkpot. In other words, now that she had rid herself of false­
hood, that young woman had only to be herself. Ah, but what is “herself ”? I mean,
what is a woman? I assure you, I do not know. I do not believe that you know. I do
not believe that anybody can know until she has expressed herself in all the arts
and professions open to human skill. That indeed is one of the reasons why I have
come here — out of respect for you, who are in process of showing us by your
experiments what a woman is, who are in process of providing us, by your failures
and successes, with that extremely important piece of information.
But to continue the story of my professional experiences. I made one pound
ten and six by my first review; and I bought a Persian cat with the proceeds. Then
I grew ambitious. A Persian cat is all very well, I said; but a Persian cat is not enough.
I must have a motor car. And it was thus that I became a novelist — for it is a very
strange thing that people will give you a motor car if you will tell them a story. It
is a still stranger thing that there is nothing so delightful in the world as telling
stories. It is far pleasanter than writing reviews of famous novels. And yet, if I am
to obey your secretary and tell you my professional experiences as a novelist, I
must tell you about a very strange experience that befell me as a novelist. And to
understand it you must try first to imagine a novelist’s state of mind. I hope I am
not giving away professional secrets if I say that a novelist’s chief desire is to be as
unconscious as possible. He has to induce in himself a state of perpetual lethargy.
He wants life to proceed with the utmost quiet and regularity. He wants to see the
same faces, to read the same books, to do the same things day after day, month
after month, while he is writing, so that nothing may break the illusion in which he
is living — so that nothing may disturb or disquiet the mysterious nosings about,
feelings round, darts, dashes and sudden discoveries of that very shy and illusive
spirit, the imagination. I suspect that this state is the same both for men and
women. Be that as it may, I want you to imagine me writing a novel in a state of
trance. I want you to figure to yourselves a girl sitting with a pen in her hand, which
for minutes, and indeed for hours, she never dips into the inkpot. The image that
comes to my mind when I think of this girl is the image of a fisherman lying sunk

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 527

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

528

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

in dreams on the verge of a deep lake with a rod held out over the water. She was
letting her imagination sweep unchecked round every rock and cranny of the world
that lies submerged in the depths of our unconscious being. Now came the expe­
rience, the experience that I believe to be far commoner with women writers than
with men. The line raced through the girl’s fingers. Her imagination had rushed
away. It had sought the pools, the depths, the dark places where the largest fish
slumber. And then there was a smash. There was an explosion. There was foam and
confusion. The imagination had dashed itself against something hard. The girl
was roused from her dream. She was indeed in a state of the most acute and dif­
ficult distress. To speak without figure she had thought of something, something
about the body, about the passions which it was unfitting for her as a woman to
say. Men, her reason told her, would be shocked. The consciousness of what men
will say of a woman who speaks the truth about her passions had roused her from
her artist’s state of unconsciousness. She could write no more. The trance was over.
Her imagination could work no longer. This I believe to be a very common expe­
rience with women writers — they are impeded by the extreme conventionality of
the other sex. For though men sensibly allow themselves great freedom in these
respects, I doubt that they realize or can control the extreme severity with which
they condemn such freedom in women.
These then were two very genuine experiences of my own. These were two of
the adventures of my professional life. The first — killing the Angel in the House —
I think I solved. She died. But the second, telling the truth about my own experi­
ences as a body, I do not think I solved. I doubt that any woman has solved it yet.
The obstacles against her are still immensely powerful — and yet they are very dif­
ficult to define. Outwardly, what is simpler than to write books? Outwardly, what
obstacles are there for a woman rather than for a man? Inwardly, I think, the case
is very different; she has still many ghosts to fight, many prejudices to overcome.
Indeed it will be a long time still, I think, before a woman can sit down to write a
book without finding a phantom to be slain, a rock to be dashed against. And if
this is so in literature, the freest of all professions for women, how is it in the new
professions which you are now for the first time entering?
Those are the questions that I should like, had I time, to ask you. And indeed,
if I have laid stress upon these professional experiences of mine, it is because I
believe that they are, though in different forms, yours also. Even when the path is
nominally open — when there is nothing to prevent a woman from being a doc­
tor, a lawyer, a civil servant — there are many phantoms and obstacles, as I believe,
looming in her way. To discuss and define them is I think of great value and impor­
tance; for thus only can the labour be shared, the difficulties be solved. But besides
this, it is necessary also to discuss the ends and the aims for which we are fighting,
for which we are doing battle with these formidable obstacles. Those aims cannot
be taken for granted; they must be perpetually questioned and examined. The whole
position, as I see it — here in this hall surrounded by women practising for the
first time in history I know not how many different professions — is one of extraor­
dinary interest and importance. You have won rooms of your own in the house

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 528

6/18/12 3:12 PM

woolf • ProfeSSionS for women

529

hitherto exclusively owned by men. You are able, though not without great labour
and effort, to pay the rent. You are earning your five hundred pounds a year. But
this freedom is only a beginning; the room is your own, but it is still bare. It has
to be furnished; it has to be decorated; it has to be shared. How are you going to
furnish it, how are you going to decorate it? With whom are you going to share it,
and upon what terms? These, I think, are questions of the utmost importance and
interest. For the first time in history you are able to ask them; for the first time
you are able to decide for yourselves what the answers should be. Willingly would
I stay and discuss those questions and answers — but not tonight. My time is up;
and I must cease.

Questions for Discussion
1. According to Virginia Woolf, what are the two main obstacles to women’s professional
identity? Are these still the two main obstacles, or does the contemporary woman
face different hurdles? Explain.
2. Research the origin of “The Angel in the House” (para. 3). Why is this an appropriate
or effective frame of reference for Woolf?
3. What do you think Woolf means in paragraph 5 when she asserts that “a novelist’s
chief desire is to be as unconscious as possible”? Do you agree that someone who
writes fiction should be “unconscious”? Why do you think a novelist would want to
be “unconscious” or would benefit from being “unconscious”?
4. In paragraphs 5 and 6, Woolf explores the consequences of being unable to tell “the
truth” about her own “experiences as a body.” What does she mean? Why does she
believe that surmounting this obstacle is more difficult — perhaps impossible at the
time she was writing — than “killing the Angel in the House”?
5. In her final paragraph, Woolf apologizes to a certain extent for dwelling on her own
experience, and then points out that her “professional experiences . . . are, though
in different forms,” also the experiences of her audience. What exactly is she asking
of her audience here?
6. In an online essay, Barbara Wahl Ledingham makes the following assertion about
the relevance of Woolf ’s essay to women in the twenty­first century:
We must claim and have knowledge of our feminists, our artists, our mothers, our
leaders, and our organizers, women like Susan B. Anthony . . . or Margaret Sanger. . . .
All of these women acted despite persecution. Their sacrifice is responsible for many
of the rights we take for granted today, but the biggest challenge is confronting our
own Angel in the House, our own inner phantom, the one that keeps us from . . .
defining and owning our own lives.
With a kind of uncanny prescience, Woolf ’s words follow us seventy years later,
haunting us with their veracity and timelessness. They are a gauge by which to mea­
sure not only our exterior accomplishments but also our inner state, and they serve
as a warning not to lose consciousness or become apathetic about either realm.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 529

6/18/12 3:12 PM

530

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

After summarizing what Ledingham is saying, explain why you agree or disagree
with her analysis.

Questions on Rhetoric and Style
1. How does Woolf present herself in the opening paragraph? What relationship is
she establishing with her audience?
2. Identify an example in the opening paragraph of each of the following, and
explain its effect: understatement, parallel structure, rhetorical question, irony,
and metonymy.
3. What is the effect of the personal anecdote in paragraph 2? Does the anecdote
appeal mainly to logos or pathos? Why is it especially effective for Woolf ’s
audience?
4. What does Woolf mean in the following description of the Angel in the House:
“The shadow of her wings fell on my page; I heard the rustling of her skirts in the
room” (para. 3)?
5. Discuss the effect of the short simple sentences that Woolf uses in paragraph 3.
How do they contribute to her tone as she describes the Angel in the House?
6. In paragraph 3, Woolf tells how she did her “best to kill [the Angel in the House].”
Examine the words and images she uses to describe this act. Do you believe the
violence of her descriptions to be appropriate? Explain why or why not.
7. How does the shift in person in paragraph 4 serve Woolf ’s purpose? In what ways
is this a transitional paragraph?
8. What is the effect in paragraph 5 of Woolf ’s referring to a novelist as he? Should
Woolf have used she as though she were referring to herself? Why or why not?
9. Summarize the extended analogy Woolf develops in paragraph 5 to describe “a
girl sitting with a pen in her hand.” Explain its effect.
10. Would you characterize the language at the end of paragraph 5, where Woolf writes
about “the body,” to be delicate and genteel or euphemistic? Explain, keeping in
mind the historical context of the work.
11. By the time of this speech, Woolf ’s extended essay A Room of One’s Own was well
known as a feminist manifesto: Woolf claimed that every woman requires a sepa­
rate income and a room of her own if she is to become an independent, produc­
tive woman. How does Woolf embellish this metaphor of a room of one’s own in
paragraph 7? What is the effect?
12. What is Woolf ’s overall tone in this speech? Because the tone evolves and shifts
throughout the text, determining the overall tone is complex. Identify passages
where Woolf displays various tones, sometimes in order to assume a specific
persona, and then develop a description of the overall tone. You will probably
need to use two words (possibly joined with but or yet) or a phrase rather than
a single word. Does Woolf display anger, bitterness, resignation, aggression,
apology, combativeness? Or does she show a combination of these emotions or
others?

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 530

6/18/12 3:12 PM

woolf • ProfeSSionS for women

531

Suggestions for Writing
1. Write an essay analyzing the rhetorical strategies Woolf uses in this speech to reach
her specific audience. Pay attention to the way she uses the tools of the novelist, such
as characterization, scene setting, highly textured and specific descriptive detail, and
figurative language.
2. Imagine that you have been invited to deliver a speech entitled “Professions for
Women” to an audience of your peers, male and female. Cite Woolf to support
your speech’s thesis, or propose a counterargument to Woolf ’s position. Also, be
sure to describe the audience and occasion of your speech.
3. If you have read any of Virginia Woolf ’s fiction (either her short stories or the
novels Mrs. Dalloway or To the Lighthouse, for example), discuss how this essay
informs them.
4. In A Room of One’s Own, Woolf asks, what if Shakespeare had had a sister? She calls
her Judith and considers whether circumstances would have encouraged or allowed
Judith to write great plays. Write an essay comparing and contrasting the ideas and
style of that essay with those in “Professions for Women.”
5. In the final paragraph of her speech, Woolf says, “Even when the path is nominally
open — when there is nothing to prevent a woman from being a doctor, a lawyer,
a civil servant — there are many phantoms and obstacles, as I believe, looming in
her way.” Write an essay in which you defend, challenge, or modify that statement
with regard to women today in the United States or to women in another country
where gender equality might be more problematic. Pay particular attention to what
you see as the “phantoms and obstacles.”

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 531

6/18/12 3:12 PM

The Speech of Miss Polly Baker
Ben Franklin
ben franklin (1706–1790) was a scholar, diplomat, author, scientist, businessman,
and inventor. one of the founding fathers, he helped draft the Declaration of
independence, and he was a delegate to the Constitutional Convention. in 1741,
he began publishing Poor Richard’s Almanac, a very popular and influential maga­
zine that established his reputation (under a pseudonym) as a satirist and secured his
fortune. He made important contributions to science, especially in the understanding
of electricity. He was ambassador to france from 1776 to 1785 and governor of
Pennsylvania from 1785 to 1788. Toward the end of his life, he became a prominent
abolitionist. The following essay initially appeared in 1747 in a london paper. Sub­
sequently, american publications picked it up. for several decades, the story was
accepted as having been written by a woman named Polly baker, but eventually
franklin admitted that he had written it to criticize a legal system that penalized
mothers but not fathers for having children out of wedlock. although there has been
some controversy, most scholars accept franklin as the author, including the editors
of The Papers of Benjamin Franklin published by the american Philosophical Society
and Yale University.

T

he Speech of Miss Polly Baker, before a Court of Judicature, at Connecti­
cut near Boston in New­England; where she was prosecuted the Fifth
Time, for having a Bastard Child: Which influenced the Court to dispense with
her Punishment, and induced one of her Judges to marry her the next Day.
May it please the Honourable Bench to indulge me in a few Words: I am a poor
unhappy Woman, who have no Money to fee Lawyers to plead for me, being hard
put to it to get a tolerable Living. I shall not trouble your Honours with long
Speeches; for I have not the Presumption to expect, that you may, by any Means,
be prevailed on to deviate in your Sentence from the Law, in my Favour. All I
humbly hope is, That your Honours would charitably move the Governor’s Good­
ness on my Behalf, that my Fine may be remitted. This is the Fifth Time, Gentle­
men, that I have been dragged before your Court on the same Account; twice I
have paid heavy Fines, and twice have been brought to Publick Punishment, for
want of Money to pay those Fines. This may have been agreeable to the Laws, and
I don’t dispute it; but since Laws are sometimes unreasonable in themselves, and
therefore repealed, and others bear too hard on the Subject in particular Circum­
stances; and therefore there is left a Power somewhat to dispense with the Execu­
tion of them; I take the Liberty to say, That I think this Law, by which I am
punished, is both unreasonable in itself, and particularly severe with regard to
me, who have always lived an inoffensive Life in the Neighbourhood where I was

532

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 532

6/18/12 3:12 PM

franklin • THe SPeeCH of miSS PollY baker

533

born, and defy my Enemies (if I have any) to say I ever wronged Man, Woman,
or Child.
Abstracted from the Law, I cannot conceive (may it please your Honours)
what the Nature of my Offence is. I have brought Five fine Children into the
World, at the Risque of my Life; I have maintained them well by my own Industry,
without burthening the Township, and would have done it better, if it had not
been for the heavy Charges and Fines I have paid. Can it be a Crime (in the Nature
of Things I mean) to add to the Number of the King’s Subjects, in a new Country
that really wants People? I own it, I should think it a Praise­worthy, rather than a
punishable Action. I have debauched no other Woman’s Husband, nor enticed any
Youth; these Things I never was charged with, nor has any one the least Cause of
Complaint against me, unless, perhaps, the Minister, or Justice, because I have had
Children without being married, by which they have missed a Wedding Fee. But,
can ever this be a Fault of mine?
I appeal to your Honours. You are pleased to allow I don’t want Sense; but I
must be stupified to the last Degree, not to prefer the Honourable State of Wed­
lock, to the Condition I have lived in. I always was, and still am willing to enter
into it; and doubt not my behaving well in it, having all the Industry, Frugality,
Fertility, and Skill in Economy, appertaining to a good Wife’s Character. I defy
any Person to say, I ever refused an Offer of that Sort: On the contrary, I readily
consented to the only Proposal of Marriage that ever was made me, which was
when I was a Virgin; but too easily confiding in the Person’s Sincerity that made
it, I unhappily lost my own Honour, by trusting to his; for he got me with Child,
and then forsook me: That very Person you all know; he is now become a Magis­
trate of this Country; and I had Hopes he would have appeared this Day on the
Bench, and have endeavoured to moderate the Court in my Favour; then I should
have scorned to have mentioned it; but I must now complain of it, as unjust and
unequal, That my Betrayer and Undoer, the first Cause of all my faults and Mis­
carriages (if they must be deemed such) should be advanced to Honour and Power
in the Government, that punishes my Misfortunes with Stripes and Infamy.
I should be told, ’tis like, That were there no Act of Assembly in the Case, the
Precepts of Religion are violated by my Transgressions. If mine, then, is a religious
Offence, leave it to religious Punishments. You have already excluded me from the
Comforts of your Church­Communion. Is not that sufficient? You believe I have
offended Heaven, and must suffer eternal Fire: Will not that be sufficient? What
Need is there, then, of your additional Fines and Whipping?
I own, I do not think as you do; for, if I thought what you call a Sin, was really
such, I could not presumptuously commit it. But, how can it be believed, that
Heaven is angry at my having Children, when to the little done by me towards it,
God has been pleased to add his Divine Skill and admirable Workmanship in the
Formation of their Bodies, and crowned it, by furnishing them with rational and
immortal Souls. Forgive me, Gentlemen, if I talk a little extravagantly on these

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 533

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

534

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

Matters; I am no Divine, but if you, Gentlemen, must be making Laws, do not turn
natural and useful Actions into Crimes, by your Prohibitions. But take into your
wise Consideration, the great and growing Number of Batchelors in the Country,
many of whom from the mean Fear of the Expences of a Family, have never sin­
cerely and honourably courted a Woman in their Lives; and by their Manner of
Living, leave unproduced (which is little better than Murder) Hundreds of their
Posterity to the Thousandth Generation. Is not this a greater Offence against the
Publick Good, than mine? Compel them, then, by Law, either to Marriage, or to pay
double the Fine of Fornication every Year.
What must poor young Women do, whom Custom have forbid to solicit the
Men, and Who cannot force themselves upon Husbands, when the Laws take no
Care to provide them any; and yet severely punish them if they do their Duty with­
out them; the Duty of the first and great Command of Nature, and of Nature’s God,
Encrease and Multiply. A Duty, from the steady Performance of which, nothing
has been able to deter me; but for its Sake, I have hazarded the Loss of the Publick
Esteem, and have frequently endured Publick Disgrace and Punishment; and there­
fore ought, in my humble Opinion, instead of a Whipping, to have a Statue erected
to my Memory.

Exploring the Text
1. How does Ben Franklin develop Polly Baker into a sympathetic character? What
ethos does the character establish at the outset?
2. What is the basic argument that Polly makes? Try explaining it through a syllo­
gism, a series of syllogisms, or the Toulmin model (see Chapter 3).
3. What evidence does Polly present in her defense?
4. How does Polly anticipate counterarguments? What examples of concession and
refutation do you find?
5. What is the effect of the rhetorical questions Polly asks? Refer to specific examples
in your response.
6. How does Polly tailor her argument (or does she?) to the particular audience of
the magistrates?
7. Outline the logic of Polly’s argument that she should, in fact, be rewarded instead
of punished. Go a step further, and show how she turns the law’s logic on itself
to argue that the bachelors in the community are the ones guilty of “a greater
Offence against the Publick Good” (para. 6).
8. What instances of a double standard does Polly point out? Pay close attention to the
examples of men’s behavior being seen in an entirely different light than women’s
in the same situation.
9. How do the diction and syntax establish Polly as a humble, obedient woman?
10. If you did not know that Polly was a fictional character created by an author whose
intent is to criticize a practice or system, what clues might you notice that suggest

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 534

6/18/12 3:12 PM

aDamS • leTTerS

535

something is below the surface? Consider elements of satire such as hyperbole,
understatement, connotative language, double entendres, and puns.
11. What does Franklin achieve by writing in the voice of a woman and creating this
fictional scenario rather than simply writing a straightforward criticism of a sys­
tem that he believes treats women unfairly?
12. Compare and contrast the rhetorical strategies used by Franklin with those of
Jonathan Swift in his satire “A Modest Proposal” (p. 404).

Letters
John and Abigail Adams
John adams (1735–1826), one of america’s founding fathers, was the second presi­
dent of the United States. His wife, abigail Smith adams (1744–1818), was also
dedicated to the cause of independence and wrote frequently to him on the conditions
of wartime boston, which was held by the british for most of the war. The city was
liberated by George washington’s army just before these letters were written. in
the following two letters, abigail writes to her husband in Philadelphia, where he is
serving in the Continental Congress, and John responds as both husband and politi­
cian. abigail presses her husband to “remember the ladies” as he and his colleagues
are discussing freedom from tyranny. Given the time period, her exhortation did not
refer to women’s suffrage but rather to laws regarding such matters as inheritance and
spousal abuse. You can view these letters at bedfordstmartins.com/languageofcomp.

From Abigail to John
Braintree, March 31, 1776
I wish you would ever write me a Letter half as long as I write you; and tell me if
you may where your Fleet are gone? What sort of Defence Virginia can make
against our common Enemy? Whether it is so situated as to make an able Defence?
Are not the Gentery Lords and the common people vassals, are they not like the
uncivilized Natives Brittain represents us to be? I hope their Riffel Men who have
shewen themselves very savage and even Blood thirsty; are not a specimen of the
Generality of the people.
I . . . am willing to allow the Colony great merrit for having produced a
Washington but they have been shamefully duped by a Dunmore.1
I have sometimes been ready to think that the passion for Liberty cannot be
Eaquelly Strong in the Breasts of those who have been accustomed to deprive their
1The Fourth Earl of Dunmore (John Murray) was the British colonial governor of Virginia
from 1771 to 1776. He opposed independence for the colonies and was forced to return to
England. — Eds.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 535

6/18/12 3:12 PM

536

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

fellow Creatures of theirs. Of this I am certain that it is not founded upon that gen­
erous and christian principal of doing to others as we would that others should
do unto us.
Do not you want to see Boston; I am fearfull of the small pox, or I should have
been in before this time. I got Mr. Crane to go to our House and see what state it
was in. I find it has been occupied by one of the Doctors of a Regiment, very dirty,
but no other damage has been done to it. The few things which were left in it are
all gone. Cranch has the key which he never deliverd up. I have wrote to him for it
and am determined to get it cleand as soon as possible and shut it up. I look upon
it a new acquisition of property, a property which one month ago I did not value
at a single Shilling, and could with pleasure have seen it in flames.
The Town in General is left in a better state than we expected, more oweing to
a percipitate flight than any Regard to the inhabitants, tho some individuals dis­
coverd a sense of honour and justice and have left the rent of the Houses in which
they were, for the owners and the furniture unhurt, or if damaged sufficent to make
it good.
Others have committed abominable Ravages. The Mansion House of your
President is safe and the furniture unhurt whilst both the House and Furniture of
the Solisiter General have fallen a prey to their own merciless party. Surely the
very Fiends feel a Reverential awe for Virtue and patriotism, whilst they Detest the
paricide2 and traitor.
I feel very differently at the approach of spring to what I did a month ago. We
knew not then whether we could plant or sow with safety, whether when we had
toild we could reap the fruits of our own industery, whether we could rest in our
own Cottages, or whether we should not be driven from the sea coasts to seek shel­
ter in the wilderness, but now we feel as if we might sit under our own vine and
eat the good of the land.
I feel a gaieti de Coar3 to which before I was a stranger. I think the Sun looks
brighter, the Birds sing more melodiously, and Nature puts on a more chearfull
countanance. We feel a temporary peace, and the poor fugitives are returning to
their deserted habitations.
Tho we felicitate ourselves, we sympathize with those who are trembling least
the Lot of Boston should be theirs. But they cannot be in similar circumstances
unless pusilanimity and cowardise should take possession of them. They have time
and warning given them to see the Evil and shun it. — I long to hear that you have
declared an independency — and by the way in the new Code of Laws which I sup­
pose it will be necessary for you to make I desire you would Remember the Ladies,
and be more generous and favourable to them than your ancestors. Do not put such
unlimited power into the hand of the Husbands. Remember all Men would be
tyrants if they could. If perticuliar care and attention is not paid to the Ladies we

5

2A son who murdered his father, also known as a patricide. — Eds.
3French (correctly spelled gaieté de coeur), happiness of heart. — Eds.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 536

6/18/12 3:12 PM

aDamS • leTTerS

537

are determined to foment a Rebelion, and will not hold ourselves bound by any
Laws in which we have no voice, or Representation.
That your Sex are Naturally Tyrannical is a Truth so thoroughly established as
to admit of no dispute, but such of you as wish to be happy willingly give up the
harsh title of Master for the more tender and endearing one of Friend. Why then,
not put it out of the power of the vicious and the Lawless to use us with cruelty
and indignity with impunity. Men of Sense in all Ages abhor those customs which
treat us only as the vassals of your Sex. Regard us then as Beings placed by provi­
dence under your protection and in immitation of the Supreem Being make use of
that power only for our happiness.

10

From John to Abigail
April 14, 1776
You justly complain of my short Letters, but the critical State of Things and the
Multiplicity of Avocations must plead my Excuse. You ask where the Fleet is. The
inclosed Papers will inform you. You ask what Sort of Defence Virginia can make.
I believe they will make an able Defence. Their Militia and minute Men have been
some time employed in training them selves and they have Nine Battallions of regu­
lars as they call them, maintained among them, under good Officers, at the Con­
tinental Expence. They have set up a Number of Manufactories of Fire Arms, which
are busily employed. They are tolerably supplied with Powder, and are successfull
and assiduous, in making Salt Petre. Their neighbouring Sister or rather Daughter
Colony of North Carolina, which is a warlike Colony, and has several Battallions
at the Continental Expence, as well as a pretty good Militia, are ready to assist
them, and they are in very good Spirits, and seem determined to make a brave
Resistance. — The Gentry are very rich, and the common People very poor.
This Inequality of Property, gives an Aristocratical Turn to all their Proceed­
ings, and occasions a strong Aversion in their Patricians, to Common Sense. But
the Spirit of these Barons, is coming down, and it must submit.
It is very true, as you observe they have been duped by Dunmore. But this is a
Common Case. All the Colonies are duped, more or less, at one Time and another.
A more egregious Bubble was never blown up, than the Story of Commissioners
coming to treat with the Congress. Yet it has gained Credit like a Charm, not only
without but against the clearest Evidence. I never shall forget the Delusion, which
seized our best and most sagacious Friends the dear Inhabitants of Boston, the
Winter before last. Credulity and the Want of Foresight, are Imperfections in the
human Character, that no Politician can sufficiently guard against.
You have given me some Pleasure, by your Account of a certain House in Queen
Street. I had burned it, long ago, in Imagination. It rises now to my View like a
Phoenix. — What shall I say of the Solicitor General? I pity his pretty Children, I
pity his Father, and his sisters. I wish I could be clear that it is no moral Evil to pity
him and his Lady. Upon Repentance they will certainly have a large Share in the

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 537

6/18/12 3:12 PM

538

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

Compassions of many. But . . . let Us take Warning and give it to our Children.
Whenever Vanity, and Gaiety, a Love of Pomp and Dress, Furniture, Equipage, Build­
ings, great Company, expensive Diversions, and elegant Entertainments get the bet­
ter of the Principles and Judgments of Men or Women there is no knowing where
they will stop, nor into what Evils, natural, moral, or political, they will lead us.
Your Description of your own Gaiety de Coeur, charms me. Thanks be to God
you have just Cause to rejoice — and may the bright Prospect be obscured by no
Cloud.
As to Declarations of Independency, be patient. Read our Privateering Laws,
and our Commercial Laws. What signifies a Word.
As to your extraordinary Code of Laws, I cannot but laugh. We have been told
that our Struggle has loosened the bands of Government every where. That Chil­
dren and Apprentices were disobedient — that schools and Colledges were grown
turbulent — that Indians slighted their Guardians and Negroes grew insolent to
their Masters.
But your Letter was the first Intimation that another Tribe more numerous
and powerfull than all the rest were grown discontented. — This is rather too coarse
a Compliment but you are so saucy, I wont blot it out.
Depend upon it, We know better than to repeal our Masculine systems. Altho
they are in full Force, you know they are little more than Theory. We dare not exert
our Power in its full Latitude. We are obliged to go fair, and softly, and in Practice
you know We are the subjects. We have only the Name of Masters, and rather than
give up this, which would compleatly subject Us to the Despotism of the Peticoat,
I hope General Washington, and all our brave Heroes would fight. I am sure every
good Politician would plot, as long as he would against Despotism, Empire, Mon­
archy, Aristocracy, Oligarchy, or Ochlocracy.4 — A fine Story indeed. I begin to think
the Ministry as deep as they are wicked. After stirring up Tories, Landjobbers,
Trimmers, Bigots, Canadians, Indians, Negroes, Hanoverians, Hessians, Russians,
Irish Roman Catholicks, Scotch Renegadoes, at last they have stimulated the[e] to
demand new Priviledges and threaten to rebell.

15

Exploring the Text
1. What ethos does Abigail Adams establish in the opening paragraph? How do the
questions contribute to the persona she presents?
2. Abigail describes Boston in considerable detail. What is the general impression she
tries to convey? Why do you think she chose the details she did?
3. When Abigail exhorts John Adams to “remember the Ladies,” she also points out
that “all Men would be tyrants if they could” (para. 9) and that “your Sex are Natu­
rally Tyrannical” (para. 10). How does she make such statements without sound­
ing accusatory or alienating her husband? Explain.
4Mob rule. — Eds.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 538

6/18/12 3:12 PM

braDY • i wanT a wife

539

4. When John tells Abigail that he “cannot but laugh” (para. 17) at her suggestions for
laws, is he dismissing her? Is he disrespectful to her? Explain.
5. Is the last paragraph of John’s letter written tongue­in­cheek, or is he serious? What
does he mean by “the Despotism of the Peticoat” (para. 19)? How do you interpret
this ending?
6. Describe the overall tone of each of these letters. Based on the tone and the infor­
mation in the letters, describe the relationship between John and Abigail Adams.
What evidence of intimacy do you find in each letter?
7. Imagine that Abigail and John Adams had access to e­mail, and rewrite these two
letters as e­mail correspondence.

I Want a Wife
Judy Brady
Judy brady was born in San francisco in 1937 and earned a bfa in painting from
the University of iowa in 1962. She has been active in political and environmental
movements as an editor and author. She edited Women and Cancer (1990) and
One in Three: Women with Cancer Confront an Epidemic (1991). brady’s work has
also appeared in periodicals such as Greenpeace magazine and the Women’s
Review of Books. Since appearing in the premiere issue of Ms. magazine in 1971,
“i want a wife” has become a classic piece of feminist writing and humor. it was
reprinted as “i [Still] want a wife” in Ms. in 1990.

I

belong to that classification of people known as wives. I am A Wife. And,
not altogether incidentally, I am a mother.
Not too long ago a male friend of mine appeared on the scene fresh from a
recent divorce. He had one child, who is, of course, with his ex­wife. He is looking
for another wife. As I thought about him while I was ironing one evening, it sud­
denly occurred to me that I, too, would like to have a wife. Why do I want a wife?
I would like to go back to school so that I can become economically indepen­
dent, support myself, and, if need be, support those dependent upon me. I want
a wife who will work and send me to school. And while I am going to school I
want a wife to take care of my children. I want a wife to keep track of the children’s
doctor and dentist appointments. And to keep track of mine, too. I want a wife to
make sure my children eat properly and are kept clean. I want a wife who will
wash the children’s clothes and keep them mended. I want a wife who is a good
nurturant attendant to my children, who arranges for their schooling, makes sure
that they have an adequate social life with their peers, takes them to the park, the
zoo, etc. I want a wife who takes care of the children when they are sick, a wife
who arranges to be around when the children need special care, because, of course,
I cannot miss classes at school. My wife must arrange to lose time at work and not

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 539

6/18/12 3:12 PM

540

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

lose the job. It may mean a small cut in my wife’s income from time to time, but
I guess I can tolerate that. Needless to say, my wife will arrange and pay for the care
of the children while my wife is working.
I want a wife who will take care of my physical needs. I want a wife who will
keep my house clean. A wife who will pick up after my children, a wife who will
pick up after me. I want a wife who will keep my clothes clean, ironed, mended,
replaced when need be, and who will see to it that my personal things are kept in
their proper place so that I can find what I need the minute I need it. I want a wife
who cooks the meals, a wife who is a good cook. I want a wife who will plan the
menus, do the necessary grocery shopping, prepare the meals, serve them pleas­
antly, and then do the cleaning up while I do my studying. I want a wife who will
care for me when I am sick and sympathize with my pain and loss of time from
school. I want a wife to go along when our family takes a vacation so that someone
can continue to care for me and my children when I need a rest and change of
scene.
I want a wife who will not bother me with rambling complaints about a wife’s
duties. But I want a wife who will listen to me when I feel the need to explain a
rather difficult point I have come across in my course of studies. And I want a wife
who will type my papers for me when I have written them.
I want a wife who will take care of the details of my social life. When my wife
and I are invited out by my friends, I want a wife who will take care of the baby­
sitting arrangements. When I meet people at school that I like and want to enter­
tain, I want a wife who will have the house clean, will prepare a special meal, serve
it to me and my friends, and not interrupt when I talk about things that interest
me and my friends. I want a wife who will have arranged that the children are fed
and ready for bed before my guests arrive so that the children do not bother us. I
want a wife who takes care of the needs of my guests so that they feel comfortable,
who makes sure that they have an ashtray, that they are passed the hors d’oeuvres,
that they are offered a second helping of the food, that their wine glasses are
replenished when necessary, that their coffee is served to them as they like it. And
I want a wife who knows that sometimes I need a night out by myself.
I want a wife who is sensitive to my sexual needs, a wife who makes love pas­
sionately and eagerly when I feel like it, a wife who makes sure that I am satisfied.
And, of course, I want a wife who will not demand sexual attention when I am not
in the mood for it. I want a wife who assumes the complete responsibility for birth
control, because I do not want more children. I want a wife who will remain sexu­
ally faithful to me so that I do not have to clutter up my intellectual life with jeal­
ousies. And I want a wife who understands that my sexual needs may entail more
than just strict adherence to monogamy. I must, after all, be able to relate to people
as fully as possible.
If, by chance, I find another person more suitable as a wife than the wife I
already have, I want the liberty to replace my present wife with another one. Natu­
rally, I will expect a fresh new life; my wife will take the children and be solely
responsible for them so that I am left free.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 540

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

STaPleS • JUST walk on bY

541

When I am through with school and have a job, I want my wife to quit working
and remain at home so that my wife can more fully and completely take care of a
wife’s duties.
My God, who wouldn’t want a wife?

10

Exploring the Text
1. How does the opening paragraph set the tone for the entire essay? Note details
such as the form and progression of sentences, the use of capitalization, and the
qualifying phrases.
2. What is the effect of Judy Brady repeating the sentence (or clause) “I want a wife”
again and again? What is the effect of Brady’s use of pronouns in referring to her­
self and “her” wife?
3. What is the overall structure of her argument? Consider breaking this essay into a
straightforward syllogism or analyzing it using the Toulmin model presented in
Chapter 3.
4. How would you describe the progression of the paragraphs? Does Brady go from
most to least or from least to most, or does she follow another organizational prin­
ciple? Why is her choice effective?
5. What elements of satire does Brady use? How does she, for instance, use hyperbole?
Understatement? Humor? Irony? Others?
6. Although Brady never uses the term sexism (or feminism), what gender inequities
does she catalog in this essay?
7. Even though this essay was published in 1971, when the feminist movement was a
strong political force, it has remained popular for decades. Why? Some of the details
seem dated, such as the references to a typewriter and ashtrays. Do you think that
the situation Brady describes is still relevant? Or is the essay mainly a historical
document that is a reminder of times past?
8. How might you apply the same rhetorical strategies that Brady uses in this essay to
another one entitled “I Want a Husband”?

Just Walk on By
A Black Man Ponders His Power
to Alter Public Space

Brent Staples
an author and editorial writer for the New York Times, brent Staples (b. 1951) grew
up in Pennsylvania in a family of nine children. He received his ba from widener
University and his PhD in psychology from the University of Chicago. His memoir,
Parallel Time: Growing Up in Black and White (1994), won the anisfield­wolf book

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 541

6/18/12 3:12 PM

542

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

award, which recognizes books that contribute to a deeper appreciation of cultural
diversity. The following essay originally appeared in Ms. magazine in 1986.

M

y first victim was a woman — white, well dressed, probably in her early
twenties. I came upon her late one evening on a deserted street in Hyde
Park, a relatively affluent neighborhood in an otherwise mean, impoverished sec­
tion of Chicago. As I swung onto the avenue behind her, there seemed to be a dis­
creet, uninflammatory distance between us. Not so. She cast back a worried glance.
To her, the youngish black man — a broad six feet two inches with a beard and bil­
lowing hair, both hands shoved into the pockets of a bulky military jacket — seemed
menacingly close. After a few more quick glimpses, she picked up her pace and was
soon running in earnest. Within seconds she disappeared into a cross street.
That was more than a decade ago. I was twenty­two years old, a graduate stu­
dent newly arrived at the University of Chicago. It was in the echo of that terrified
woman’s footfalls that I first began to know the unwieldy inheritance I’d come
into — the ability to alter public space in ugly ways. It was clear that she thought
herself the quarry of a mugger, a rapist, or worse. Suffering a bout of insomnia,
however, I was stalking sleep, not defenseless wayfarers. As a softy who is scarcely
able to take a knife to a raw chicken — let alone hold it to a person’s throat — I was
surprised, embarrassed, and dismayed all at once. Her flight made me feel like an
accomplice in tyranny. It also made it clear that I was indistinguishable from the
muggers who occasionally seeped into the area from the surrounding ghetto. That
first encounter, and those that followed, signified that a vast, unnerving gulf lay
between nighttime pedestrians — particularly women — and me. And I soon gath­
ered that being perceived as dangerous is a hazard in itself. I only needed to turn
a corner into a dicey situation, or crowd some frightened, armed person in a foyer
somewhere, or make an errant move after being pulled over by a policeman. Where
fear and weapons meet — and they often do in urban America — there is always
the possibility of death.
In that first year, my first away from my hometown, I was to become thor­
oughly familiar with the language of fear. At dark, shadowy intersections in Chicago,
I could cross in front of a car stopped at a traffic light and elicit the thunk, thunk,
thunk, thunk of the driver — black, white, male, or female — hammering down the
door locks. On less traveled streets after dark, I grew accustomed to but never com­
fortable with people who crossed to the other side of the street rather than pass me.
Then there were the standard unpleasantries with police, doormen, bouncers, cab­
drivers, and others whose business is to screen out troublesome individuals before
there is any nastiness.
I moved to New York nearly two years ago and I have remained an avid night
walker. In central Manhattan, the near­constant crowd cover minimizes tense one­
on­one street encounters. Elsewhere — visiting friends in Soho, where sidewalks
are narrow and tightly spaced buildings shut out the sky — things can get very taut
indeed.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 542

6/18/12 3:12 PM

STaPleS • JUST walk on bY

543

Black men have a firm place in New York mugging literature. Norman Podhoretz
in his famed (or infamous) 1963 essay, “My Negro Problem — And Ours,” recalls
growing up in terror of black males; they “were tougher than we were, more ruth­
less,” he writes — and as an adult on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, he con­
tinues, he cannot constrain his nervousness when he meets black men on certain
streets. Similarly, a decade later, the essayist and novelist Edward Hoagland extols
a New York where once “Negro bitterness bore down mainly on other Negroes.”
Where some see mere panhandlers, Hoagland sees “a mugger who is clearly screw­
ing up his nerve to do more than just ask for money.” But Hoagland has “the New
Yorker’s quick­hunch posture for broken­field maneuvering,” and the bad guy
swerves away.
I often witness that “hunch posture,” from women after dark on the warren­
like streets of Brooklyn where I live. They seem to set their faces on neutral and, with
their purse straps strung across their chests bandolier style, they forge ahead as
though bracing themselves against being tackled. I understand, of course, that the
danger they perceive is not a hallucination. Women are particularly vulnerable to
street violence, and young black males are drastically overrepresented among the
perpetrators of that violence. Yet these truths are no solace against the kind of
alienation that comes of being ever the suspect, against being set apart, a fearsome
entity with whom pedestrians avoid making eye contact.
It is not altogether clear to me how I reached the ripe old age of twenty­two
without being conscious of the lethality nighttime pedestrians attributed to me.
Perhaps it was because in Chester, Pennsylvania, the small, angry industrial town
where I came of age in the 1960s, I was scarcely noticeable against a backdrop of
gang warfare, street knifings, and murders. I grew up one of the good boys, had
perhaps a half­dozen fistfights. In retrospect, my shyness of combat has clear
sources.
Many things go into the making of a young thug. One of those things is the
consummation of the male romance with the power to intimidate. An infant dis­
covers that random flailings send the baby bottle flying out of the crib and crash­
ing to the floor. Delighted, the joyful babe repeats those motions again and again,
seeking to duplicate the feat. Just so, I recall the points at which some of my boy­
hood friends were finally seduced by the perception of themselves as tough guys.
When a mark cowered and surrendered his money without resistance, myth and
reality merged — and paid off. It is, after all, only manly to embrace the power to
frighten and intimidate. We, as men, are not supposed to give an inch of our lane
on the highway; we are to seize the fighter’s edge in work and in play and even in
love; we are to be valiant in the face of hostile forces.
Unfortunately, poor and powerless young men seem to take all this nonsense
literally. As a boy, I saw countless tough guys locked away; I have since buried sev­
eral, too. They were babies, really — a teenage cousin, a brother of twenty­two, a
childhood friend in his midtwenties — all gone down in episodes of bravado played
out in the streets. I came to doubt the virtues of intimidation early on. I chose, per­
haps even unconsciously, to remain a shadow — timid, but a survivor.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 543

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

544

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

The fearsomeness mistakenly attributed to me in public places often has a per­
ilous flavor. The most frightening of these confusions occurred in the late 1970s
and early 1980s when I worked as a journalist in Chicago. One day, rushing into the
office of a magazine I was writing for with a deadline story in hand, I was mis­
taken for a burglar. The office manager called security and, with an ad hoc posse,
pursued me through the labyrinthine halls, nearly to my editor’s door. I had no
way of proving who I was. I could only move briskly toward the company of some­
one who knew me.
Another time I was on assignment for a local paper and killing time before an
interview. I entered a jewelry store on the city’s affluent Near North Side. The
proprietor excused herself and returned with an enormous red Doberman pin­
scher straining at the end of a leash. She stood, the dog extended toward me,
silent to my questions, her eyes bulging nearly out of her head. I took a cursory
look around, nodded, and bade her good night. Relatively speaking, however, I
never fared as badly as another black male journalist. He went to nearby Wauke­
gan, Illinois, a couple of summers ago to work on a story about a murderer who
was born there. Mistaking the reporter for the killer, police hauled him from his
car at gunpoint and but for his press credentials would probably have tried to
book him. Such episodes are not uncommon. Black men trade tales like this all
the time.
In “My Negro Problem — And Ours,” Podhoretz writes that the hatred he
feels for blacks makes itself known to him through a variety of avenues — one
being his discomfort with that “special brand of paranoid touchiness” to which
he says blacks are prone. No doubt he is speaking here of black men. In time, I
learned to smother the rage I felt at so often being taken for a criminal. Not to do
so would surely have led to madness — via that special “paranoid touchiness” that
so annoyed Podhoretz at the time he wrote the essay.
I began to take precautions to make myself less threatening. I move about
with care, particularly late in the evening. I give a wide berth to nervous people on
subway platforms during the wee hours, particularly when I have exchanged busi­
ness clothes for jeans. If I happen to be entering a building behind some people
who appear skittish, I may walk by, letting them clear the lobby before I return, so
as not to seem to be following them. I have been calm and extremely congenial on
those rare occasions when I’ve been pulled over by the police.
And on late­evening constitutionals along streets less traveled by, I employ
what has proved to be an excellent tension­reducing measure: I whistle melodies
from Beethoven and Vivaldi and the more popular classical composers. Even
steely New Yorkers hunching toward nighttime destinations seem to relax, and
occasionally they even join in the tune. Virtually everybody seems to sense that a
mugger wouldn’t be warbling bright, sunny selections from Vivaldi’s Four Seasons.
It is my equivalent of the cowbell that hikers wear when they know they are in
bear country.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 544

10

6/18/12 3:12 PM

STaPleS • JUST walk on bY

545

Exploring the Text
1. What is the impact of the opening sentence, “My first victim was a woman . . .”?
How is Brent Staples using the term “victim”? How does the meaning of the sen­
tence and the term change as you read and reread the essay?
2. In what ways does the description at the beginning resemble a scene from a novel?
What mood does Staples set with the details and specific words he chooses? Pay
close attention to modifiers and verbs.
3. Staples opens paragraph 2 with the short, simple sentence “That was more than a
decade ago,” an objective statement that indicates the passage of time. Does this
sentence jolt you as a reader? Disappoint you? Explain why you think it is or is
not an effective follow­up to the opening paragraph.
4. What examples does Staples provide to illustrate “the language of fear” (para. 3)?
5. In what ways does Staples acknowledge that the “victim’s” response is not unwar­
ranted? What explanations does he provide for her behavior? To what extent does
he blame her? Does he want us as readers to blame or be more sympathetic
toward her?
6. What is his purpose in quoting Norman Podhoretz and Edward Hoagland? Are
they providing support for his viewpoint, a contrasting viewpoint, expert testi­
mony, or something else?
7. Is Staples being ironic when he writes, “I began to take precautions to make myself
less threatening” (para. 13)? Cite specific parts of the text to support your view­
point.
8. Is the final paragraph intended to be flippant? Humorous? Explain whether you
find it an effective conclusion to the essay.
9. How would you describe the overall tone of this essay? You might consider a
phrase rather than a single word to capture the complexity of this piece. Support
your reading with specific references to Staples’s language.
10. In 1994, Staples incorporated this essay into his memoir, Parallel Time, but he
revised it substantially. Below, you will find the first two paragraphs from that
revised version. Compare those paragraphs with the originals. Why do you think
Staples made the changes he did? In your opinion, did they improve the essay?
At night, I walked to the lakefront whenever the weather permitted. I was headed
home from the lake when I took my first victim. It was late fall, and the wind was
cutting. I was wearing my navy pea jacket, the collar turned up, my hands snug in
the pockets. Dead leaves scuttled in shoals along the streets. I turned out of Black­
stone Avenue and headed west on 57th Street, and there she was, a few yards ahead
of me, dressed in business clothes and carrying a briefcase. She looked back at me
once, then again, and picked up her pace. She looked back again and started to run.
I stopped where I was and looked up at the surrounding windows. What did this
look like to people peeking out through their blinds? I was out walking. But what
if someone had thought they’d seen something they hadn’t and called the police. I

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 545

6/18/12 3:12 PM

546

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

held back the urge to run. Instead, I walked south to The Midway, plunged into its
darkness, and remained on The Midway until I reached the foot of my street.
I’d been a fool. I’d been walking the streets grinning good evening at people
who were frightened to death of me. I did violence to them by just being. How had
I missed this? I kept walking at night, but from then on I paid attention.

11. Staples first wrote this essay in 1986. Do you think the essay is dated? Explain why
you do or do not feel that many people in today’s society continue to perceive young
African American males as threatening.

The Myth of the Latin Woman
I Just Met a Girl Named María

Judith Ortiz Cofer
Poet, novelist, and essayist Judith ortiz Cofer was born in Puerto rico in 1952 and
grew up in new Jersey. She is currently the regents’ and franklin Professor of english
and Creative writing at the University of Georgia. among her many publications
are the young adult novel If I Could Fly (2011), the novel The Meaning of Consuelo
(2004), her memoirs Silent Dancing: A Partial Remembrance of a Puerto Rican Childhood (1990) and Woman in Front of the Sun: Becoming a Writer (2000), and her
collection of prose and poetry, The Latin Deli (1993). She has won many awards,
including the anisfield­wolf award in race relations and the americas award for
Children’s and Young adult literature; she was nominated for the Pulitzer Prize in
1989. in the following selection, originally published in Glamour in 1992, Cofer
examines the impact of stereotyping.

O

n a bus trip to London from Oxford University where I was earning some
graduate credits one summer, a young man, obviously fresh from a pub,
spotted me and as if struck by inspiration went down on his knees in the aisle.
With both hands over his heart he broke into an Irish tenor’s rendition of “María”
from West Side Story.1 My politely amused fellow passengers gave his lovely voice
the round of gentle applause it deserved. Though I was not quite as amused, I
managed my version of an English smile: no show of teeth, no extreme contor­
tions of the facial muscles — I was at this time of my life practicing reserve and
cool. Oh, that British control, how I coveted it. But María had followed me to
1West Side Story was a Broadway musical (1957) and then a feature film (1961). Based on Romeo

and Juliet, the story deals with the conflicts between two New York City gangs — a Puerto Rican
gang and a white ethnic gang. The Puerto Rican actress Rita Moreno, mentioned later in this
paragraph, had a major role in the movie. — Eds.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 546

6/18/12 3:12 PM

Cofer • THe mYTH of THe laTin woman

547

London, reminding me of a prime fact of my life; you can leave the Island, master
the English language, and travel as far as you can, but if you are a Latina, espe­
cially one like me who so obviously belongs to Rita Moreno’s gene pool, the Island
travels with you.
This is sometimes a very good thing — it may win you that extra minute of
someone’s attention. But with some people, the same things can make you an
island — not so much a tropical paradise as an Alcatraz, a place nobody wants to
visit. As a Puerto Rican girl growing up in the United States and wanting like
most children to “belong,” I resented the stereotype that my Hispanic appearance
called forth from many people I met.
Our family lived in a large urban center in New Jersey during the sixties, where
life was designed as a microcosm of my parents’ casas on the island. We spoke in
Spanish, we ate Puerto Rican food bought at the bodega, and we practiced strict
Catholicism complete with Saturday confession and Sunday mass at a church where
our parents were accommodated into a one­hour Spanish mass slot, performed
by a Chinese priest trained as a missionary for Latin America.
As a girl I was kept under strict surveillance, since virtue and modesty were,
by cultural equation, the same as family honor. As a teenager I was instructed on
how to behave as a proper señorita. But it was a conflicting message girls got, since
the Puerto Rican mothers also encouraged their daughters to look and act like
women and to dress in clothes our Anglo friends and their mothers found too
“mature” for our age. It was, and is, cultural, yet I often felt humiliated when I
appeared at an American friend’s party wearing a dress more suitable to a semi­
formal than to a playroom birthday celebration. At Puerto Rican festivities, neither
the music nor the colors we wore could be too loud. I still experience a vague sense
of letdown when I’m invited to a “party” and it turns out to be a marathon con­
versation in hushed tones rather than a fiesta with salsa, laughter, and dancing —
the kind of celebration I remember from my childhood.
I remember Career Day in our high school, when teachers told us to come
dressed as if for a job interview. It quickly became obvious that to the barrio girls,
“dressing up” sometimes meant wearing ornate jewelry and clothing that would
be more appropriate (by mainstream standards) for the company Christmas party
than as daily office attire. That morning I had agonized in front of my closet, try­
ing to figure out what a “career girl” would wear because, essentially, except for
Marlo Thomas on TV, I had no models on which to base my decision. I knew how
to dress for school: at the Catholic school I attended we all wore uniforms; I knew
how to dress for Sunday mass, and I knew what dresses to wear for parties at my
relatives’ homes. Though I do not recall the precise details of my Career Day outfit,
it must have been a composite of the above choices. But I remember a comment
my friend (an Italian­American) made in later years that coalesced my impres­
sions of that day. She said that at the business school she was attending the Puerto
Rican girls always stood out for wearing “everything at once.” She meant, of course,
too much jewelry, too many accessories. On that day at school, we were simply

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 547

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

548

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

made the negative models by the nuns who were themselves not credible fashion
experts to any of us. But it was painfully obvious to me that to the others, in their
tailored skirts and silk blouses, we must have seemed “hopeless” and “vulgar.”
Though I now know that most adolescents feel out of step much of the time, I also
know that for the Puerto Rican girls of my generation that sense was intensified.
The way our teachers and classmates looked at us that day in school was just a taste
of the culture clash that awaited us in the real world, where prospective employers
and men on the street would often misinterpret our tight skirts and jingling brace­
lets as a come­on.
Mixed cultural signals have perpetuated certain stereotypes — for example,
that of the Hispanic woman as the “Hot Tamale” or sexual firebrand. It is a one­
dimensional view that the media have found easy to promote. In their special
vocabulary, advertisers have designated “sizzling” and “smoldering” as the adjectives
of choice for describing not only the foods but also the women of Latin America.
From conversations in my house I recall hearing about the harassment that Puerto
Rican women endured in factories where the “boss men” talked to them as if
sexual innuendo was all they understood and, worse, often gave them the choice
of submitting to advances or being fired.
It is custom, however, not chromosomes, that leads us to choose scarlet over
pale pink. As young girls, we were influenced in our decisions about clothes and
colors by the women — older sisters and mothers who had grown up on a tropical
island where the natural environment was a riot of primary colors, where show­
ing your skin was one way to keep cool as well as to look sexy. Most important of
all, on the island, women perhaps felt freer to dress and move more provocatively,
since, in most cases, they were protected by the traditions, mores, and laws of a
Spanish/Catholic system of morality and machismo whose main rule was: You may
look at my sister, but if you touch her I will kill you. The extended family and church
structure could provide a young woman with a circle of safety in her small pueblo
on the island; if a man “wronged” a girl, everyone would close in to save her family
honor.
This is what I have gleaned from my discussions as an adult with older Puerto
Rican women. They have told me about dressing in their best party clothes on
Saturday nights and going to the town’s plaza to promenade with their girlfriends
in front of the boys they liked. The males were thus given an opportunity to admire
the women and to express their admiration in the form of piropos: erotically charged
street poems they composed on the spot. I have been subjected to a few piropos
while visiting the Island, and they can be outrageous, although custom dictates that
they must never cross into obscenity. This ritual, as I understand it, also entails a
show of studied indifference on the woman’s part; if she is “decent,” she must not
acknowledge the man’s impassioned words. So I do understand how things can
be lost in translation. When a Puerto Rican girl dressed in her idea of what is attrac­
tive meets a man from the mainstream culture who has been trained to react to
certain types of clothing as a sexual signal, a clash is likely to take place. The line

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 548

6/18/12 3:12 PM

Cofer • THe mYTH of THe laTin woman

549

I first heard based on this aspect of the myth happened when the boy who took
me to my first formal dance leaned over to plant a sloppy overeager kiss painfully on
my mouth, and when I didn’t respond with sufficient passion said in a resentful
tone: “I thought you Latin girls were supposed to mature early” — my first instance
of being thought of as a fruit or vegetable — I was supposed to ripen, not just
grow into womanhood like other girls.
It is surprising to some of my professional friends that some people, includ­
ing those who should know better, still put others “in their place.” Though rarer,
these incidents are still commonplace in my life. It happened to me most recently
during a stay at a very classy metropolitan hotel favored by young professional
couples for their weddings. Late one evening after the theater, as I walked toward
my room with my new colleague (a woman with whom I was coordinating an arts
program), a middle­aged man in a tuxedo, a young girl in satin and lace on his
arm, stepped directly into our path. With his champagne glass extended toward
me, he exclaimed, “Evita!”
Our way blocked, my companion and I listened as the man half­recited, half­
bellowed “Don’t Cry for Me, Argentina.” When he finished, the young girl said:
“How about a round of applause for my daddy?” We complied, hoping this would
bring the silly spectacle to a close. I was becoming aware that our little group was
attracting the attention of the other guests. “Daddy” must have perceived this too,
and he once more barred the way as we tried to walk past him. He began to shout­
sing a ditty to the tune of “La Bamba” — except the lyrics were about a girl named
María whose exploits all rhymed with her name and gonorrhea. The girl kept say­
ing “Oh, Daddy” and looking at me with pleading eyes. She wanted me to laugh
along with the others. My companion and I stood silently waiting for the man to
end his offensive song. When he finished, I looked not at him but at his daughter.
I advised her calmly never to ask her father what he had done in the army. Then
I walked between them and to my room. My friend complimented me on my cool
handling of the situation. I confessed to her that I really had wanted to push the jerk
into the swimming pool. I knew that this same man — probably a corporate execu­
tive, well educated, even worldly by most standards — would not have been likely to
regale a white woman with a dirty song in public. He would perhaps have checked
his impulse by assuming that she could be somebody’s wife or mother, or at least
somebody who might take offense. But to him, I was just an Evita or a María: merely
a character in his cartoon­populated universe.
Because of my education and my proficiency with the English language, I have
acquired many mechanisms for dealing with the anger I experience. This was not
true for my parents, nor is it true for the many Latin women working at menial jobs
who must put up with stereotypes about our ethnic group such as: “They make
good domestics.” This is another facet of the myth of the Latin woman in the United
States. Its origin is simple to deduce. Work as domestics, waitressing, and factory
jobs are all that’s available to women with little English and few skills. The myth
of the Hispanic menial has been sustained by the same media phenomenon that

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 549

10

6/18/12 3:12 PM

550

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

made “Mammy” from Gone with the Wind America’s idea of the black woman for
generations: María, the housemaid or counter girl, is now indelibly etched into the
national psyche. The big and the little screens have presented us with the picture
of the funny Hispanic maid, mispronouncing words and cooking up a spicy storm
in a shiny California kitchen.
This media­engendered image of the Latina in the United States has been
documented by feminist Hispanic scholars, who claim that such portrayals are
partially responsible for the denial of opportunities for upward mobility among
Latinas in the professions. I have a Chicana friend working on a Ph.D. in philoso­
phy at a major university. She says her doctor still shakes his head in puzzled amaze­
ment at all the “big words” she uses. Since I do not wear my diplomas around my
neck for all to see, I too have on occasion been sent to that “kitchen,” where some
think I obviously belong.
One such incident that has stayed with me, though I recognize it as a minor
offense, happened on the day of my first public poetry reading. It took place in
Miami in a boat­restaurant where we were having lunch before the event. I was ner­
vous and excited as I walked in with my notebook in my hand. An older woman
motioned me to her table. Thinking (foolish me) that she wanted me to auto­
graph a copy of my brand­new slender volume of verse, I went over. She ordered a
cup of coffee from me, assuming that I was the waitress. Easy enough to mistake my
poems for menus, I suppose. I know that it wasn’t an intentional act of cruelty, yet
of all the good things that happened that day, I remember that scene most clearly,
because it reminded me of what I had to overcome before anyone would take me
seriously. In retrospect I understand that my anger gave my reading fire, that I
have almost always taken doubts in my abilities as a challenge — and that the result
is, most times, a feeling of satisfaction at having won a convert when I see the cold,
appraising eyes warm to my words, the body language change, the smile that indi­
cates that I have opened some avenue for communication. That day I read to that
woman and her lowered eyes told me that she was embarrassed at her little faux
pas, and when I willed her to look up at me, it was my victory, and she graciously
allowed me to punish her with my full attention. We shook hands at the end of
the reading, and I never saw her again. She has probably forgotten the whole thing
but maybe not.
Yet I am one of the lucky ones. My parents made it possible for me to acquire
a stronger footing in the mainstream culture by giving me the chance at an educa­
tion. And books and art have saved me from the harsher forms of ethnic and racial
prejudice that many of my Hispanic compañeras have had to endure. I travel a lot
around the United States, reading from my books of poetry and my novel, and
the reception I most often receive is one of positive interest by people who want to
know more about my culture. There are, however, thousands of Latinas without
the privilege of an education or the entrée into society that I have. For them life
is a struggle against the misconceptions perpetuated by the myth of the Latina as
whore, domestic, or criminal. We cannot change this by legislating the way people

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 550

6/18/12 3:12 PM

Cofer • THe mYTH of THe laTin woman

551

look at us. The transformation, as I see it, has to occur at a much more individual
level. My personal goal in my public life is to try to replace the old pervasive ste­
reotypes and myths about Latinas with a much more interesting set of realities.
Every time I give a reading, I hope the stories I tell, the dreams and fears I examine
in my work, can achieve some universal truth which will get my audience past the
particulars of my skin color, my accent, or my clothes.
I once wrote a poem in which I called us Latinas “God’s brown daughters.”
This poem is really a prayer of sorts, offered upward, but also, through the human­
to­human channel of art, outward. It is a prayer for communication, and for respect.
In it, Latin women pray “in Spanish to an Anglo God / With a Jewish heritage,”
and they are “fervently hoping / that if not omnipotent / at least He be bilingual.”

15

Exploring the Text
1. What is the effect of Judith Ortiz Cofer’s opening paragraph? Does her anger draw
you in or distance you?
2. Note the times when Cofer explains rather than denies the basis for stereotyping.
For instance, rather than deny that Latinas prefer vivid colors, she explains that
this preference reflects the bright landscape of their homelands. Does this strategy
work, or do you think Cofer is playing to the stereotype?
3. Note the sections of the essay that refer to personal experience. Does Cofer’s use of
personal experience weaken her argument or make it more effective? Explain. Would
the essay be more effective with less — or more — personal experience? Explain
your view.
4. What do Cofer’s experiences on the bus, in the hotel, and at the poetry reading
have in common? Could she have omitted any of them from her essay? Do you find
her behavior toward the man in the “very classy metropolitan hotel” (para. 9)
unnecessarily cruel? Explain.
5. How does Cofer broaden the argument from her personal experience to larger
concerns, including other stereotypes (or stereotypes of other communities)?
6. Cofer ends by quoting one of her own poems. Is this effective? Why or why not?
7. Who do you think is Cofer’s audience for this essay? Does it include the woman at
the poetry reading who asks Cofer for a cup of coffee?
8. According to Cofer, “Mixed cultural signals have perpetuated certain stereotypes —
for example, that of the Hispanic woman as the ‘Hot Tamale’ or sexual firebrand.
It is a one­dimensional view that the media have found easy to promote. In their
special vocabulary, advertisers have designated ‘sizzling’ and ‘smoldering’ as the
adjectives of choice for describing not only the foods but also the women of Latin
America” (para. 6). Does this assertion — that the media promotes stereotypes —
apply today? In answering, consider Cofer’s example of Latin American women, or
choose another group, such as African Americans, older people, or people from
the Middle East.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 551

6/18/12 3:12 PM

552

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

There Is No Unmarked Woman
Deborah Tannen
a linguist by training, Deborah Tannen (b. 1945) is the best­selling author of more than
fifteen books, including You Just Don’t Understand: Women and Men in Conversation (1990), in which she argues that “communication between men and women
can be like cross­cultural communication, prey to a clash of conversational styles.”
Her most recent book is You Were Always Mom’s Favorite!: Sisters in Conversation
throughout Their Lives (2009). winner of numerous fellowships and awards, Dr.
Tannen is a professor of linguistics at Georgetown University. The following essay
is part of a longer piece Tannen wrote for the New York Times, “wears Jump Suit.
Sensible Shoes. Uses Husband’s last name.” She contrasts the impact that appear­
ance, especially clothing, has on perceptions of men and women.

S

ome years ago I was at a small working conference of four women and
eight men. Instead of concentrating on the discussion I found myself look­
ing at the three other women at the table, thinking how each had a different style
and how each style was coherent.
One woman had dark brown hair in a classic style, a cross between Cleopatra
and Plain Jane. The severity of her straight hair was softened by wavy bangs and
ends that turned under. Because she was beautiful, the effect was more Cleopatra
than plain.
The second woman was older, full of dignity and composure. Her hair was cut
in a fashionable style that left her with only one eye, thanks to a side part that let
a curtain of hair fall across half her face. As she looked down to read her prepared
paper, the hair robbed her of bifocal vision and created a barrier between her and
the listeners.
The third woman’s hair was wild, a frosted blond avalanche falling over and
beyond her shoulders. When she spoke she frequently tossed her head, calling
attention to her hair and away from her lecture.
Then there was makeup. The first woman wore facial cover that made her skin
smooth and pale, a black line under each eye and mascara that darkened already
dark lashes. The second wore only a light gloss on her lips and a hint of shadow
on her eyes. The third had blue bands under her eyes, dark blue shadow, mascara,
bright red lipstick, and rouge; her fingernails flashed red.
I considered the clothes each woman had worn during the three days of the
conference: In the first case, man­tailored suits in primary colors with solid­color
blouses. In the second, casual but stylish black T­shirts, a floppy collarless jacket and
baggy slacks or a skirt in neutral colors. The third wore a sexy jumpsuit; tight sleeve­
less jersey and tight yellow slacks; a dress with gaping armholes and an indulged
tendency to fall off one shoulder.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 552

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

Tannen • THere iS no UnmarkeD woman

553

Shoes? No. 1 wore string sandals with medium heels; No. 2, sensible, com­
fortable walking shoes; No. 3, pumps with spike heels. You can fill in the jewelry,
scarves, shawls, sweaters — or lack of them.
As I amused myself finding coherence in these styles, I suddenly wondered
why I was scrutinizing only the women. I scanned the eight men at the table. And
then I knew why I wasn’t studying them. The men’s styles were unmarked.
The term “marked” is a staple of linguistic theory. It refers to the way language alters
the base meaning of a word by adding a linguistic particle that has no meaning on
its own. The unmarked form of a word carries the meaning that goes without
saying — what you think of when you’re not thinking anything special.
The unmarked tense of verbs in English is the present — for example, visit.
To indicate past, you mark the verb by adding ed to yield visited. For future, you
add a word: will visit. Nouns are presumed to be singular until marked for plural,
typically by adding s or es, so visit becomes visits and dish becomes dishes.
The unmarked forms of most English words also convey “male.” Being male
is the unmarked case. Endings like ess and ette mark words as “female.” Unfortu­
nately, they also tend to mark them for frivolousness. Would you feel safe entrust­
ing your life to a doctorette? Alfre Woodard, who was an Oscar nominee for best
supporting actress, says she identifies herself as an actor because “actresses worry
about eyelashes and cellulite, and women who are actors worry about the charac­
ters we are playing.” Gender markers pick up extra meanings that reflect common
associations with the female gender: not quite serious, often sexual.
Each of the women at the conference had to make decisions about hair, cloth­
ing, makeup, and accessories, and each decision carried meaning. Every style
available to us was marked. The men in our group had made decisions, too, but the
range from which they chose was incomparably narrower. Men can choose styles
that are marked, but they don’t have to, and in this group none did. Unlike the
women, they had the option of being unmarked.
Take the men’s hair styles. There was no marine crew cut or oily longish hair
falling into eyes, no asymmetrical, two­tiered construction to swirl over a bald top.
One man was unabashedly bald; the others had hair of standard length, parted on
one side, in natural shades of brown or gray or graying. Their hair obstructed no
views, left little to toss or push back or run fingers through and, consequently,
needed and attracted no attention. A few men had beards. In a business setting,
beards might be marked. In this academic gathering, they weren’t.
There could have been a cowboy shirt with string tie or a three­piece suit or a
necklaced hippie in jeans. But there wasn’t. All eight men wore brown or blue slacks
and nondescript shirts of light colors. No man wore sandals or boots; their shoes
were dark, closed, comfortable, and flat. In short, unmarked.
Although no man wore makeup, you couldn’t say the men didn’t wear makeup
in the sense that you could say a woman didn’t wear makeup. For men, no makeup
is unmarked.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 553

10

15

6/18/12 3:12 PM

554

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

I asked myself what style we women could have adopted that would have
been unmarked, like the men’s. The answer was none. There is no unmarked
woman.
There is no woman’s hairstyle that can be called standard, that says nothing
about her. The range of women’s hairstyles is staggering, but a woman whose hair
has no particular style is perceived as not caring about how she looks, which can
disqualify her from many positions, and will subtly diminish her as a person in
the eyes of some.
Women must choose between attractive shoes and comfortable shoes. When
our group made an unexpected trek, the woman who wore flat, laced shoes arrived
first. Last to arrive was the woman in spike heels, shoes in hand and a handful of
men around her.
If a woman’s clothing is tight or revealing (in other words, sexy), it sends
a message — an intended one of wanting to be attractive, but also a possibly
unintended one of availability. If her clothes are not sexy, that too sends a mes­
sage, lent meaning by the knowledge that they could have been. There are thou­
sands of cosmetic products from which women can choose and myriad ways of
applying them. Yet no makeup at all is anything but unmarked. Some men see it as
a hostile refusal to please them.
Women can’t even fill out a form without telling stories about themselves.
Most forms give four titles to choose from. “Mr.” carries no meaning other than
that the respondent is male. But a woman who checks “Mrs.” or “Miss” communi­
cates not only whether she has been married but also whether she has conserva­
tive tastes in forms of address — and probably other conservative values as well.
Checking “Ms.” declines to let on about marriage (checking “Mr.” declines nothing
since nothing was asked), but it also marks her as either liberated or rebellious,
depending on the observer’s attitudes and assumptions.
I sometimes try to duck these variously marked choices by giving my title as
“Dr.” — and in so doing risk marking myself as either uppity (hence sarcastic
responses like “Excuse me!”) or an overachiever (hence reactions of congratulatory
surprise like “Good for you!”).
All married women’s surnames are marked. If a woman takes her husband’s
name, she announces to the world that she is married and has traditional values.
To some it will indicate that she is less herself, more identified by her husband’s
identity. If she does not take her husband’s name, this too is marked, seen as worthy
of comment: She has done something; she has “kept her own name.” A man is never
said to have “kept his own name” because it never occurs to anyone that he might
have given it up. For him using his own name is unmarked.
A married woman who wants to have her cake and eat it too may use her sur­
name plus his, with or without a hyphen. But this too announces her marital sta­
tus and often results in a tongue­tying string. In a list (Harvey O’Donovan, Jonathan
Feldman, Stephanie Woodbury McGillicutty), the woman’s multiple name stands
out. It is marked.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 554

20

6/18/12 3:12 PM

Tannen • THere iS no UnmarkeD woman

555

I have never been inclined toward biological explanations of gender differences
in language, but I was intrigued to see Ralph Fasold bring biological phenomena
to bear on the question of linguistic marking in his book The Sociolinguistics of
Language. Fasold stresses that language and culture are particularly unfair in treat­
ing women as the marked case because biologically it is the male that is marked.
While two X chromosomes make a female, two Y chromosomes make nothing.
Like the lingustic markers s, es, or ess, the Y chromosome doesn’t “mean” anything
unless it is attached to a root form — an X chromosome.
Developing this idea elsewhere Fasold points out that girls are born with fully
female bodies, while boys are born with modified female bodies. He invites men
who doubt this to lift up their shirts and contemplate why they have nipples.
In his book, Fasold notes “a wide range of facts which demonstrates that
female is the unmarked sex.” For example, he observes that there are a few species
that produce only females, like the whiptail lizard. Thanks to parthenogenesis,1 they
have no trouble having as many daughters as they like. There are no species, how­
ever, that produce only males. This is no surprise, since any such species would
become extinct in its first generation.
Fasold is also intrigued by species that produce individuals not involved in
reproduction, like honeybees and leaf­cutter ants. Reproduction is handled by the
queen and a relatively few males; the workers are sterile females. “Since they do not
reproduce,” Fasold said, “there is no reason for them to be one sex or the other, so
they default, so to speak, to female.”
Fasold ends his discussion of these matters by pointing out that if language
reflected biology, grammar books would direct us to use “she” to include males and
females and “he” only for specifically male referents. But they don’t. They tell us
that “he” means “he or she,” and that “she” is used only if the referent is specifi­
cally female. This use of “he” as the sex­indefinite pronoun is an innovation intro­
duced into English by grammarians in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries,
according to Peter Mühlhäusler and Rom Harré in Pronouns and People. From at
least about 1500, the correct sex­indefinite pronoun was “they,” as it still is in casual
spoken English. In other words, the female was declared by grammarians to be the
marked case.
Writing this article may mark me not as a writer, not as a linguist, not as an
analyst of human behavior, but as a feminist — which will have positive or nega­
tive, but in any case powerful, connotations for readers. Yet I doubt that anyone
reading Ralph Fasold’s book would put that label on him.
I discovered the markedness inherent in the very topic of gender after writing a
book on differences in conversational style based on geographical region, ethnicity,
class, age, and gender. When I was interviewed, the vast majority of journalists wanted
to talk about the differences between women and men. While I thought I was simply

25

30

1Asexual reproduction in females that does not require fertilization by males. — Eds.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 555

6/18/12 3:12 PM

556

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

describing what I observed — something I had learned to do as a researcher —
merely mentioning women and men marked me as a feminist for some.
When I wrote a book devoted to gender differences in ways of speaking, I sent
the manuscript to five male colleagues, asking them to alert me to any interpreta­
tion, phrasing, or wording that might seem unfairly negative toward men. Even so,
when the book came out, I encountered responses like that of the television talk
show host who, after interviewing me, turned to the audience and asked if they
thought I was male­bashing.
Leaping upon a poor fellow who affably nodded in agreement, she made him
stand and asked, “Did what she say accurately describe you?” “Oh, yes,” he answered.
“That’s me exactly.” “And what she said about women — does that sound like your
wife?” “Oh yes,” he responded. “That’s her exactly.” “Then why do you think she’s
male­bashing?” He answered, with disarming honesty, “Because she’s a woman and
she’s saying things about men.”
To say anything about women and men without marking oneself as either
feminist or anti­feminist, male­basher or apologist for men seems as impossible
for a woman as trying to get dressed in the morning without inviting interpreta­
tions of her character.
Sitting at the conference table musing on these matters, I felt sad to think that
we women didn’t have the freedom to be unmarked that the men sitting next to
us had. Some days you just want to get dressed and go about your business. But if
you’re a woman, you can’t, because there is no unmarked woman.

Exploring the Text
1. What is the effect of opening the essay with elaborate descriptions of the women’s
appearance?
2. Do Deborah Tannen’s references to her personal experiences strengthen or weaken
the argument about marked versus unmarked people? Explain.
3. What is the effect of Tannen’s turning to “biological explanations of gender differ­
ences in language” (para. 24)? Does this discussion support or challenge her thesis
about marked women?
4. In paragraph 32, what is the impact of Tannen’s presenting the television anecdote
as a conversation rather than a straight narrative?
5. Identify examples of subjective description, technical explanation, personal opinion,
and argumentative conclusions in the essay. How effective is Tannen in embedding
a technical analysis into a social commentary? Discuss.
6. Tannen uses the framing, or envelope, technique — opening and closing an essay
with the same reference, quotation, or anecdote. What effect does this have?
7. Tannen wrote this essay in 1993. Is it outdated, or is it even more relevant today?
Consider her thesis in light of other cultures or ethnicities or time periods. In a
country where women’s choices in dress are restricted by social mores, for example,
is Tannen’s claim applicable?

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 556

6/18/12 3:12 PM

meHl • are women reallY more TalkaTiVe THan men?

557

8. In the last paragraph, Tannen argues that women should have the “freedom to be
unmarked.” What does she mean by this? Do you think an unmarked woman is
possible in our culture today?

Are Women Really More
Talkative Than Men?
Matthias R. Mehl et al.
The principal researcher, matthias r. mehl, is an assistant professor of psychology at
the University of arizona. He earned an ma in psychology from friedrich­alexander
University in Germany and a PhD in social and personality psychology from the Uni­
versity of Texas at austin. in 2008, the Society for Personality and Social Psychology
named him one of the ten most cited assistant professors in the field. He describes his
research interests as “naturalistic person­environment interactions . . . how psycho­
logical responses to upheaval change over time, and how social interactions facili­
tate coping.” others on the research team for this article were Simine Vazire, nairan
ramirez­esparza, richard Slatcher, and James Pennebaker. This article appeared in
Science magazine in 2007.

S

ex differences in conversational behavior have long been a topic of public
and scientific interest (1, 2). The stereotype of female talkativeness is
deeply engrained in Western folklore and often considered a scientific fact. In the
first printing of her book, neuropsychiatrist Brizendine reported, “A woman uses
about 20,000 words per day while a man uses about 7,000” (3). These numbers have
since circulated throughout television, radio, and print media (e.g., CBS, CNN,
National Public Radio, Newsweek, the New York Times, and the Washington Post).
Indeed, the 20,000­versus­7000 word estimates appear to have achieved the status
of a cultural myth in that comparable differences have been cited in the media for
the past 15 years (4).
In reality, no study has systematically recorded the natural conversations of
large groups of people for extended periods of time. Consequently, there have not
been the necessary data for reliably estimating differences in daily word usage among
women and men (5). Extrapolating from a reanalysis of tape­recorded daily con­
versations from 153 participants from the British National Corpus (6), Liberman
recently estimated that women speak 8805 words and men 6073 words per day.
However, he acknowledged that these estimates may be problematic because no
information was available regarding when participants decided to turn off their
manual tape recorders (4).
Over the past 8 years, we have developed a method for recording natural lan­
guage using the electronically activated recorder (EAR) (7). The EAR is a digital

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 557

6/18/12 3:12 PM

558

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

voice recorder that unobtrusively tracks people’s real­world moment­to­moment
interactions. It operates by periodically recording snippets of ambient sounds,
including conversations, while participants go about their daily lives. Because of the
covert digital recording, it is impossible for participants to control or even to sense
when the EAR is on or off. For the purpose of this study, the EAR can be used to
track naturally spoken words and to estimate how many words women and men
use over the course of a day.
In the default paradigm, participants wear the EAR for several days during
their waking hours. The device is programmed to record for 30 s every 12.5 min. All
captured words spoken by the participant are transcribed. The number of spoken
words per day can then be estimated by extrapolating from a simple word count,
the number of sampled sound files, and the recording time per sound file.
We addressed the question about sex differences in daily word use with data
from six samples based on 396 participants (210 women and 186 men) that were
conducted between 1998 and 2004. Five of the samples were composed of univer­
sity students in the United States, and the sixth, university students in Mexico.
Table 1 provides background information on the samples along with estimates for
the number of words that female and male participants spoke per day (8).
The data suggest that women spoke on average 16,215 (SD = 7301) words and
men 15,669 (SD = 8633) words over an assumed period of, on average, 17 waking
hours. Expressed in a common effect­size metric (Cohen’s d = 0.07), this sex dif­
ference in daily word use (546 words) is equal to only 7% of the standardized
variability among women and men. Further, the difference does not meet con­
ventional thresholds for statistical significance (P = 0.248, one­sided test). Thus,
the data fail to reveal a reliable sex difference in daily word use. Women and
men both use on average about 16,000 words per day, with very large individual
differences around this mean.
A potential limitation of our analysis is that all participants were univer­
sity students. The resulting homogeneity in the samples with regard to socio­
demographic characteristics may have affected our estimates of daily word usage.
However, none of the samples provided support for the idea that women have
substantially larger lexical budgets than men. Further, to the extent that sex dif­
ferences in daily word use are assumed to be biologically based, evolved adapta­
tions (3), they should be detectable among university students as much as in more
diverse samples. We therefore conclude, on the basis of available empirical evi­
dence, that the widespread and highly publicized stereotype about female talk­
ativeness is unfounded.

5

References and Notes
1. R. Lakoff, Language and Woman’s Place (Harper, New York, 1975).
2. L. Litosseliti, Gender and Language: Theory and Practice (Arnold, London, 2006).
3. L. Brizendine, The Female Brain (Morgan Road, New York, 2006).

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 558

6/18/12 3:12 PM

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 559

YEAR

2004

2003

2003

2001

2001

1998

SAmpLE

1

2

3

4

5

6

USA

USA

USA

Mexico

USA

USA

LocATioN

4 days

10 days

2 days

4 days

4 days

7 days

DuRATioN

17–23

18–26

17–22

17–25

17–23

18–29

AgE RANgE
(YEARS)

20

4

49

20

37

56

Weighted average

27

7

47

31

42

56

SAmpLE SizE (N)
WomeN
meN

16,215 (7301)

16,496 (7914)

15,761 (8985)

16,177 (7520)

14,704 (6215)

14,297 (6441)

18,443 (7460)

15,669 (8633)

12,867 (8343)

24,051 (10,211)

16,569 (9108)

15,022 (7864)

14,060 (9065)

16,576 (7871)

ESTimATED AvERAgE NumBER (SD)
oF WoRDS SpokEN pER DAY
WomeN
meN

TABLE 1
Estimated number of words spoken per day for female and male study participants across six samples. N = 396. Year refers to the year when the data
collection started; duration refers to the approximate number of days participants wore the EAR; the weighted average weighs the respective sample
group mean by the sample size of the group.

meHl • are women reallY more TalkaTiVe THan men?

559

6/18/12 3:12 PM

560

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

4. M. Liberman, Sex-Linked Lexical Budgets, http://itre.cis.upenn.edu/~myl/languagelog/
archives/003420.html (first accessed 12 December 2006).
5. D. James, J. Drakich, in Gender and Conversational Interaction, D. Tannen, Ed. (Oxford
Univ. Press, New York, 1993), pp. 281–313.
6. P. Rayson, G. Leech, M. Hodges, Int. J. Corpus Linguist, 2, 133 (1997).
7. M. R. Mehl, J. W. Pennebaker, M. Crow, J. Dabbs, J. Price, Behav. Res. Methods Instrum
Comput, 33, 517 (2001).
8. Details on methods and analysis are available on Science Online.
9. This research was supported by a grant from the National Institute of Mental Health
(MH 52391). We thank V. Dominguez, J. Greenberg, S. Holleran, C. Mehl, M. Peterson,
and T. Schmader for their valuable feedback.

Exploring the Text
1. What is the stereotype that Matthias Mehl and his research team sought to debunk?
Is discussing this stereotype an effective way to open the article? Explain your answer.
2. How does Mehl establish that his research will not merely duplicate previous studies?
What is original about the work he and his colleagues have been doing?
3. What is meant by “the default paradigm” (para. 4)?
4. What information do you gain from Table 1 that is not in the written text? Explain
why you believe that this is or is not an effective way to convey additional information.
5. Mehl and his colleagues are careful to explain their hypothesis, methodology, and
findings, including some limitations of their study. What other questions do you
think they have left unanswered or unexamined? What questions might guide fur­
ther research?
6. Judging from the References and Notes, how would you characterize the type of
research Mehl and his colleagues conducted?
7. This article reports a scientific study and its findings. In what ways is it the same as
a conventional essay of explanation or argument? In what ways does it differ? Cite
specific passages to support your response.
8. In an interview on National Public Radio, Mehl made the following statement about
the importance of debunking the stereotype of the “female chatterbox” and the
“silent male”: “It puts men into the gender box, that in order to be a good male, we’d
better not talk — [that] silence is golden. The stereotype puts unfortunate con­
straints on men and women — the idea that you can only happily be a woman if
you’re talkative and you can only be happy as a man if you’re reticent. The study
relieves those gender constraints.” Do you agree or disagree with Mehl’s interpreta­
tion of the study’s impact? Why?
9. Mehl’s research has proved to be of interest to a wider, nonspecialist audience. What
rhetorical strategies does he employ in this article to make it accessible to readers
who are not professional psychologists or linguists without diluting the research
itself? Examine one of the reports on his work, and discuss how the analysis of his

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 560

6/18/12 3:12 PM

PierCY • barbie Doll

561

research is reported — specifically, how the reporting differs from Mehl’s own article.
See, for instance, “Stereotypes of Quiet Men, Chatty Women Not Sound Science”
from the Washington Post; “Study: Women Don’t Talk More Than Men” from ABC
News; and “Men ‘No Less Chatty than Women’” from BBC News.

Barbie Doll
Marge Piercy
american poet, novelist, and activist marge Piercy (b. 1936) grew up in michigan
in a working­class family during the Depression. She graduated from northwestern
University with an ma and went on to write more than thirty books, including novels
and volumes of poetry. She is known for her highly personal free verse and her
themes of feminism and social protest. “barbie Doll,” from her 1973 collection To Be
of Use, comments on the popular icon — and children’s toy — of the same name.

This girlchild was born as usual
and presented dolls that did pee­pee
and miniature GE stoves and irons
and wee lipsticks the color of cherry candy.
Then in the magic of puberty, a classmate said:
You have a great big nose and fat legs.
She was healthy, tested intelligent,
possessed strong arms and back,
abundant sexual drive and manual dexterity.
She went to and fro apologizing.
Everyone saw a fat nose on thick legs.
She was advised to play coy,
exhorted to come on hearty,
exercise, diet, smile and wheedle.
Her good nature wore out
like a fan belt.
So she cut off her nose and her legs
and offered them up.
In the casket displayed on satin she lay
with the undertaker’s cosmetics painted on,
a turned­up putty nose,
dressed in a pink and white nightie.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 561

5

10

15

20

6/18/12 3:12 PM

562

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

Doesn’t she look pretty? everyone said.
Consummation at last.
To every woman a happy ending.

25

Exploring the Text
1. Identify several stereotypes that Marge Piercy draws on in this poem. Why is
girlchild — one word — an appropriate term?
2. What images and colors does Piercy use to depict the girlchild?
3. Who is the speaker in the poem?
4. How does the way the girl is encouraged to behave run counter to her natural
inclinations?
5. How does the speaker entwine other commentaries into the poem? Why? Are these
voices in the mind of the girlchild real or imagined?
6. What is the speaker’s tone in this poem? What specific lines and images lead you to
your understanding of tone?

Chancellor Séguier at the Entry
of Louis XIV into Paris in 1660
Charles Le Brun
and

The Chancellor Séguier on Horseback
Kehinde Wiley
Charles le brun (1619–1690) was responsible for the production of paintings,
sculpture, and decorative objects commissioned by the french government during the
reign of louis XiV. The monarch had extravagant tastes and favored artists whose
work reflected the opulence of the period. although known as a fine portrait painter,
le brun preferred a narrative style, believing that a painting told a story through sym­
bols, costumes, and gestures — as in the one shown here depicting Pierre Séguier,
Duke of Villemor, the lord Chief Justice of france. He and his entourage are shown
entering Paris in august 1660 to celebrate the marriage of louis XiV and his wife,
maria Theresa, daughter of the king of Spain. Those shown would be counselors,
treasurers, secretaries, court ushers, and the like who took part in the procession.
kehinde wiley was born in 1977 in los angeles, lives in new York City, and
maintains studios in several cities worldwide, including beijing and Dakar. He holds
a bfa from the San francisco art institute and an mfa from Yale. wiley is a photo­

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 562

6/18/12 3:12 PM

le brUn • CHanCellor SéGUier aT THe enTrY of loUiS XiV inTo PariS

563

realist painter whose work is inspired by traditional portraitists, such as Sir Joshua
reynolds, Thomas Gainsborough, Titian, and Jean­auguste­Dominique ingres. His
paintings are in the permanent collections of the Columbus museum of art, the Stu­
dio museum in Harlem, the walker art Center, the miami art museum, and the Detroit
institute of arts, among others. To create paintings such as this one, wiley often seeks
out average african american men and asks them to select a painting from one of
the old masters such as Titian or ingres. Then they strike a pose from one of those
paintings. in an interview with Art in America, wiley said of his work, “black mascu­
linity has been codified in a fixed way. i’m not trying to provide a direct corrective,
but . . . there is a certain desire in my work to tie the urban street and the way it’s
been depicted with elements that are not necessarily coded as masculine.”

Chancellor Séguier at the Entry of Louis XIV into Paris in 1660 (c. 1661, oil on
canvas, 295 x 357 cm.) (See insert for color version.)

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 563

6/18/12 3:12 PM

564

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

The Chancellor Séguier on Horseback (2005, oil on canvas, 108” x 144”) (See insert
for color version.)

Exploring the Texts
1. The men in Charles Le Brun’s painting are dressed in the height of fashion for their
day. How would you characterize it? Note differences between the eminence on
horseback and the others. What specific elements of dress seem to define the male
image? Note the hair, hats, and shoes.
2. The entourage pictured in Le Brun’s painting was intended as a sign to the cheering
Parisians that a new epoch of peace and glory had dawned. What elements of this
painting attest to affluence and power?
3. What symbols of African American culture or hip­hop culture does Kehinde Wiley
include in his painting?
4. Wiley applies the visual vocabulary and conventions of glorification, wealth, and
prestige to his subject matter. In this painting, what is the fashion code? How does
the appearance of these men define the image of today’s young, urban African
American male?
5. What is the effect of Wiley’s melding of late Renaissance prototypes and hip­hop
street style? Is Wiley being critical of one or the other — or both? Is he celebrating
or criticizing (or both) what one reviewer called “the hyper­masculine posturing
of hip­hop culture”?

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 564

6/18/12 3:12 PM

wileY • THe CHanCellor SéGUier on HorSebaCk

565

6. In a review of one of Wiley’s shows, an art critic asks, “Do his big, flashy pictures
of young African­American men recast as the kings, dandies, prophets, and saints
of European portraiture subvert the timeworn ruses of Western art and its hierar­
chies of race, class and sex?” Based on these two paintings, how would you answer
that question? To expand your response, you might look at other paintings by Wiley
on his Web site, www.kehindewiley.com.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 565

6/18/12 3:12 PM

Conversation
Defining Masculinity
The following six texts comment directly or indirectly on definitions and images
of masculinity in today’s society:

Sources
1. Leonard McCombe, Marlboro Man (photo)
2. Paul Theroux, Being a Man
3. Gretel Ehrlich, About Men
4. Rebecca Walker, Putting Down the Gun
5. Mark Bauerlein and Sandra Stotsky, Why Johnny Won’t Read
6. David Brooks, Mind over Muscle
After you have read, studied, and synthesized these pieces, enter the conversation
by responding to one of the prompts on page 580.

1. Marlboro Man
Leonard McCombe
This iconic photograph, taken by leonard mcCombe, was used by the Philip
morris Company to transform marlboro cigarettes from the feminine appeal of
being “mild as may” to a more rugged image that appealed to men. when this
campaign began in 1955, sales were at $5 billion; by 1957, they had jumped
to $20 billion despite growing health concerns over cigarettes. mcCombe took
this photo of Clarence Hailey Young, a ranch foreman in Texas, in 1949.

Questions
1. How does the composition of the photograph contribute to its effect? Why is the focus
exclusively on the face rather than a longer shot that would include the entire body?
2. What is the effect of the subject’s gaze not meeting the eyes of the viewer?
3. Life magazine assigned McCombe to do a story that dispelled the glamorous image
of cowboys seen in Hollywood movies of the period and, instead, documented the
hardworking life of ranchers. What stereotypes about cowboys or the West does the
photo exploit — or combat?
4. Why do you think that this photo caught the eye of legendary advertising executive
Leo Burnett as a good choice for his campaign to transform the image of Marlboro
cigarettes?

566

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 566

6/18/12 3:12 PM

ConVerSaTion

567

2. Being a Man
Paul Theroux
in the following essay, part of the collection Sunrise with Seamonsters (1985),
novelist and travel writer Paul Theroux examines society’s views of masculinity.

There is a pathetic sentence in the chapter “Fetishism” in Dr. Norman Cameron’s
book Personality Development and Psychopathology. It goes, “Fetishists are nearly
always men; and their commonest fetish is a woman’s shoe.” I cannot read that sen­
tence without thinking that it is just one more awful thing about being a man —
and perhaps it is an important thing to know about us.
I have always disliked being a man. The whole idea of manhood in America is
pitiful, in my opinion. This version of masculinity is a little like having to wear an
ill­fitting coat for one’s entire life (by contrast, I imagine femininity to be an oppres­
sive sense of nakedness). Even the expression “Be a man!” strikes me as insulting

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 567

6/18/12 3:12 PM

568

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

and abusive. It means: Be stupid, be unfeeling, obedient, soldierly and stop think­
ing. Man means “manly” — how can one think about men without considering
the terrible ambition of manliness? And yet it is part of every man’s life. It is a
hideous and crippling lie; it not only insists on difference and connives at superi­
ority, it is also by its very nature destructive — emotionally damaging and socially
harmful.
The youth who is subverted, as most are, into believing in the masculine ideal
is effectively separated from women and he spends the rest of his life finding
women a riddle and a nuisance. Of course, there is a female version of this male
affliction. It begins with mothers encouraging little girls to say (to other adults)
“Do you like my new dress?” In a sense, little girls are traditionally urged to please
adults with a kind of coquettishness, while boys are enjoined to behave like monkeys
towards each other. The nine­year­old coquette proceeds to become womanish in
a subtle power game in which she learns to be sexually indispensable, socially
decorative and always alert to a man’s sense of inadequacy.
Femininity — being lady­like — implies needing a man as witness and seducer;
but masculinity celebrates the exclusive company of men. That is why it is so gro­
tesque; and that is also why there is no manliness without inadequacy — because it
denies men the natural friendship of women.
It is very hard to imagine any concept of manliness that does not belittle women,
and it begins very early. At an age when I wanted to meet girls — let’s say the treach­
erous years of thirteen to sixteen — I was told to take up a sport, get more fresh
air, join the Boy Scouts, and I was urged not to read so much. It was the 1950s and
if you asked too many questions about sex you were sent to camp — boy’s camp,
of course: the nightmare. Nothing is more unnatural or prison­like than a boy’s
camp, but if it were not for them we would have no Elks’ Lodges, no pool rooms,
no boxing matches, no Marines.
And perhaps no sports as we know them. Everyone is aware of how few in
number are the athletes who behave like gentlemen. Just as high school basketball
teaches you how to be a poor loser, the manly attitude towards sports seems to be
little more than a recipe for creating bad marriages, social misfits, moral degener­
ates, sadists, latent rapists and just plain louts. I regard high school sports as a drug
far worse than marijuana, and it is the reason that the average tennis champion,
say, is a pathetic oaf.
Any objective study would find the quest for manliness essentially right­wing,
puritanical, cowardly, neurotic and fueled largely by a fear of women. It is also
certainly philistine. There is no book­hater like a Little League coach. But indeed
all the creative arts are obnoxious to the manly ideal, because at their best the arts
are pursued by uncompetitive and essentially solitary people. It makes it very hard
for a creative youngster, for any boy who expresses the desire to be alone seems to
be saying that there is something wrong with him.
It ought to be clear by now that I have something of an objection to the way we
turn boys into men. It does not surprise me that when the President of the United

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 568

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

ConVerSaTion

569

States [George W. Bush] has his customary weekend off he dresses like a cowboy —
it is both a measure of his insecurity and his willingness to please. In many ways,
American culture does little more for a man than prepare him for modeling
clothes in the L. L. Bean catalogue. I take this as a personal insult because for many
years I found it impossible to admit to myself that I wanted to be a writer. It was
my guilty secret, because being a writer was incompatible with being a man.
There are people who might deny this, but that is because the American writer,
typically, has been so at pains to prove his manliness that we have come to see
literariness and manliness as mingled qualities. But first there was a fear that writ­
ing was not a manly profession — indeed, not a profession at all. (The paradox in
American letters is that it has always been easier for a woman to write and for a
man to be published.) Growing up, I had thought of sports as wasteful and humili­
ating, and the idea of manliness was a bore. My wanting to become a writer was
not a flight from that oppressive role­playing, but I quickly saw that it was at odds
with it. Everything in stereotyped manliness goes against the life of the mind. The
Hemingway personality is too tedious to go into here, and in any case his exertions
are well­known, but certainly it was not until this aberrant behavior was exam­
ined by feminists in the 1960s that any male writer dared question the pugnacity
in Hemingway’s fiction. All the bullfighting and arm wrestling and elephant shoot­
ing diminished Hemingway as a writer, but it is consistent with a prevailing atti­
tude in American writing: one cannot be a male writer without first proving that
one is a man.
It is normal in America for a man to be dismissive or even somewhat apolo­
getic about being a writer. Various factors make it easier. There is a heartiness about
journalism that makes it acceptable — journalism is the manliest form of Ameri­
can writing and, therefore, the profession the most independent­minded women
seek (yes, it is an illusion, but that is my point). Fiction­writing is equated with a
kind of dispirited failure and is only manly when it produces wealth — money is
masculinity. So is drinking. Being a drunkard is another assertion, if misplaced,
of manliness. The American male writer is traditionally proud of his heavy drink­
ing. But we are also a very literal­minded people. A man proves his manhood in
America in old­fashioned ways. He kills lions, like Hemingway; or he hunts ducks,
like Nathanael West; or he makes pronouncements like, “A man should carry enough
knife to defend himself with,” as James Jones once said to a Life interviewer. Or he
says he can drink you under the table. But even tiny drunken William Faulkner
loved to mount a horse and go fox hunting, and Jack Kerouac roistered up and down
Manhattan in a lumberjack shirt (and spent every night of The Subterraneans1 with
his mother in Queens). And we are familiar with the lengths to which Norman Mailer 2
is prepared, in his endearing way, to prove that he is just as much a monster as the
next man.

10

1A 1960 film based on Jack Kerouac’s novel about the lifestyle of 1950s Beats. — Eds.
2An American journalist and novelist. — Eds.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 569

6/18/12 3:12 PM

570

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

When the novelist John Irving was revealed as a wrestler, people took him to
be a very serious writer; and even a bubble reputation like Erich (Love Story)
Segal’s was enhanced by the news that he ran the marathon in a respectable time.
How surprised we would be if Joyce Carol Oates were revealed as a sumo wrestler
or Joan Didion active in pumping iron. “Lives in New York City with her three
children” is the typical woman writer’s biographical note, for just as the male writer
must prove he has achieved a sort of muscular manhood, the woman writer — or
rather her publicists — must prove her motherhood.
There would be no point in saying any of this if it were not generally accepted
that to be a man is somehow — even now in feminist­influenced America — a
privilege. It is on the contrary an unmerciful and punishing burden. Being a man
is bad enough; being manly is appalling (in this sense, women’s lib has done much
more for men than for women). It is the sinister silliness of men’s fashions, and a
clubby attitude in the arts. It is the subversion of good students. It is the so­called
“Dress Code” of the Ritz­Carlton Hotel in Boston, and it is the institutionalized
cheating in college sports. It is the most primitive insecurity.
And this is also why men often object to feminism but are afraid to explain
why: of course women have a justified grievance, but most men believe — and with
reason — that their lives are just as bad.

Questions
1. Much of this essay consists of negative descriptions of what it means to Paul
Theroux to be masculine or a man. Why does he offer such strong images and
assertions?
2. Do you agree or disagree with Theroux when he writes, “It is very hard to imagine
any concept of manliness that does not belittle women, and it begins very early”
(para. 5)? Explain.
3. How does Theroux prepare his readers for the turn the essay takes in paragraph 12
when he says, “There would be no point in saying any of this if it were not gener­
ally accepted that to be a man is somehow — even now in feminist­influenced
America — a privilege”? What does this statement reveal about Theroux’s overall
purpose in this piece?
4. Theroux’s essay was written in 1983. Which of his points are outdated? Which
ones do you think remain true today?

3. About Men
Gretel Ehrlich
in the following essay from The Solace of Open Spaces (1984), author and
documentary filmmaker Gretel ehrlich compares the popular view of the cow­
boy with her own experiences.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 570

6/18/12 3:12 PM

ConVerSaTion

571

When I’m in New York but feeling lonely for Wyoming I look for the Marlboro
ads in the subway. What I’m aching to see is horseflesh, the glint of a spur, a line
of distant mountains, brimming creeks, and a reminder of the ranchers and cow­
boys I’ve ridden with for the last eight years. But the men I see in those posters
with their stern, humorless looks remind me of no one I know here. In our hell­
bent earnestness to romanticize the cowboy we’ve ironically disesteemed his true
character. If he’s “strong and silent” it’s because there’s probably no one to talk to.
If he “rides away into the sunset” it’s because he’s been on horseback since four in
the morning moving cattle and he’s trying, fifteen hours later, to get home to his
family. If he’s “a rugged individualist” he’s also part of a team: ranch work is team­
work and even the glorified open­range cowboys of the 1880s rode up and down
the Chisholm Trail in the company of twenty or thirty other riders. Instead of the
macho, trigger­happy man our culture has perversely wanted him to be, the cow­
boy is more apt to be convivial, quirky, and softhearted. To be “tough” on a ranch
has nothing to do with conquests and displays of power. More often than not,
circumstances — like the colt he’s riding or an unexpected blizzard — are over­
powering him. It’s not toughness but “toughing it out” that counts. In other words,
this macho, cultural artifact the cowboy has become is simply a man who pos­
sesses resilience, patience, and an instinct for survival. “Cowboys are just like a pile
of rocks — everything happens to them. They get climbed on, kicked, rained and
snowed on, scuffed up by wind. Their job is ‘just to take it,’” one old­timer told me.
A cowboy is someone who loves his work. Since the hours are long — ten to
fifteen hours a day — and the pay is $30 he has to. What’s required of him is an
odd mixture of physical vigor and maternalism. His part of the beef­raising indus­
try is to birth and nurture calves and take care of their mothers. For the most part
his work is done on horseback and in a lifetime he sees and comes to know more
animals than people. The iconic myth surrounding him is built on American
notions of heroism: the index of a man’s value as measured in physical courage.
Such ideas have perverted manliness into a self­absorbed race for cheap thrills.
In a rancher’s world, courage has less to do with facing danger than with acting
spontaneously — usually on behalf of an animal or another rider. If a cow is stuck
in a boghole he throws a loop around her neck, takes his dally (a half hitch around
the saddle horn), and pulls her out with horsepower. If a calf is born sick, he may
take her home, warm her in front of the kitchen fire, and massage her legs until
dawn. One friend, whose favorite horse was trying to swim a lake with hobbles
on, dove under water and cut her legs loose with a knife, then swam her to shore,
his arm around her neck lifeguard­style, and saved her from drowning. Because
these incidents are usually linked to someone or something outside himself, the
westerner’s courage is selfless, a form of compassion.
The physical punishment that goes with cowboying is greatly underplayed.
Once fear is dispensed with, the threshold of pain rises to meet the demands of
the job. When Jane Fonda asked Robert Redford (in the film Electric Horseman) if
he was sick as he struggled to his feet one morning, he replied, “No, just bent.” For

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 571

6/18/12 3:12 PM

572

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

once the movies had it right. The cowboys I was sitting with laughed in agree­
ment. Cowboys are rarely complainers; they show their stoicism by laughing at
themselves.
If a rancher or cowboy has been thought of as a “man’s man” — laconic, hard­
drinking, inscrutable — there’s almost no place in which the balancing act between
male and female, manliness and femininity, can be more natural. If he’s gruff, hand­
some, and physically fit on the outside, he’s androgynous at the core. Ranchers are
midwives, hunters, nurturers, providers, and conservationists all at once. What
we’ve interpreted as toughness — weathered skin, calloused hands, a squint in the
eye and a growl in the voice — only masks the tenderness inside. “Now don’t go
telling me these lambs are cute,” one rancher warned me the first day I walked into
the football­field­sized lambing sheds. The next thing I knew he was holding a black
lamb. “Ain’t this little rat good­lookin’?”
So many of the men who came to the West were southerners — men looking
for work and a new life after the Civil War — that chivalrousness and strict codes
of honor were soon thought of as western traits. There were very few women in
Wyoming during territorial days, so when they did arrive (some as mail­order brides
from places like Philadelphia) there was a stand­offishness between the sexes and
a formality that persists now. Ranchers still tip their hats and say, “Howdy, ma’am”
instead of shaking hands with me.
Even young cowboys are often evasive with women. It’s not that they’re Jekyll
and Hyde creatures — gentle with animals and rough on women — but rather, that
they don’t know how to bring their tenderness into the house and lack the vocabu­
lary to express the complexity of what they feel. Dancing wildly all night becomes a
metaphor for the explosive emotions pent up inside, and when these are, on occa­
sion, released, they’re so battery­charged and potent that one caress of the face or
one “I love you” will peal for a long while.
The geographical vastness and the social isolation here make emotional evo­
lution seem impossible. Those contradictions of the heart between respectability,
logic, and convention on the one hand, and impulse, passion, and intuition on the
other, played out wordlessly against the paradisical beauty of the West, give cow­
boys a wide­eyed but drawn look. Their lips pucker up, not with kisses but with
immutability. They may want to break out, staying up all night with a lover just to
talk, but they don’t know how and can’t imagine what the consequences will be.
Those rare occasions when they do bare themselves result in confusion. “I feel as
if I’d sprained my heart,” one friend told me a month after such a meeting.
My friend Ted Hoagland wrote, “No one is as fragile as a woman but no one
is as fragile as a man.” For all the women here who use “fragileness” to avoid work
or as a sexual ploy, there are men who try to hide theirs, all the while clinging to
an adolescent dependency on women to cook their meals, wash their clothes, and
keep the ranch house warm in winter. But there is true vulnerability in evidence
here. Because these men work with animals, not machines or numbers, because
they live outside in landscapes of torrential beauty, because they are confined to a

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 572

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

ConVerSaTion

573

place and a routine embellished with awesome variables, because calves die in the
arms that pulled others into life, because they go to the mountains as if on a pil­
grimage to find out what makes a herd of elk tick, their strength is also a softness,
their toughness, a rare delicacy.

Questions
1. Gretel Ehrlich opens with a reference to the Marlboro Man (pp. 566–7), a lone and
rugged­looking cowboy who represented Marlboro in its cigarette advertising for
many years. With this reference and her description of the Wyoming landscape,
what effect does she achieve in the first three sentences of her essay?
2. In the first paragraph, Ehrlich claims that by romanticizing the cowboy, we have “dis­
esteemed his true character” (para. 1). How does she define that “true character”?
3. What does Ehrlich mean when she calls the cowboy “an odd mixture of physical
vigor and maternalism” (para. 2)?
4. In paragraphs 5 and 6, Ehrlich analyzes the cowboy’s relationship with women.
How has the cowboy’s history defined the way he interacts with women?
5. How does the paradoxical statement by Ted Hoagland that “[n]o one is as fragile as
a woman but no one is as fragile as a man” (para. 8) distill the points Ehrlich makes
throughout the essay?

4. Putting Down the Gun
Rebecca Walker
in the following excerpt from her introduction to the essay collection What Makes
a Man: 22 Writers Imagine the Future (2004), rebecca walker, journalist, activ­
ist, and author of the memoir Black White Jewish, looks at the pressures boys
experience to conform to certain societal expectations.

The idea for this book was born one night after a grueling conversation with my
then eleven­year­old son. He had come home from his progressive middle school
unnaturally quiet and withdrawn, shrugging off my questions of concern with
uncharacteristic irritability. Where was the sunny, chatty boy I dropped off that
morning? What had befallen him in the perilous halls of middle school? I backed
off but kept a close eye on him, watching for clues.
After a big bowl of his favorite pasta, he sat on a sofa in my study and read his
science textbook as I wrote at my desk. We both enjoyed this simple yet profound
togetherness, the two of us focused on our own projects yet palpably connected. As
we worked under the soft glow of paper lanterns, with the heat on high and our
little dog snoring at his feet, my son began to relax. I could feel a shift as he began
to remember, deep in his body, that he was home, that he was safe, that he didn’t
have to brace to protect himself from the expectations of the outside world.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 573

6/18/12 3:12 PM

574

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

An hour or so passed like this before he announced that he had a question.
He had morphed back into the child I knew, and was lying down with a colorful
blanket over his legs, using one hand to scratch behind the dog’s ears. “I’ve been
thinking that maybe I should play sports at school.”
“Sports?” I replied with surprise, swiveling around and leaning back in my
chair. “Any sport in mind, or just sports in general?”
A nonchalant shrug. “Maybe softball, I like softball.”
I cocked my head to one side. “What brought this on?”
“I don’t know,” he said. “Maybe girls will like me if I play sports.”
Excuse me?
My boy is intuitive, smart, and creative beyond belief. At the time he loved
animals, Japanese anime, the rap group Dead Prez, and everything having to do
with snowboarding. He liked to help both of his grandmothers in the garden. He
liked to read science fiction. He liked to climb into bed with me and lay his head
on my chest. He liked to build vast and intricate cities with his Legos, and was
beginning what I thought would be a lifelong love affair with chess.
Maybe girls would like him if he played sports?
Call me extreme, but I felt like my brilliant eleven­year­old daughter had come
home and said, “Maybe boys will like me if I stop talking in class.” Or my gregari­
ous African­American son had told me, “Maybe the kids will like me if I act white.”
I tried to stay calm as he illuminated the harsh realities of his sixth grade
social scene. In a nutshell, the girls liked the jocks the best, and sometimes deigned
to give the time of day to the other team, the computer nerds. Since he wasn’t
allowed to play violent computer games — we forbade them in our house — he
was having trouble securing his place with the latter, hence his desire to assume
the identity of the former. When I asked about making friends based on common
interests rather than superficial categories, he got flustered. “You don’t understand,”
he said huffily. “Boys talk about sports, like their matches and who scored what
and stuff, or they talk about new versions of computer games or tricks they learned
to get to higher levels.” Tears welled up in his eyes. “I don’t have anything to talk
about.”
He was right; until that moment I had had no idea, but suddenly the truth of
being a sixth­grade boy in America crystallized before me. My beautiful boy and
every other mother’s beautiful boy had what essentially boiled down to two options:
fight actually in sport, or fight virtually on the computer. Athlete, gladiator, secret
agent, Tomb Raider. The truth of his existence, his many likes and dislikes, none
of them having to do with winning or killing of any kind, had no social currency.
My son could compete and score, perform and win, or be an outcast or worse,
invisible, his unique gifts unnoticed and unharvested, the world around him that
much more impoverished.
That night I went to sleep with several things on my mind: the conversation
I planned to have with the head of my son’s school about the need for a comprehen­
sive, curricular interrogation of the contours of masculinity; the way girls find

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 574

5

10

6/18/12 3:12 PM

ConVerSaTion

575

themselves drawn to more “traditional” displays of masculinity because they are
more unsure than ever about how to experience their own femininity; and the many
hours and endless creativity I would have to devote to ensuring that my son’s true
self would not be entirely snuffed out by the cultural imperative.
And then there was the final and most chilling thought of all:
A bat, a “joy stick.” What’s next, a gun?
It occurred to me that my son was being primed for war, was being prepared
to pick up a gun. The first steps were clear: Tell him that who he is authentically is
not enough; tell him that he will not be loved unless he abandons his own desires
and picks up a tool of competition; tell him that to really be of value he must
stand ready to compete, dominate, and, if necessary, kill, if not actually then vir­
tually, financially, athletically.
If one’s life purpose is obscured by the pressure to conform to a generic type and
other traces of self are ostracized into shadow, then just how difficult is it to pick
up a gun, metaphoric or literal, as a means of self­definition, as a way of securing
what feels like personal power?

15

Questions
1. Rebecca Walker focuses on her own son as she develops her thesis. Is doing so an
effective strategy to reach her audience? Explain whether the addition of quantitative
evidence would have strengthened or weakened the introduction. As you develop
your response, take into account what you believe Walker’s purpose is.
2. Do you think the pressure Walker’s son was experiencing was simply standard peer
pressure, or do you agree with her that the pressure was tied to gender roles?
Explain.
3. Do you agree with this statement: “My beautiful boy and every other mother’s beau­
tiful boy had what essentially boiled down to two options: fight actually in sport, or
fight virtually on the computer” (para. 13)?
4. What does Walker mean by “the cultural imperative” (para. 14)?
5. Trace the causal links that Walker makes in order to move from the pressure her
son feels to participate in competitive sports to her worry that he “was being primed
for war” (para. 17). Do you find any faulty linkages in her logic? If so, identify and
explain.

5. Why Johnny Won’t Read
Mark Bauerlein and Sandra Stotsky
in the following 2005 Washington Post column, mark bauerlein and Sandra
Stotsky, researchers involved in the national endowment for the arts and the
national assessment of educational Progress, examine the reading habits and
preferences of boys.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 575

6/18/12 3:12 PM

576

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

When the National Endowment for the Arts last summer [2004] released “Reading
at Risk: A Survey of Literary Reading in America,” journalists and commentators
were quick to seize on the findings as a troubling index of the state of literary
culture. The survey showed a serious decline in both literary reading and book read­
ing in general by adults of all ages, races, incomes, education levels and regions.
But in all the discussion, one of the more worrisome trends went largely
unnoticed. From 1992 to 2002, the gender gap in reading by young adults wid­
ened considerably. In overall book reading, young women slipped from 63 percent
to 59 percent, while young men plummeted from 55 percent to 43 percent.
Placed in historical perspective, these findings fit with a gap that has existed
in the United States since the spread of mass publishing in the mid­19th century.
But for the gap to have grown so much in so short a time suggests that what was
formerly a moderate difference is fast becoming a decided marker of gender iden­
tity: Girls read; boys don’t.
The significance of the gender gap is echoed in two other recent studies. In
September the Bureau of Labor Statistics issued the “American Time Use Survey,”
a report on how Americans spend their hours, including work, school, sleep and
leisure. The survey found that in their leisure time young men and women both
read only eight minutes per day. But the equality is misleading, because young men
enjoy a full 56 minutes more leisure than young women — approximately six hours
for men and five for women.
The other report, “Trends in Educational Equity of Girls and Women: 2004,”
is from the Education Department. Between 1992 and 2002, among high school
seniors, girls lost two points in reading scores and boys six points, leaving a
16­point differential in their averages on tests given by the National Assessment of
Educational Progress. In the fall semester of kindergarten in 1998, on a different
test, girls outperformed boys by 0.9 points. By the spring semester, the difference
had nearly doubled, to 1.6 points.
Although one might expect the schools to be trying hard to make reading
appealing to boys, the K–12 literature curriculum may in fact be contributing to
the problem. It has long been known that there are strong differences between
boys and girls in their literary preferences. According to reading interest surveys,
both boys and girls are unlikely to choose books based on an “issues” approach, and
children are not interested in reading about ways to reform society — or them­
selves. But boys prefer adventure tales, war, sports and historical nonfiction, while
girls prefer stories about personal relationships and fantasy. Moreover, when given
choices, boys do not choose stories that feature girls, while girls frequently select
stories that appeal to boys.
Unfortunately, the textbooks and literature assigned in the elementary grades
do not reflect the dispositions of male students. Few strong and active male role
models can be found as lead characters. Gone are the inspiring biographies of
the most important American presidents, inventors, scientists and entrepreneurs.
No military valor, no high adventure. On the other hand, stories about adventur­
ous and brave women abound. Publishers seem to be more interested in avoiding

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 576

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

ConVerSaTion

577

“masculine” perspectives or “stereotypes” than in getting boys to like what they
are assigned to read.
At the middle school level, the kind of quality literature that might appeal to
boys has been replaced by Young Adult Literature, that is, easy­to­read, short novels
about teenagers and problems such as drug addiction, teenage pregnancy, alco­
holism, domestic violence, divorced parents and bullying. Older literary fare has
also been replaced by something called “culturally relevant” literature — texts that
appeal to students’ ethnic group identification on the assumption that sharing
the leading character’s ethnicity will motivate them to read.
There is no evidence whatsoever that either of these types of reading fare has
turned boys into lifelong readers or learners. On the contrary, the evidence is accu­
mulating that by the time they go on to high school, boys have lost their interest
in reading about the fictional lives, thoughts and feelings of mature individuals in
works written in high­quality prose, and they are no longer motivated by an excit­
ing plot to persist in the struggle they will have with the vocabulary that goes with it.
Last year the National Assessment Governing Board approved a special study of
gender differences in reading as part of its research agenda over the next five years.
The study will examine how differences in theme, the leading character’s gender, and
genre, among other factors, bear upon the relative reading performance of boys and
girls. With its focus on the content of reading rather than process, this study will,
one hopes, give us some ideas on what needs to be done to get boys reading again.

10

Questions
1. What types of evidence dominate in this essay? Is the purpose of the essay to
inform or to persuade?
2. Do you agree with Mark Bauerlein and Sandra Stotsky’s analysis of the literary
preferences of girls and boys? Explain.
3. Taking the opening two paragraphs as the authors’ introduction, how do they cap­
ture their readers’ interest?

6. Mind over Muscle
David Brooks
The following is a 2005 editorial by columnist David brooks that appeared in
the New York Times.

Once upon a time, it was a man’s world. Men possessed most of the tools one
needed for power and success: muscles, connections, control of the crucial social
institutions.
But then along came the information age to change all that. In the informa­
tion age, education is the gateway to success. And that means this is turning into
a woman’s world, because women are better students than men.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 577

6/18/12 3:12 PM

578

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

From the first days of school, girls outperform boys. The gap is sometimes
small, but over time slight advantages accumulate into big ones. In surveys, kin­
dergarten teachers report that girls are more attentive than boys and more persis­
tent at tasks. Through elementary school, girls are less likely to be asked to repeat a
grade. They are much less likely to be diagnosed with a learning disability.
In high school, girls get higher grades in every subject, usually by about a quar­
ter of a point, and have a higher median class rank. They are more likely to take
advanced placement courses and the hardest math courses, and are more likely to be
straight­A students. They have much higher reading and writing scores on national
assessment tests. Boys still enjoy an advantage on math and science tests, but that
gap is smaller and closing.
Girls are much more likely to be involved in the school paper or yearbook, to
be elected to student government and to be members of academic clubs. They set
higher goals for their post­high­school career. (This data is all from the Department
of Education.)
The differences become monumental in college. Women are more likely to
enroll in college and they are more likely to have better applications, so now there
are hundreds of schools where the female­male ratio is 60 to 40. About 80 percent
of the majors in public administration, psychology and education are female.
And here’s the most important piece of data: Until 1985 or so, male college gradu­
ates outnumbered female college graduates. But in the mid­80’s, women drew even,
and ever since they have been pulling away at a phenomenal rate.
This year [2005], 133 women will graduate from college for every 100 men.
By decade’s end, according to Department of Education projections, there will be
142 female graduates for every 100 male graduates. Among African­Americans,
there are 200 female grads for every 100 male grads.
The social consequences are bound to be profound. The upside is that by
sheer force of numbers, women will be holding more and more leadership jobs.
On the negative side, they will have a harder and harder time finding marriage­
able men with comparable education levels. One thing is for sure: in 30 years the
notion that we live in an oppressive patriarchy that discriminates against women
will be regarded as a quaint anachronism.
There are debates about why women have thrived and men have faltered.
Some say men are imprisoned by their anti­intellectual machismo. Others say the
educational system has been overly feminized. Boys are asked to sit quietly for hours
at a stretch under conditions where they find it harder to thrive.
But Thomas G. Mortensen of the Pell Institute observes that these same
trends — thriving women, faltering men — are observable across the world. In most
countries, and in nearly all developed countries, women are graduating from
high school and college at much higher rates than men. Mortensen writes, “We con­
clude that the issue is far less driven by a nation’s culture than it is by basic differ­
ences between males and females in the modern world.”
In other words, if we want to help boys keep up with girls, we have to have an
honest discussion about innate differences between the sexes. We have to figure

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 578

5

10

6/18/12 3:12 PM

ConVerSaTion

579

out why poor girls who move to middle­class schools do better, but poor boys who
make the same move often do worse. We have to absorb the obvious lesson of
every airport bookstore, which is that men and women like to read totally differ­
ent sorts of books, and see if we can apply this fact when designing curriculums.
If boys like to read about war and combat, why can’t there be books about combat
on the curriculum?
Would elementary school boys do better if they spent more time outside the
classroom and less time chained to a desk? Or would they thrive more in a rigor­
ous, competitive environment?
For 30 years, attention has focused on feminine equality. During that time
honest discussion of innate differences has been stifled (ask Larry Summers1). It’s
time to look at the other half.

Questions
1. What is David Brooks’s main point in this essay? Why doesn’t he state it directly at
the outset?
2. What is the effect of using the standard fairy­tale opening, “Once upon a time . . .”?
3. Do you agree with Brooks’s cause­effect analysis that in the information age, “this
is turning into a woman’s world” (para. 2)? Why or why not?
4. Do you agree with Brooks that in the near future “women will be holding more
and more leadership jobs” and “will have a harder and harder time finding mar­
riageable men with comparable education levels” (para. 8)? Why or why not?
5. What type of evidence does Brooks cite in order to give his position weight?

making connections
1. In what ways does the study reported by Mark Bauerlein and Sandra Stotsky
support or challenge the more personal commentary of Paul Theroux?
2. Would Rebecca Walker likely agree or disagree with David Brooks’s claim that we
need “to have an honest discussion about innate differences between the sexes”
(para. 11)? Why or why not?
3. How does Gretel Ehrlich’s essay reflect or conflict with the image of the Marl­
boro Man?
4. On the face of it, Walker and Theroux seem at odds; yet despite their quite
different perspectives, they share a number of concerns. What are the most
obvious differences? What are the more subtle commonalities?

1Lawrence Summers was president of Harvard University when he claimed that differences in

ability were one reason why women were underrepresented in scientific fields. Summers even­
tually resigned his post. — Eds.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 579

6/18/12 3:12 PM

580

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

5. How might Ehrlich respond to Theroux’s contention that being a man in
America is “an unmerciful and punishing burden” (para. 12)? How would
Brooks?

Entering the conversation
As you respond to each of the following prompts, support your argument with refer­
ences to at least three of the sources in this Conversation on Defining Masculinity. For
help using sources, see Chapter 4.

1. Suppose you are part of a community group deciding whether to experiment
with single­sex classrooms in grades 9–12 in an effort to raise the achievement
level and character development of boys. Based on the readings in this Conver­
sation and your own knowledge and experience, discuss the three or four major
issues that you believe should be taken into consideration.
2. Using the readings presented here and your own knowledge and research, write
an argument defining what you see as the central issue facing boys and young
men in our society. Recommend at least one way to address the issue.
3. Rebecca Walker edited the anthology What Makes a Man. Write an essay answer­
ing that question. Cite authors in this Conversation on Defining Masculinity
who support your point of view, or explain why you disagree with authors in
the Conversation.
4. Choose one or two assertions that authors in this Conversation section make
that you believe are questionable, perhaps even stereotypes. Write an essay illus­
trating how popular culture and the media promote or reinforce such beliefs.
For example, David Brooks writes, “[W]omen are better students than men”
(para. 2); Rebecca Walker speculates that boys’ choices “boiled down to two
options: fight actually in sport, or fight virtually on the computer” (para. 13).

Student Writing
Argument: Supporting an Assertion
In the following prompt, the writer is asked to take a side in the debate over single­
sex education.
In “Fee­Paying Parents Lose Faith in Single Sex Education,” an article filed on telegraph
.co.uk, the online version of an English newspaper, John Clare covers the debate about
single­sex schools, citing examples of formerly single­sex private schools that have

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 580

6/18/12 3:12 PM

STUDenT wriTinG

581

become, or are planning to become, coeducational. Read the excerpt from the article
below, and then choose one side of the argument to defend in an essay.

The head teachers of co­educational schools say that girls’ parents are increas­
ingly rejecting the arguments of those such as Brenda Despontin, this year’s
president of the Girls’ Student Association (GSA), who maintains that “girls’
brains are wired differently; it follows that adolescents need to be taught
differently.”
Girls, insists Dr. Despontin, the head of Haberdashers’, Monmouth, are
“short­changed” in co­ed classrooms. “Boys dominate teacher time, organis­
ing themselves quickly to the task, often with a degree of ruthlessness, while
girls sharing a classroom with boys hold back, through shyness or a desire to
cooperate,” she says.
“Oh, no they don’t,” chorus co­educational school heads. “They learn
how to succeed in a co­ed world.” Boys’ parents, they add, recognise and wel­
come the “civilising” influence of the opposite sex.

Brian Tannenbaum, an eleventh­grade student, argues for coeducation in his
response. Read his essay, and consider its strengths and weaknesses. Then answer
the questions about how Brian develops his argument.

Coeducational Schools
Brian Tannenbaum
“In a world that taught them how to think, she showed them how to live.” This
is the tagline from Mona Lisa Smile, a movie set in 1953 when freethinking art-history
teacher Katherine Watson came to teach at Wellesley College, arguably at that time the
best women’s college in the nation, and one of the top colleges in the world. From the
beginning of the movie, it is evident that the Wellesley women are both intelligent and
competitive. As Ms. Watson discovers in her very first class, every single student had
read the art-history textbook before being given any assignments. Would these women
have read the textbook if they were at Yale, Harvard, or Princeton? Is it imaginable that
these brilliant thinkers would take a secondary position to their male counterparts at
coeducational universities? Why should women be separated from men in learning
environments? Single-sex schools are both discriminatory and do not prepare their
students for the real adult world where both males and females live mutually.
Segregation existed throughout the South until the 1950s, when Brown v. Board
of Education argued that segregation of black children in the public schools was
unconstitutional because it violated the Fourteenth Amendment. Is being denied admission

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 581

6/18/12 3:12 PM

582

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

to a school because of race any different from being denied because of sex? It seems
unconstitutional that a college, such as Wellesley, has a right to deny a potential student
because the applicant is a male. A person is born with both a sex and a race, and since
denying someone of the black race is unconstitutional, denying someone of the male sex
must be also. How would the world react if a university only admitted white students?
Advocates of single-sex education argue that males distract females and vice
versa in coeducational schools. If only one sex is taught in a school, they believe, there
will be no distractions and the students can focus on their studies. Although this position
may seem logical, there is one major flaw. The workforce is composed of both males and
females. If men and women are not able to interact as adolescents, how can they possibly
interact as adults? Boys and girls must be exposed to each other so they can learn how
to coexist and cooperate. Our world is based on the fundamental relationship between a
man and a female. This relationship must be formed from the beginning so our world can
continue to function. If the sexes are considered a distraction to each other in elementary
and secondary schools, imagine the disturbance if they are first introduced to each other
in the working world.
Dr. Brenda Despontin believes that “girls’ brains are wired differently” and “boys
dominate teacher time” in coeducational schools. Dr. Despontin sets the male brain as
the standard norm and, therefore, declares the female brain to be a deviation. Ironically,
this female scholar is reverting to ancient times when women were considered inferior to
men. I happen to know, firsthand, that female students are outspoken in the classroom
and realize they must assert their beliefs in front of males to ensure that they will not
be considered the inferior sex. Young girls must be around young boys to develop the
social and emotional skills that will prepare them for the coeducational world. And on
the other end of the spectrum, young boys must be around young girls to guarantee
healthy relationships between males and females.
The second part of the Mona Lisa Smile tagline says that Ms. Watson taught the
Wellesley women another way of living, helping them become more than what my mother
declares herself to be — a domestic engineer. Males and females must interact at a young
age to ensure proper relationships between the sexes. Perhaps what is most wrong with
single-sex schools is the loss of diversity. Should anyone go to school with people who
are just the same as they are?

Questions
1. What is most appealing or effective about this essay? As you respond, reflect on
how your own view (that is, whether you agree or disagree with Brian) affects what
you find most appealing or effective.
2. Are Brian’s outside sources — a film, a Supreme Court case — helpful in making
his argument? Explain why or why not.
3. If you were making suggestions for revision, would you recommend adding more
external sources? If so, what kind would you suggest?

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 582

6/18/12 3:12 PM

Grammar aS rHeToriC anD STYle

583

4. Brian draws an analogy between segregation by race and sex. Explain whether you
think this strategy strengthens or weakens his argument.
5. Does referring to his mother as “a domestic engineer” strengthen or weaken Brian’s
argument?
6. What is the effect of the rhetorical questions in the essay’s first and last paragraphs?

Grammar as Rhetoric and Style
Pronouns
As you well know, a pronoun takes the place of a noun (called the antecedent).
Unlike a noun, however, a pronoun defines the viewpoint in your writing. Are you
talking about yourself (first person), are you talking directly to the audience (second
person), or are you referring to a person who is neither the speaker nor the audi­
ence (third person)? This section considers two points of pronoun usage that affect
viewpoint: (1) consistency of pronouns in a sentence or passage, and (2) sexist
pronouns.

consistency: viewpoint and Number
Pronouns must agree with one another and with their antecedents in number and
in viewpoint (person). The following table summarizes which personal pronouns
are singular and which are plural, as well as which are first person, second person,
and third person:
NumBER
viEWpoiNT

SiNguLAR

pLuRAL

First person

I, me, my, mine

we, us, our, ours

Second person

you, your, yours

you, your, yours

Third person

he, him, his

they, them, their,
theirs

she, her, hers
it, its
one, one’s

If you use pronouns to refer to an antecedent more than once in a sentence
or paragraph, it’s important that they be consistent in person and number. Con­
sider the following sentence:

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 583

6/18/12 3:12 PM

584

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

If, by chance, you find another person more suitable as a wife than the wife I already
have, I want the liberty to replace my present wife with another one.

This sentence shifts viewpoint from second person to first­person singular, and as
a result it is confusing to the reader.
When corrected, the sentence maintains a consistent first­person singular
viewpoint:
If, by chance, I find another person more suitable as a wife than the wife I already
have, I want the liberty to replace my present wife with another one.
— Judy Brady

Consistency is also important when using indefinite pronouns. (An indefinite
pronoun is one that does not have a specific antecedent.) Consider the singular
indefinite pronoun one as it is used here:
One cannot think well, love well, sleep well, if one has not dined well.
— Virginia Woolf

This sentence begins with the singular indefinite pronoun one and sticks with one.
The sentence would be much less effective if it said:
One cannot think well, love well, sleep well, if you have not dined well.

Note, though, that Virginia Woolf could have opted to use the second person:
You cannot think well, love well, sleep well, if you have not dined well.

Woolf ’s use of the third person adds a formality to the tone — through the more
distanced one — while the second­person you sounds more conversational.

Sexist pronoun usage
When a third­person singular pronoun (he, she, it) could refer to either a male or
a female, writers have several options: they can combine the male and female
pronouns, using or; they can use the plural form of the pronoun, being careful to
adjust the rest of the sentence accordingly; or they can alternate the gender of the
pronouns.
Consider the following sentences from Virginia Woolf ’s “Professions for
Women.”
I hope I am not giving away professional secrets if I say that a novelist’s chief desire is to
be as unconscious as possible. He has to induce in himself a state of perpetual lethargy.

The pronouns he and himself in the second sentence refer to the antecedent novelist
in the first sentence. In using he and himself, Woolf was not only following stan­
dard grammatical practice of the 1930s but also underscoring the reality that
during her lifetime most published novelists were indeed male. But the world and

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 584

6/18/12 3:12 PM

Grammar aS rHeToriC anD STYle

585

the English language have changed, and using the generic he, his, him, himself to
refer to any individual is not as acceptable today as it was when Woolf wrote. How
would writers today handle a discussion of an unidentified novelist? One possi­
bility would be to use the term his/her or his or her:
I hope I am not giving away professional secrets if I say that a novelist’s chief desire is
to be as unconscious as possible. He or she has to induce in himself or herself a state of
perpetual lethargy.

If writers need to make only one or two references to an unspecified anteced­
ent, perhaps they can get away with he or she and himself or herself, though even
the two references in this sentence are awkward. But if there are many references to
the antecedent, as in the Woolf passage that follows, the or construction becomes
monotonous or downright annoying:
I hope I am not giving away professional secrets if I say that a novelist’s chief desire is
to be as unconscious as possible. He or she has to induce in himself or herself a state of
perpetual lethargy. He or she wants life to proceed with the utmost quiet and regularity.
He or she wants to see the same faces, to read the same books, to do the same things
day after day, month after month, while he or she is writing, so that nothing may break
the illusion in which he or she is living.

The most straightforward revision would be to change the unspecified singu­
lar noun to an unspecified plural noun:
I hope I am not giving away professional secrets if I say that the chief desire of novelists
is to be as unconscious as possible. They have to induce in themselves a state of per­
petual lethargy. They want life to proceed with the utmost quiet and regularity. They
want to see the same faces, to read the same books, to do the same things day after
day, month after month, while they are writing, so that nothing may break the illu­
sion in which they are living.

Another possibility for large sections of an essay is to shift between male and
female pronouns, using he or him or his for a while, then shifting to she or her or
hers, and shifting yet again. Generally, writers seem to like this approach more
than readers, who can lose track of what they are reading about, especially if the
shift in gender happens too frequently.

Rhetorical and Stylistic Strategy
Although maintaining a consistent viewpoint is a matter of grammatical accu­
racy, selecting which viewpoint to use is a rhetorical decision. If the writing is
formal, then the third person is generally the most appropriate choice. For example,
most teachers expect a research paper to be written in the third person. If the
essay is more informal and draws on the writer’s personal experience, then the first
person (singular or plural) works well. The second person — you — is generally

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 585

6/18/12 3:12 PM

586

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

reserved for informal writing, such as a newspaper column, where the writer is
addressing readers as though they are in conversation, or for speeches, where the
writer is directly addressing an audience.
In the second part of this section, we focused on sexist pronouns. Why do we
recommend that you eliminate pronouns that some people think of as sexist?
After all, there is nothing grammatically wrong with Virginia Woolf ’s use of a
male pronoun to refer to an indefinite singular noun such as novelist. But lan­
guage choice sometimes involves more than grammatical correctness. Through­
out this book, you are reading about how to appeal to audiences and how to make
audiences find you credible. One way to impress readers is to be sensitive to their
likes and dislikes — in this case, to their own attitudes toward sexist language.
Many of your readers will appreciate any steps you take in your writing to estab­
lish common ground with them. In pronoun usage, meet your readers’ expecta­
tions that an indefinite singular noun might just as easily refer to a woman as to
a man.
Remember, grammatical correctness and a writer’s purpose go hand in hand.

• ExErciSE 1 •
Correct all errors in the following sentences that result from sexist pronouns
or inconsistencies in pronoun person or number.
1. Popular culture once provided us with a common vocabulary, but now
you have a hard time keeping up with the jargon.
2. For a runner to keep up his pace, one must pay attention to nutrition.
3. If one measures her country’s commitment to education by dollars allo­
cated, you can see that it’s not our top priority.
4. Baseball fans pay so much attention to percentages that you almost
always have a sense of the improbability or likelihood of an event actu­
ally occurring.
5. Most of the time a teacher tries to tailor writing assignments to interest
his students.
6. Everyone is wondering who the next Democratic presidential candidate
will be and if he will be a charismatic leader.
7. A doctor should treat his patients respectfully by listening to them no
matter how busy they are.
8. We hoped to get a free pass to the movie, but the mall was so crowded
that you didn’t have a chance.
9. You should try to stop arguments before they start; otherwise, one
might become involved in a conflict that gets more complicated than
we thought possible.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 586

6/18/12 3:12 PM

Grammar aS rHeToriC anD STYle

587

10. When one is as strong a student as Chong is, you’re not surprised that
he passed the bar on his first try.

• ExErciSE 2 •
The following paragraph is taken from the essay “I Want a Wife” by Judy
Brady (p. 539). Discuss the effect of the pronouns I and my. How many times
does Brady use them? How does this repetition help to achieve her purpose?
I would like to go back to school so that I can become economically inde­
pendent, support myself, and, if need be, support those dependent upon
me. I want a wife who will work and send me to school. And while I am
going to school I want a wife to take care of my children. I want a wife to
keep track of the children’s doctor and dentist appointments. And to keep
track of mine, too. I want a wife to make sure my children eat properly and
are kept clean. I want a wife who will wash the children’s clothes and keep
them mended. I want a wife who is a good nurturant attendant to my
children, who arranges for their schooling, makes sure that they have an
adequate social life with their peers, takes them to the park, the zoo, etc.
I want a wife who takes care of the children when they are sick, a wife who
arranges to be around when the children need special care, because, of
course, I cannot miss classes at school. My wife must arrange to lose time
at work and not lose the job. It may mean a small cut in my wife’s income
from time to time, but I guess I can tolerate that. Needless to say, my wife
will arrange and pay for the care of the children while my wife is working.

• ExErciSE 3 •
The following excerpt is from “Professions for Women” by Virginia Woolf
(p. 525). It includes both the first and third person. Rewrite it entirely in the
first person — for example, with I and we women. Then discuss the effect of
your changes. Consider the excerpt in the context of the entire essay.
These then were two very genuine experiences of my own. These were
two of the adventures of my professional life. The first — killing the Angel
in the House — I think I solved. She died. But the second, telling the truth
about my own experiences as a body, I do not think I solved. I doubt that
any woman has solved it yet. The obstacles against her are still immensely
powerful — and yet they are very difficult to define. Outwardly, what is
simpler than to write books? Outwardly, what obstacles are there for a
woman rather than for a man? Inwardly, I think, the case is very different;

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 587

6/18/12 3:12 PM

588

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

she has still many ghosts to fight, many prejudices to overcome. Indeed
it will be a long time still, I think, before a woman can sit down to write
a book without finding a phantom to be slain, a rock to be dashed
against. And if this is so in literature, the freest of all professions for
women, how is it in the new professions which you are now for the first
time entering?

• ExErciSE 4 •
Think of an example of gender stereotyping that drives you crazy. Perhaps
it’s a television or movie character, an incident from the news, or a pop culture personality who seems to play to stereotypical expectations of male or
female behavior. Write two paragraphs explaining your outrage. In one, use
the first person, singular or plural, so that your identity is front and center;
then rewrite it in third person so that your gender is not a part of the voice.
Discuss the different effects of the two.

Suggestions for Writing
Gender
Now that you have examined a number of readings and other texts that focus on
gender, including gender stereotypes and their consequences, explore one dimen­
sion of this topic by synthesizing your own ideas and the readings. You might want
to do more research or use readings from other classes as you prepare for the fol­
lowing projects.
1. From popular magazines and newspapers, collect ads that reflect stereotypes
about the roles of men and women, as well as ads that show men and women
in a more progressive light. You might work in groups to collect and analyze the
ads. Make lists of both kinds of ads. Determine which kinds of products show
men and women in stereotyped roles and which show men and women break­
ing gender stereotypes. Which stereotypes are more common in these ads —
stereotypes about women or about men? Then, working individually, write a
report that discusses what the ads show about American values, beliefs, and
attitudes toward gender roles.
2. Write a personal narrative in which you describe a role that your family or
friends expected of you but that you either refused to play or struggled against.
Explain the origin and nature of the expectation, as well as your reasons for not

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 588

6/18/12 3:12 PM

SUGGeSTionS for wriTinG

589

wanting to fulfill it. Include a discussion of the reactions you have gotten as you
challenged the role or expectation.
3. To explore the idea that gender roles are socially constructed rather than bio­
logically determined, do some research into other cultures and times. Report on
a role that our society believes is gender­specific (for example, the nurturing
mother, the protective male) but that another culture or people from another
period viewed quite differently.
4. The Internet is arguably gender­neutral. When you do not know other users’
background, physical traits, style of dress, and so on, you have to judge them
only by their words. Some observers believe that the anonymity of the Internet
allows people to move outside of expected gender roles. Does the Internet affect
you that way? Are you more willing to be confrontational online, for example?
Are you funnier? Does your online voice resemble who you are in person? Write
an essay exploring how gender does or does not influence your online commu­
nication style.
5. Write a roundtable conversation that you might have with three authors in this
chapter about one of the following quotations:
• The curse of too many women has been that they have this privilege of refuge
in the home.
— Pearl Buck
• There are two kinds of spiritual law, two kinds of conscience, one in man
and another, altogether different, in women. They do not understand each
other.
— Henrik Ibsen
• The discovery is, of course, that “man” and “woman” are fictions, caricatures,
cultural constructs. As models they are reductive, totalitarian, inappropriate to
human becoming. As roles they are static, demeaning to the female, dead­
ended for males and females both.
— Andrea Dworkin
• You see a lot of smart guys with dumb women but you hardly ever see a
smart woman with a dumb guy.
— Erica Jong
6. Examine a popular movie in terms of gender roles, and write about it. In what
ways do the characters reflect conventional roles, and in what ways do they step
out of those roles?
7. Write a “myth­buster” essay. Take a stereotype based on gender (such as “women
are bad drivers” or “men are more prone to violent behavior than women”),
and debunk it by conducting research. Use quantitative information as well as
anecdotal or personal experience as evidence. Consider how this myth origi­
nated and who benefits from perpetuating it.
8. In his book Men Are from Mars, Women Are from Venus, John Gray writes,
“A man’s sense of self is defined through his ability to achieve results. . . .
A woman’s sense of self is defined through her feelings and the quality of

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 589

6/18/12 3:12 PM

590

CHaPTer 8 • GenDer

her relationships.” Write an essay supporting, challenging, or modifying these
statements. Use examples from your own experience and selections from this
chapter.
9. Several of the authors in this Conversation on Defining Masculinity raise
questions about the reading required in school. Working in groups, develop
a list of books the girls like, and one the boys like; then try to reach a consen­
sus on at least two or three selections that both groups find interesting. Write
an essay analyzing the process and explaining the results. As part of your
inquiry, you might visit www.guysread.com.
10. In “Mind over Muscle,” David Brooks asserts: “One thing is for sure: in 30
years the notion that we live in an oppressive patriarchy that discriminates
against women will be regarded as a quaint anachronism.” Write an essay
explaining why you agree or disagree with Brooks’s prediction.

08_SHE_67650_Ch08_517_590.indd 590

6/18/12 3:12 PM

9
Sports
How do the values of sports affect the way we see ourselves?

L

ove them or hate them, sports are a central part of our modern world.
Athletes are cultural icons; sports dominate television, radio, even film.
Once the purview of men and boys, the subject of sports — opinions on its ethics,
its future, its place in society — is now open to everyone. And in some ways, the
line separating the professional from the spectator has blurred. Weekend athletes
train like professionals; even couch potatoes participate in fantasy leagues.
We speak the language of sports. We are asked to play to win, play by the
rules, play fair, be team players, be good sports. We’re taught to be good losers;
we’re reminded that the best defense is a good offense — and the other way
around. We’re told that life is a game of chance, but that we can sometimes level
the playing field. These exhortations are as at home in a grade school kickball
game as they are in politics and business. Why are we so comfortable with this
shorthand?
The questions raised by sports are out of proportion to the tiny number of
people who play professional sports and are front and center in the news-earning
salaries that top those of movie stars. At their best, sports pros are hailed as role
models; at their worst, as scourges on society. Is our attraction to professional
athletes healthy? Do we learn from their grit, from their strength and commitment to training, or do they encourage unhealthy narcissism and dangerous
habits?
The selections in this chapter explore many of the questions raised by our
interest in sports and the effect of that interest on everyday life. The readings look
at the star power of our professional athletes and the thrill of tapping into our
own potential for athletic achievement. They ask questions about ethics; they
make us think about whether our passion for both following and participating in
sports is a way for us to, at least temporarily, avoid the demands of real life. Finally,
they ask whether the language of the playing field and the model of the professional athlete enliven communication and help us become better people.

591

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 591

6/18/12 3:12 PM

The Silent Season of a Hero
Gay Talese
Gay Talese (b. 1932) began life on the small island of Ocean City,
New Jersey. As the son of a southern Italian immigrant growing up
Catholic in a Protestant town, Talese identified himself as an outsider.
He is known for writing the “unnoticed story,” reporting the angle
ignored by others or the news that others thought was not newsworthy. Recognized for his elegant style, Talese is considered one of the
founders of New Journalism, a term coined in the 1960s to describe
the work of writers like Talese, Tom Wolfe, and Hunter S. Thompson.
New Journalism is characterized by the use of elements of fiction to get at the story
behind the story. New Journalists set scenes, include dialogue, and accept their
own presence as part of the drama of the story. The following selection appeared
in Esquire in 1966.

“I would like to take the great DiMaggio fishing,” the old man said. “They say his
father was a fisherman. Maybe he was as poor as we are and would understand.”
— Ernest Hemingway, The Old Man and the Sea

I

t was not quite spring, the silent season before the search for salmon, and
the old fishermen of San Francisco were either painting their boats or
repairing their nets along the pier or sitting in the sun talking quietly among
themselves, watching the tourists come and go, and smiling, now, as a pretty girl
paused to take their picture. She was about 25, healthy and blue-eyed and wearing
a turtleneck sweater, and she had long, flowing blonde hair that she brushed back
a few times before clicking her camera. The fishermen, looking at her, made
admiring comments, but she did not understand because they spoke a Sicilian
dialect; nor did she understand the tall gray-haired man in a dark suit who stood
watching her from behind a big bay window on the second floor of DiMaggio’s
Restaurant that overlooks the pier.
He watched until she left, lost in the crowd of newly arrived tourists that had
just come down the hill by cable car. Then he sat down again at the table in the
restaurant, finishing his tea and lighting another cigarette, his fifth in the last half
hour. It was 11:30 in the morning. None of the other tables was occupied, and the
only sounds came from the bar, where a liquor salesman was laughing at something the headwaiter had said. But then the salesman, his briefcase under his arm,
headed for the door, stopping briefly to peek into the dining room and call out,
“See you later, Joe.” Joe DiMaggio turned and waved at the salesman. Then the
room was quiet again.

592

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 592

6/18/12 3:12 PM

TAleSe • THe SIleNT SeASON Of A HeRO

593

At 51, DiMaggio was a most distinguished-looking man, aging as gracefully
as he had played on the ball field, impeccable in his tailoring, his nails manicured,
his 6-foot-2 body seeming as lean and capable as when he posed for the portrait
that hangs in the restaurant and shows him in Yankee Stadium, swinging from
the heels at a pitch thrown 20 years ago. His gray hair was thinning at the crown,
but just barely, and his face was lined in the right places, and his expression, once
as sad and haunted as a matador’s, was more in repose these days, though, as now,
tension had returned and he chain-smoked and occasionally paced the floor and
looked out the window at the people below. In the crowd was a man he did not
wish to see.
The man had met DiMaggio in New York. This week he had come to San
Francisco and had telephoned several times, but none of the calls had been
returned because DiMaggio suspected that the man, who had said he was doing
research on some vague sociological project, really wanted to delve into DiMaggio’s private life and that of DiMaggio’s former wife, Marilyn Monroe. DiMaggio
would never tolerate this. The memory of her death is still very painful to him,
and yet, because he keeps it to himself, some people are not sensitive to it. One
night in a supper club, a woman who had been drinking approached his table,
and when he did not ask her to join him, she snapped:
“All right, I guess I’m not Marilyn Monroe.”
He ignored her remark, but when she repeated it, he replied, barely controlling his anger, “No — I wish you were, but you’re not.”
The tone of his voice softened her, and she asked, “Am I saying something
wrong?”
“You already have,” he said. “Now will you please leave me alone?”
His friends on the wharf, understanding him as they do, are very careful
when discussing him with strangers, knowing that should they inadvertently
betray a confidence, he will not denounce them but rather will never speak to
them again; this comes from a sense of propriety not inconsistent in the man who
also, after Marilyn Monroe’s death, directed that fresh flowers be placed on her
grave “forever.”
Some of the older fishermen who have known DiMaggio all his life remember him as a small boy who helped clean his father’s boat, and as a young man
who sneaked away and used a broken oar as a bat on the sandlots nearby. His
father, a small mustachioed man known as Zio Pepe, would become infuriated
and call him lagnuso, lazy, meschino, good-for-nothing, but in 1936 Zio Pepe was
among those who cheered when Joe DiMaggio returned to San Francisco after his
first season with the New York Yankees and was carried along the wharf on the
shoulders of the fishermen.
The fishermen also remember how, after his retirement in 1951, DiMaggio
brought his second wife, Marilyn, to live near the wharf, and sometimes they
would be seen early in the morning fishing off DiMaggio’s boat, the Yankee Clipper, now docked quietly in the marina, and in the evening they would be sitting

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 593

5

10

6/18/12 3:12 PM

594

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

and talking on the pier. They had arguments, too, the fishermen knew, and one
night Marilyn was seen running hysterically, crying, as she ran, along the road
away from the pier, with Joe following. But the fishermen pretended they did not
see this; it was none of their affair. They knew that Joe wanted her to stay in San
Francisco and avoid the sharks in Hollywood, but she was confused and torn
then — “She was a child,” they said — and even today DiMaggio loathes Los Angeles and many of the people in it. He no longer speaks to his onetime friend,
Frank Sinatra, who had befriended Marilyn in her final years, and he also is cool
to Dean Martin and Peter Lawford and Lawford’s former wife, Pat, who once gave
a party at which she introduced Marilyn Monroe to Robert Kennedy, and the two
of them danced often that night, Joe heard, and he did not take it well. He was
possessive of her that year, his close friends say, because Marilyn and he had
planned to remarry; but before they could she was dead, and DiMaggio banned
the Lawfords and Sinatra and many Hollywood people from her funeral. When
Marilyn Monroe’s attorney complained that DiMaggio was keeping her friends
away, DiMaggio answered coldly, “If it weren’t for those friends persuading her to
stay in Hollywood, she would still be alive.”
Joe DiMaggio now spends most of the year in San Francisco, and each day
tourists, noticing the name on the restaurant, ask the men on the wharf if they
ever see him. Oh, yes, the men say, they see him nearly every day; they have not
seen him yet this morning, they add, but he should be arriving shortly. So the
tourists continue to walk along the piers past the crab vendors, under the circling
sea gulls, past the fish-’n’-chip stands, sometimes stopping to watch a large vessel
steaming toward the Golden Gate Bridge, which, to their dismay, is painted red.
Then they visit the Wax Museum, where there is a life-size figure of DiMaggio in
uniform, and walk across the street and spend a quarter to peer through the silver
telescopes focused on the island of Alcatraz, which is no longer a federal prison.
Then they return to ask the men if DiMaggio has been seen. Not yet, the men say,
although they notice his blue Impala parked in the lot next to the restaurant.
Sometimes tourists will walk into the restaurant and have lunch and will see him
sitting calmly in a corner signing autographs and being extremely gracious with
everyone. At other times, as on this particular morning when the man from New
York chose to visit, DiMaggio was tense and suspicious.
When the man entered the restaurant from the side steps leading to the dining room, he saw DiMaggio standing near the window, talking with an elderly
maître d’ named Charles Friscia. Not wanting to walk in and risk intrusion, the
man asked one of DiMaggio’s nephews to inform Joe of his presence. When
DiMaggio got the message, he quickly turned and left Friscia and disappeared
through an exit leading down to the kitchen.
Astonished and confused, the visitor stood in the hall. A moment later Friscia
appeared and the man asked, “Did Joe leave?”
“Joe who?” Friscia replied.
“Joe DiMaggio!”

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 594

15

6/18/12 3:12 PM

TAleSe • THe SIleNT SeASON Of A HeRO

595

“Haven’t seen him,” Friscia said.
“You haven’t seen him! He was standing right next to you a second ago!”
“It wasn’t me,” Friscia said.
“You were standing next to him. I saw you. In the dining room.”
“You must be mistaken,” Friscia said, softly, seriously. “It wasn’t me.”
“You must be kidding,” the man said angrily, turning and leaving the restaurant. Before he could get to his car, however, DiMaggio’s nephew came running
after him and said, “Joe wants to see you.”
He returned, expecting to see DiMaggio waiting for him. Instead he was
handed a telephone. The voice was powerful and deep and so tense that the quick
sentences ran together.
“You are invading my rights. I did not ask you to come. I assume you have a
lawyer. You must have a lawyer, get your lawyer!”
“I came as a friend,” the man interrupted.
“That’s beside the point,” DiMaggio said. “I have my privacy. I do not want it
violated. You’d better get a lawyer. . . .” Then, pausing, DiMaggio asked, “Is my
nephew there?”
He was not.
“Then wait where you are.”
A moment later DiMaggio appeared, tall and red-faced, erect and beautifully
dressed in his dark suit and white shirt with the gray silk tie and the gleaming
silver cuff links. He moved with his big steps toward the man and handed him an
airmail envelope unopened that the man had written from New York.
“Here,” DiMaggio said. “This is yours.”
Then DiMaggio sat down at a small table. He said nothing, just lit a cigarette
and waited, legs crossed, his head held high and back so as to reveal the intricate
construction of his nose, a fine sharp tip above the big nostrils and tiny bones
built out from the bridge, a great nose.
“Look,” DiMaggio said, more calmly, “I do not interfere with other people’s
lives. And I do not expect them to interfere with mine. There are things about my
life, personal things, that I refuse to talk about. And even if you asked my brothers, they would be unable to tell you about them because they do not know. There
are things about me, so many things, that they simply do not know. . . .”
“I don’t want to cause trouble,” the man said. “I think you’re a great
man, and . . .”
“I’m not great,” DiMaggio cut in. “I’m not great,” he repeated softly. “I’m just
a man trying to get along.”
Then DiMaggio, as if realizing that he was intruding upon his own privacy,
abruptly stood up. He looked at his watch.
“I’m late,” he said, very formal again. “I’m 10 minutes late. You’re making
me late.”
The man left the restaurant. He crossed the street and wandered over to the
pier, briefly watching the fishermen hauling their nets and talking in the sun,

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 595

20

25

30

35

6/18/12 3:12 PM

596

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

seemingly very calm and contented. Then, after he turned and was headed back
toward the parking lot, a blue Impala stopped in front of him and Joe DiMaggio
leaned out the window and asked, “Do you have a car?” His voice was very gentle.
“Yes,” the man said.
“Oh,” DiMaggio said. “I would have given you a ride.”
Joe DiMaggio was not born in San Francisco but in Martinez, a small fishing
village 25 miles northeast of the Golden Gate. Zio Pepe had settled there after
leaving Isola delle Femmine, an islet off Palermo where the DiMaggios had been
fishermen for generations. But in 1915, hearing of the luckier waters off San
Francisco’s wharf, Zio Pepe left Martinez, packing his boat with furniture and
family, including Joe, who was one year old.
San Francisco was placid and picturesque when the DiMaggios arrived, but
there was a competitive undercurrent and struggle for power along the pier. At
dawn the boats would sail out to where the bay meets the ocean and the sea is
rough, and later the men would race back with their hauls, hoping to beat their
fellow fishermen to shore and sell it while they could. Twenty or 30 boats would
sometimes be trying to gain the channel shoreward at the same time, and a fisherman had to know every rock in the water, and later know every bargaining trick
along the shore, because the dealers and restaurateurs would play one fisherman
off against the other, keeping the prices down. Later the fishermen became wiser
and organized, predetermining the maximum amount each fisherman would
catch, but there were always some men who, like the fish, never learned, and so
heads would sometimes be broken, nets slashed, gasoline poured onto their fish,
flowers of warning placed outside their doors.
But these days were ending when Zio Pepe arrived, and he expected his five
sons to succeed him as fishermen, and the first two, Tom and Michael, did; but a
third, Vincent, wanted to sing. He sang with such magnificent power as a young
man that he came to the attention of the great banker, A. P. Giannini, and there
were plans to send him to Italy for tutoring and the opera. But there was hesitation around the DiMaggio household and Vince never went; instead, he played
ball with the San Francisco Seals and sports writers misspelled his name.
It was DeMaggio until Joe, at Vince’s recommendation, joined the team and
became a sensation, being followed later by the youngest brother, Dominic, who
was also outstanding. All three later played in the big leagues, and some writers
like to say that Joe was the best hitter, Dom the best fielder, Vince the best singer,
and Casey Stengel once said: “Vince is the only player I ever saw who could strike
out three times in one game and not be embarrassed. He’d walk into the clubhouse whistling. Everybody would be feeling sorry for him, but Vince always
thought he was doing good.”
After he retired from baseball Vince became a bartender, then a milkman,
now a carpenter. He lives 40 miles north of San Francisco in a house he partly
built, has been happily married for 34 years, has four grandchildren, has in the
closet one of Joe’s tailor-made suits that he has never had altered to fit, and when

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 596

40

6/18/12 3:12 PM

TAleSe • THe SIleNT SeASON Of A HeRO

597

people ask him if he envies Joe he always says, “No, maybe Joe would like to have
what I have.” The brother Vincent most admired was Michael, “a big earthy man,
a dreamer, a fisherman who wanted things but didn’t want to take from Joe, or to
work in the restaurant. He wanted a bigger boat, but wanted to earn it on his own.
He never got it.” In 1953, at the age of 44, Michael fell from his boat and drowned.
Since Zio Pepe’s death at 77 in 1949, Tom at 62, the oldest brother — two of
his four sisters are older — has become nominal head of the family and manages
the restaurant that was opened in 1937 as Joe DiMaggio’s Grotto. Later Joe sold
out his share, and now Tom is the co-owner with Dominic. Of all the brothers,
Dominic, who was known as the “Little Professor” when he played with the Boston Red Sox, is the most successful in business. He lives in a fashionable Boston
suburb with his wife and three children and is president of a firm that manufactures fiber cushion materials and grossed more than $3,500,000 last year.
Joe DiMaggio lives with his widowed sister, Marie, in a tan stone house on a
quiet residential street not far from Fisherman’s Wharf. He bought the house
almost 30 years ago for his parents, and after their deaths he lived there with
Marilyn Monroe. Now it is cared for by Marie, a slim and handsome dark-eyed
woman who has an apartment on the second floor, Joe on the third. There are
some baseball trophies and plaques in the small room off DiMaggio’s bedroom,
and on his dresser are photographs of Marilyn Monroe, and in the living room
downstairs is a small painting of her that DiMaggio likes very much; it reveals
only her face and shoulders and she is wearing a wide-brimmed sun hat, and
there is a soft, sweet smile on her lips, an innocent curiosity about her that is the
way he saw her and the way he wanted her to be seen by others — a simple girl, “a
warm, big-hearted girl,” he once described her, “that everybody took advantage of.”
The publicity photographs emphasizing her sex appeal often offend him, and
a memorable moment for Billy Wilder, who directed her in The Seven-Year Itch,
occurred when he spotted DiMaggio in a large crowd of people gathered on Lexington Avenue in New York to watch a scene in which Marilyn, standing over a
subway grating to cool herself, had her skirts blown high by a sudden wind blow.
“What the hell is going on here?” DiMaggio was overheard to have said in the
crowd, and Wilder recalled, “I shall never forget the look of death on Joe’s face.”
He was then 39, she was 27. They had been married in January of that year,
1954, despite disharmony in temperament and time; he was tired of publicity, she
was thriving on it; he was intolerant of tardiness, she was always late. During their
honeymoon in Tokyo an American general had introduced himself and asked if,
as a patriotic gesture, she would visit the troops in Korea. She looked at Joe. “It’s
your honeymoon,” he said, shrugging, “go ahead if you want to.”
She appeared on 10 occasions before 100,000 servicemen, and when she
returned, she said, “It was so wonderful, Joe. You never heard such cheering.”
“Yes, I have,” he said.
Across from her portrait in the living room, on a coffee table in front of a sofa,
is a sterling-silver humidor that was presented to him by his Yankee teammates at

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 597

45

50

6/18/12 3:12 PM

598

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

a time when he was the most talked-about man in America, and when Les Brown’s
band had recorded a hit that was heard day and night on the radio.
From Coast to Coast, that’s all you hear
Of Joe the One-Man Show.
He’s glorified the horsehide sphere,
Jolting Joe DiMaggio . . .
Joe . . . Joe . . . DiMaggio . . .
we want you on our side . . .

The year was 1941, and it began for DiMaggio in the middle of May after the
Yankees had lost four games in a row, seven of their last nine, and were in fourth
place, five and a half games behind the leading Cleveland Indians. On May 15,
DiMaggio hit only a first-inning single in a game that New York lost to Chicago
13–1; he was barely hitting .300, and had greatly disappointed the crowds that
had seen him finish with a .352 average the year before and .381 in 1939.
He got a hit in the next game, and the next, and the next. On May 24, with the
Yankees losing 6–5 to Boston, DiMaggio came up with runners on second and
third and singled them home, winning the game, extending his streak to 10
games. But it went largely unnoticed. Even DiMaggio was not conscious of it until
it had reached 29 games in mid-June. Then the newspapers began to dramatize it,
the public became aroused, they sent him good-luck charms of every description,
and DiMaggio kept hitting, and radio announcers would interrupt programs to
announce the news, and then the song again: “Joe . . . Joe . . . DiMaggio . . . we
want you on our side . . .”
Sometimes DiMaggio would be hitless his first three times up, the tension
would build, it would appear that the game would end without his getting another
chance — but he always would, and then he would hit the ball against the leftfield wall, or through the pitcher’s legs, or between two leaping infielders. In the
forty-first game, the first of a doubleheader in Washington, DiMaggio tied an
American League record that George Sisler had set in 1922. But before the second
game began, a spectator sneaked onto the field and into the Yankees’ dugout and
stole DiMaggio’s favorite bat. In the second game, using another of his bats,
DiMaggio lined out twice and flied out. But in the seventh inning, borrowing one
of his old bats that a teammate was using, he singled and broke Sisler’s record,
and he was only three games away from surpassing the major-league record of 44
set in 1897 by Willie Keeler while playing for Baltimore when it was a National
League franchise.
An appeal for the missing bat was made through the newspapers. A man
from Newark admitted the crime and returned it with regrets. And on July 2 at
Yankee Stadium, DiMaggio hit a home run into the left-field stands. The record
was broken.
He also got hits on the next 11 games, but on July 17 in Cleveland, at a
night game attended by 67,468, he failed against two pitchers, Al Smith and Jim

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 598

55

6/18/12 3:12 PM

TAleSe • THe SIleNT SeASON Of A HeRO

599

Bagby, Jr., although Cleveland’s hero was really its third baseman, Ken Keltner,
who in the first inning lunged to his right to make a spectacular backhanded stop of
a drive and, from the foul line behind third base, threw DiMaggio out. DiMaggio
received a walk in the fourth inning. But in the seventh he again hit a hard shot at
Keltner, who again stopped it and threw him out. DiMaggio hit sharply toward
the shortstop in the eighth inning, the ball taking a bad hop, but Lou Boudreau
speared it off his shoulder and threw to the second baseman to start a double play
and DiMaggio’s streak was stopped at 56 games. But the New York Yankees were
on their way to winning the pennant by 17 games, and the World Series too, and
so in August, in a hotel suite in Washington, the players threw a surprise party for
DiMaggio and toasted him with champagne and presented him with his Tiffany
silver humidor that is now in San Francisco in his living room. . . .

Y
Marie was in the kitchen making toast and tea when DiMaggio came down for
breakfast; his gray hair was uncombed but, since he wears it short, it was not
untidy. He said good morning to Marie, sat down, and yawned. He lit a cigarette.
He wore a blue wool bathrobe over his pajamas. It was 8:00 a.m. He had many
things to do today and he seemed cheerful. He had a conference with the president of Continental Television, Inc., a large retail chain in California of which he
is a partner and vice-president; later he had a golf date, and then a big banquet to
attend, and, if that did not go on too long and if he were not too tired afterward,
he might have a date.
Picking up the morning paper, not rushing to the sports page, DiMaggio read
the front-page news, the people problems of 1966; Kwame Nkrumah was overthrown in Ghana, students were burning their draft cards (DiMaggio shook his
head), the flu epidemic was spreading through the whole state of California. Then
he flipped inside through the gossip columns, thankful they did not have him
in there today — they had printed an item about his dating “an electrifying airline hostess” not long ago, and they also spotted him at dinner with Dori Lane,
“the frantic frugger” in Whisky à Go Go’s glass cage — and then he turned to the
sports page and read a story about how the injured Mickey Mantle may never
regain his form.
It happened all so quickly, the passing of Mantle, or so it seemed; he had succeeded DiMaggio, who had succeeded Ruth, but now there was no great young
power hitter coming up, and the Yankee management, almost desperate, had
talked Mantle out of retirement, and on September 18, 1965, they gave him a
“day” in New York during which he received several thousand dollars’ worth of
gifts — an automobile, two quarter horses, free vacation trips to Rome, Nassau,
Puerto Rico — and DiMaggio had flown to New York to make the introduction
before 50,000: it had been a dramatic day, an almost holy day for the believers
who had jammed the grandstands early to witness the canonization of a new
stadium saint. Cardinal [Francis] Spellman was on the committee, President

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 599

6/18/12 3:12 PM

600

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

[Lyndon] Johnson sent a telegram, the day was officially proclaimed by the Mayor
of New York, an orchestra assembled in the center field in front of the trinity of
monuments to Ruth, [Lou] Gehrig, [Miller] Huggins; and high in the grandstands, billowing in the breeze of early autumn, were white banners that read:
“Don’t Quit, Mick,” “We Love the Mick.”
The banner had been held by hundreds of young boys whose dreams had
been fulfilled so often by Mantle, but also seated in the grandstands were older
men, paunchy and balding, in whose middle-aged minds DiMaggio was still vivid
and invincible, and some of them remembered how one month before, during a
pregame exhibition at Old-Timers’ Day in Yankee Stadium, DiMaggio had hit a
pitch into the left-field seats, and suddenly thousands of people had jumped
wildly to their feet, joyously screaming — the great DiMaggio had returned, they
were young again, it was yesterday.
But on this sunny September day at the stadium, the feast day of Mickey
Mantle, DiMaggio was not wearing No. 5 on his back or a black cap to cover his
graying hair; he was wearing a black suit and white shirt and blue tie, and he
stood in one corner of the Yankees’ dugout waiting to be introduced by Red Barber,
who was standing near home plate behind a silver microphone. In the outfield
Guy Lombardo’s Royal Canadians were playing soothing, soft music; and moving slowly back and forth over the sprawling green grass between the left-field
bullpen and the infield were two carts driven by grounds keepers and containing dozens and dozens of large gifts for Mantle — a 6-foot, 100-pound Hebrew
National salami, a Winchester rifle, a mink coat for Mrs. Mantle, a set of Wilson
golf clubs, a year’s supply of Chunky Candy. DiMaggio smoked a cigarette, but
cupped it in his hands as if not wanting to be caught in the act by teen-aged boys
near enough to peek down into the dugout. Then, edging forward a step, DiMaggio
poked his head out and looked up. He could see nothing above except the packed,
towering green grandstands that seemed a mile high and moving, and he could
see no clouds or blue sky, only a sky of faces. Then the announcer called out
his name — “Joe DiMaggio!” — and suddenly there was a blast of cheering that
grew louder and louder, echoing and reechoing within the big steel canyon, and
DiMaggio stomped out his cigarette and climbed up the dugout steps and onto
the soft green grass, the noise resounding in his ears, he could almost feel the
breeze, the breath of 50,000 lungs upon him, 100,000 eyes watching his every
move, and for the briefest instant as he walked he closed his eyes.
Then in his path he saw Mickey Mantle’s mother, a smiling woman wearing
an orchid, and he gently reached out for her elbow, holding it as he led her toward
the microphone next to the other dignitaries lined up on the infield. Then he
stood, very erect and without expression as the cheers softened and the stadium
settled down.
Mantle was still in the dugout, in uniform, standing with one leg on the top
step, and lined on both sides of him were the other Yankees who, when the ceremony was over, would play the Detroit Tigers. Then into the dugout, smiling,

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 600

60

6/18/12 3:12 PM

TAleSe • THe SIleNT SeASON Of A HeRO

601

came Senator Robert Kennedy, accompanied by two tall curly-haired assistants
with blue eyes, Fordham freckles. Jim Farley was the first on the field to notice the
Senator, and Farley muttered, loud enough for others to hear, “Who the hell
invited him?”
Toots Shor and some of the other committeemen standing near Farley looked
into the dugout, and so did DiMaggio, his glance seeming cold, but he remained
silent. Kennedy walked up and down within the dugout, shaking hands with the
Yankees, but he did not walk onto the field.
“Senator,” said Yankees’ manager Johnny Keane, “why don’t you sit down?”
Kennedy quickly shook his head, smiled. He remained standing, and then one
Yankee came over and asked about getting relatives out of Cuba, and Kennedy
called over one of his aides to take down the details in a notebook.
On the infield the ceremony went on, Mantle’s gifts continued to pile up — a
Mobilette motorbike, a Sooner Schooner wagon barbecue, a year’s supply of
Chock Full O’ Nuts coffee, a year’s supply of Topps Chewing Gum — and the
Yankee players watched, and Maris seemed glum.
“Hey, Rog,” yelled a man with a tape recorder, Murray Olderman, “I want to
do a 30-second tape with you.”
Maris swore angrily, shook his head.
“Why don’t you ask Richardson? He’s a better talker than me.”
“Yes, but the fact that it comes from you . . .”
Maris swore again. But finally he went over and said in an interview that
Mantle was the finest player of his era, a great competitor, a great hitter.
Fifteen minutes later, standing behind the microphone at home plate, DiMaggio was telling the crowd, “I’m proud to introduce the man who succeeded
me in center field in 1951,” and from every corner of the stadium, the cheering,
whistling, clapping came down. Mantle stepped forward. He stood with his wife
and children, posed for the photographers kneeling in front. Then he thanked the
crowd in a short speech, and, turning, shook hands with the dignitaries standing
nearby. Among them now was Senator Kennedy, who had been spotted in the
dugout five minutes before by Red Barber, and been called out and introduced.
Kennedy posed with Mantle for a photographer, then shook hands with the Mantle
children, and with Toots Shor and James Farley and others. DiMaggio saw him
coming down the line and at the last second he backed away, casually, hardly anybody noticing it, and Kennedy seemed not to notice it either, just swept past,
shaking more hands. . . .
Finishing his tea, putting aside the newspaper, DiMaggio went upstairs to
dress, soon he was waving good-bye to Marie and driving toward his business
appointment in downtown San Francisco with his partners in the retail television
business. DiMaggio, while not a millionaire, has invested wisely and has always
had, since his retirement from baseball, executive positions with big companies
that have paid him well. He also was among the organizers of the Fisherman’s
National Bank of San Francisco last year, and, though it never came about, he

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 601

65

70

6/18/12 3:12 PM

602

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

demonstrated an acuteness that impressed those businessmen who had thought
of him only in terms of baseball. He has had offers to manage big-league baseball
teams but always has rejected them, saying, “I have enough trouble taking care of
my own problems without taking on the responsibilities of 25 ball players.”
So his only contact with baseball these days, excluding public appearances, is
his unsalaried job as a batting coach each spring in Florida with the New York
Yankees, a trip he would make once again on the following Sunday, three days
away, if he could accomplish what for him is always the dreaded responsibility of
packing, a task made no easier by the fact that he lately had fallen into the habit
of keeping his clothes in two places — some hang in his closet at home, some
hang in the back room of a saloon called Reno’s.
Reno’s is a dimly lit bar in the center of San Francisco. A portrait of DiMaggio
swinging a bat hangs on the wall, in addition to portraits of other star athletes,
and the clientele consists mainly of the sporting crowd and newspapermen,
people who know DiMaggio quite well and around whom he speaks freely on a
number of subjects and relaxes as he can in few other places. The owner of the bar
is Reno Barsocchini, a broad-shouldered and handsome man of 51 with graying wavy hair who began as a fiddler in Dago Mary’s tavern 35 years ago. He
later became a bartender there and elsewhere, including DiMaggio’s Restaurant,
and now he is probably DiMaggio’s closest friend. He was the best man at the
DiMaggio-Monroe wedding in 1954, and when they separated nine months later
in Los Angeles, Reno rushed down to help DiMaggio with the packing and drove
him back to San Francisco. Reno will never forget the day.
Hundreds of people were gathered around the Beverly Hills home that
DiMaggio and Marilyn had rented, and photographers were perched in the trees
watching the windows, and others stood on the lawn and behind the rose bushes
waiting to snap pictures of anybody who walked out of the house. The newspapers that day played all the puns — “Joe Fanned on Jealousy”; “Marilyn and
Joe — Out at Home” — and the Hollywood columnists, to whom DiMaggio was
never an idol, never a gracious host, recounted instances of incompatibility, and
Oscar Levant said it all proved that no man could be a success in two national
pastimes. When Reno Barsocchini arrived, he had to push his way through the
mob, then bang on the door for several minutes before being admitted. Marilyn
Monroe was upstairs in bed. Joe DiMaggio was downstairs with his suitcases,
tense and pale, his eyes bloodshot.
Reno took the suitcase and golf clubs out to DiMaggio’s car, and then DiMaggio
came out of the house, the reporters moving toward him, the lights flashing.
“Where are you going?” they yelled.
“I’m driving to San Francisco,” he said, walking quickly.
“Is that going to be your home?”
“That is my home and always has been.”
“Are you coming back?”
DiMaggio turned for a moment, looking up at the house.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 602

75

80

6/18/12 3:12 PM

TAleSe • THe SIleNT SeASON Of A HeRO

603

“No,” he said, “I’ll never be back.”
Reno Barsocchini, except for a brief falling-out over something he will not
discuss, has been DiMaggio’s trusted companion ever since, joining him whenever he can on the golf course or on the town, otherwise waiting for him in the
bar with other middle-aged men. They may wait for hours sometimes, waiting
and knowing that when he arrives he may wish to be alone; but it does not seem
to matter, they are endlessly awed by him, moved by the mystique, he is a kind of
male Garbo. They know that he can be warm and loyal if they are sensitive to
his wishes, but they must never be late for an appointment to meet him. One
man, unable to find a parking place, arrived a half hour late once, and DiMaggio
did not talk to him again for three months. They know, too, when dining at
night with DiMaggio, that he generally prefers male companions and occasionally one or two young women, but never wives; wives gossip, wives complain,
wives are trouble, and men wishing to remain close to DiMaggio must keep their
wives at home.
When DiMaggio strolls into Reno’s bar, the men wave and call out his name
and Reno Barsocchini smiles and announces, “Here’s the Clipper!” — the “Yankee
Clipper” being a nickname from his baseball days.
“Hey Clipper, Clipper,” Reno had said two nights before, “where you been,
Clipper? . . . Clipper, how ’bout a belt?”
DiMaggio refused the offer of a drink, ordering instead a pot of tea, which he
prefers to all other beverages except before a date, when he will switch to vodka.
“Hey, Joe,” a sports writer asked, a man researching a magazine piece on golf,
“why is it that a golfer, when he starts getting older, loses his putting touch first?
Like [Sam] Snead and [Ben] Hogan, they can still hit a ball well off the tee, but on
the greens they lose the strokes.”
“It’s the pressure of age,” DiMaggio said, turning around on his barstool.
“With age you get jittery. It’s true of golfers, it’s true of any man when he gets into
his 50s. He doesn’t take chances like he used to. The younger golfer, on the greens,
he’ll stroke his putts better. The older man, he becomes hesitant. A little uncertain. Shaky. When it comes to taking chances, the younger man, even when driving a car, will take chances that the older man won’t.”
“Speaking of chances,” another man said, one of the group that had gathered
around DiMaggio, “did you see that guy on crutches in here last night?”
“Yeah, had his leg in a cast,” a third said. “Skiing.”
“I would never ski,” DiMaggio said. “Men who ski must be doing it to impress
a broad. You see these men, some of them 40, 50, getting onto skis. And later you
see them all bandaged up, broken legs.”
“But skiing’s a very sexy sport, Joe. All the clothes, the tight pants, the fireplaces in the ski lodge, the bear rug — Christ nobody goes to ski. They just go out
there to get it cold so they can warm it up.”
“Maybe you’re right,” DiMaggio said. “I might be persuaded.”
“Want a belt, Clipper?” Reno asked.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 603

85

90

95

6/18/12 3:12 PM

604

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

DiMaggio thought for a second, then said, “All right — first belt tonight.”
Now it was noon, a warm sunny day. DiMaggio’s business meeting with
the television retailers had gone well; he had made a strong appeal to George
Shahood, president of Continental Television, Inc., which has eight retail outlets
in Northern California, to put prices on color television sets and increase the sales
volume, and Shahood had conceded it was worth a try. Then DiMaggio called
Reno’s bar to see if there were any messages, and now he was in Lefty O’Doul’s car
being driven along Fisherman’s Wharf toward the Golden Gate Bridge en route to
a golf course 30 miles upstate. Lefty O’Doul was one of the great hitters in the
National League in the early thirties, and later he managed the San Francisco
Seals when DiMaggio was the shining star. Though O’Doul is now 69, 18 years
older than DiMaggio, he nevertheless possesses great energy and spirit, is a harddrinking, boisterous man with a big belly and roving eye; and when DiMaggio, as
they drove along the highway toward the golf club, noticed a lovely blonde at the
wheel of a car nearby and exclaimed, “Look at that tomato!” O’Doul’s head suddenly spun around, he took his eyes off the road, and yelled, “Where, where?”
O’Doul’s golf game is less than what it was — he used to have a two-handicap —
but he still shoots in the 80s, as does DiMaggio.
DiMaggio’s drives range between 250 and 280 yards when he doesn’t sky
them, and his putting is good, but he is distracted by a bad back that both pains
him and hinders the fullness of his swing. On the first hole, waiting to tee off,
DiMaggio sat back watching a foursome of college boys ahead swinging with
such freedom. “Oh,” he said with a sigh, “to have their backs.”
DiMaggio and O’Doul were accompanied around the golf course by Ernie
Nevers, the former football star, and two brothers who are in the hotel and moviedistribution business. They moved quickly up and down the green hills in electric
golf carts, and DiMaggio’s game was exceptionally good for the first nine holes.
But then he seemed distracted, perhaps tired, perhaps even reacting to a conversation of a few minutes before. One of the movie men was praising the film
Boeing, Boeing, starring Tony Curtis and Jerry Lewis, and the man asked DiMaggio if he had seen it.
“No,” DiMaggio said. Then he added, swiftly, “I haven’t seen a film in eight
years.”
DiMaggio hooked a few shots, was in the woods. He took a No. 9 iron and
tried to chip out. But O’Doul interrupted DiMaggio’s concentration to remind
him to keep the face of the club closed. DiMaggio hit the ball. It caromed off the
side of his club, went skipping like a rabbit through the high grass down toward
a pond. DiMaggio rarely displays any emotion on a golf course, but now, without
saying a word, he took his No. 9 iron and flung it into the air. The club landed in
a tree and stayed up there.
“Well,” O’Doul said casually, “there goes that set of clubs.”
DiMaggio walked to the tree. Fortunately the club had slipped to the lower
branch, and DiMaggio could stretch up on the cart and get it back.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 604

100

6/18/12 3:12 PM

From p. 23

From p. 25

SHE_67650_Insert_01_24.indd 1

6/11/12 12:08 PM

From p. 66

SHE_67650_Insert_01_24.indd 2

6/11/12 12:08 PM

From p. 68

SHE_67650_Insert_01_24.indd 3

6/11/12 12:08 PM

From p. 82

TOLES © 2005 The Washington Post. Reprinted with permission of Universal Uclick. All rights
reserved.

From p. 133

www.polyp.org.uk

SHE_67650_Insert_01_24.indd 4

6/11/12 12:08 PM

From p. 137

SHE_67650_Insert_01_24.indd 5

6/11/12 12:08 PM

From p. 174

SHE_67650_Insert_01_24.indd 6

6/11/12 12:08 PM

From p. 242

Norman Rockwell, The Spirit of Education (1934, oil on canvas, 32” x 24”).

SHE_67650_Insert_01_24.indd 7

6/11/12 12:08 PM

From pp. 244–46

SHE_67650_Insert_01_24.indd 8

6/11/12 12:08 PM

SHE_67650_Insert_01_24.indd 9

6/11/12 12:08 PM

SHE_67650_Insert_01_24.indd 10

6/11/12 12:08 PM

From p. 357

Norman Rockwell, Freedom from Want (1943, oil on canvas, 45.75” x 35.5”).

SHE_67650_Insert_01_24.indd 11

6/11/12 12:08 PM

From p. 359

From p. 473

SHE_67650_Insert_01_24.indd 12

6/11/12 12:08 PM

SHE_67650_Insert_01_24.indd 13

6/11/12 12:08 PM

Charles Le Brun, Chancellor Séguier at the Entry of Louis XIV into Paris in 1660 (c. 1661, oil on canvas, 295 x 357 cm.).

From p. 563

SHE_67650_Insert_01_24.indd 14

6/11/12 12:08 PM

Kehinde Wiley, The Chancellor Séguier on Horseback (2005, oil on canvas, 108” x 144”).

From p. 564

From p. 670

From p. 767

SHE_67650_Insert_01_24.indd 15

6/11/12 12:08 PM

From p. 826

From p. 873

SHE_67650_Insert_01_24.indd 16

6/11/12 12:08 PM

From p. 954
SHE_67650_Insert_01_24.indd 17

6/11/12 12:08 PM

From pp. 956–57

SHE_67650_Insert_01_24.indd 18

6/11/12 12:08 PM

SHE_67650_Insert_01_24.indd 19

6/11/12 12:08 PM

From p. 959

United States: The Caven family of California
Food expenditure for one week: $159.18
Favorite foods: Beef stew, berry yogurt sundae, clam chowder, ice cream

Kuwait: The Al Haggan family of Kuwait City
Food expenditure for one week: 63.63 dinar or $221.45
Family recipe: Chicken biryani with basmati rice

SHE_67650_Insert_01_24.indd 20

6/11/12 12:08 PM

From p. 960

Bhutan: The Namgay family of Shingkhey Village
Food expenditure for one week: 224.93 ngultrum or $5.03
Family recipe: Mushroom, cheese, pork

Ecuador: The Ayme family of Tingo
Food expenditure for one week: $31.55
Family recipe: Potato soup with cabbage

SHE_67650_Insert_01_24.indd 21

6/11/12 12:08 PM

From p. 961

Chad: The Aboubakar family of Breidjing Camp
Food expenditure for one week: 685 CFA francs or $1.23
Favorite foods: Soup with fresh sheep meat

Germany: The Melander family of Bargteheide
Food expenditure for one week: 375.39 euros or $500.07
Favorite foods: Fried potatoes with onions, bacon and herring, fried noodles with eggs and cheese, pizza,
vanilla pudding

SHE_67650_Insert_01_24.indd 22

6/11/12 12:08 PM

From p. 1087
SHE_67650_Insert_01_24.indd 23

6/11/12 12:08 PM

From pp. 1116–17
SHE_67650_Insert_01_24.indd 24

6/11/12 12:08 PM

TAleSe • THe SIleNT SeASON Of A HeRO

605

“Every time I get advice,” DiMaggio muttered to himself, shaking his head
slowly and walking toward the pond, “I shank it.”
Later, showered and dressed, DiMaggio and the others drove to a banquet
about 10 miles from the golf course. Somebody had said it was going to be an
elegant dinner, but when they arrived they could see it was more like a county
fair; farmers were gathered outside a big barnlike building, a candidate for sheriff
was distributing leaflets at the front door, and a chorus of homely ladies was
inside singing “You Are My Sunshine.”
“How did we get sucked into this?” DiMaggio asked, talking out of the side of
his mouth, as they approached the building.
“O’Doul,” one of the men said. “It’s his fault. Damned O’Doul can’t turn
anything down.”
“Go to hell,” O’Doul said.
Soon DiMaggio and O’Doul and Ernie Nevers were surrounded by the
crowd, and the woman who had been leading the chorus came rushing over and
said, “Oh, Mr. DiMaggio, it certainly is a pleasure having you.”
“It’s a pleasure being here, ma’am,” he said, forcing a smile.
“It’s too bad you didn’t arrive a moment sooner. You’d have heard our
singing.”
“Oh, I heard it,” he said, “and I enjoyed it very much.”
“Good, good,” she said. “And how are your brothers, Dom and Vic?”
“Fine. Dom lives near Boston. Vince is in Pittsburgh.”
“Why, hello there, Joe,” interrupted a man with wine on his breath, patting
DiMaggio on the back, feeling his arm. “Who’s gonna take it this year, Joe?”
“Well, I have no idea,” DiMaggio said.
“What about the Giants?”
“Your guess is as good as mine.”
“Well, you can’t count the Dodgers out,” the man said.
“You sure can’t,” DiMaggio said.
“Not with all that pitching.”
“Pitching is certainly important,” DiMaggio said.
Everywhere he goes the question seems the same, as if he has some special
vision into the future of new heroes, and everywhere he goes, too, older men grab
his hand and feel his arm and predict that he could still go out there and hit one,
and the smile on DiMaggio’s face is genuine. He tries hard to remain as he
was — he diets, he takes steambaths, he is careful; and flabby men in the locker
rooms of golf clubs sometimes steal peeks at him when he steps out of the shower,
observing the tight muscles across his chest, the flat stomach, the long sinewy
legs. He has a young man’s body, very pale and little hair; his face is dark and
lined, however, parched by the sun of several seasons. Still he is always an impressive figure at banquets such as this — an “immortal” sports writers called him,
and that is how they have written about him and others like him, rarely suggesting that such heroes might ever be prone to the ills of mortal men, carousing,

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 605

105

110

115

120

6/18/12 3:12 PM

606

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

drinking, scheming; to suggest this would destroy the myth, would disillusion
small boys, would infuriate rich men who own ball clubs and to whom baseball is
a business dedicated to profit and in pursuit of which they trade mediocre players’
flesh as casually as boys trade players’ pictures on bubble-gum cards. And so the
baseball hero must always act the part, must preserve the myth, and none does it
better than DiMaggio, none is more patient when drunken old men grab an arm
and ask, “Who’s gonna take it this year, Joe?”
Two hours later, dinner and the speeches over, DiMaggio was slumped in
O’Doul’s car headed back to San Francisco. He edged himself up, however, when
O’Doul pulled into a gas station in which a pretty red-haired girl sat on a stool,
legs crossed, filing her fingernails. She was about 22, wore a tight black skirt and
tighter white blouse.
“Look at that,” DiMaggio said.
“Yeah,” O’Doul said.
O’Doul turned away when a young man approached, opened the gas tank,
began wiping the windshield. The young man wore a greasy white uniform on
the front of which was printed the name “Burt.” DiMaggio kept looking at the
girl, but she was not distracted from her fingernails. Then he looked at Burt, who
did not recognize him. When the tank was full, O’Doul paid and drove off. Burt
returned to his girl; DiMaggio slumped down in the front seat and did not open
his eyes again until they arrived in San Francisco.
“Let’s go see Reno,” DiMaggio said.
“No, I gotta go see my old lady,” O’Doul said. So he dropped DiMaggio off in
front of the bar, and a moment later Reno’s voice was announcing in the smoky
room, “Hey, here’s the Clipper!” The men waved and offered to buy him a drink.
DiMaggio ordered a vodka and sat for an hour at the bar talking to a half-dozen
men around him. Then a blonde girl who had been with friends at the other end
of the bar came over, and somebody introduced her to DiMaggio. He bought her
a drink, offered her a cigarette. Then he struck a match and held it. His hand was
unsteady.
“Is that me that’s shaking?” he asked.
“It must be,” said the blonde. “I’m calm.”
Two nights later, having collected his clothes out of Reno’s back room,
DiMaggio boarded a jet; he slept crossways on three seats, then came down the
steps as the sun began to rise in Miami. He claimed his luggage and golf clubs, put
them into the trunk of a waiting automobile, and less than an hour later he was
being driven into Fort Lauderdale, past palm-lined streets, toward the Yankee
Clipper Hotel.
“All my life it seems I’ve been on the road traveling,” he said, squinting
through the windshield into the sun. “I never get a sense of being in any one
place.”
Arriving at the Yankee Clipper Hotel, DiMaggio checked into the largest
suite. People rushed through the lobby to shake hands with him, to ask for his

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 606

125

130

135

6/18/12 3:12 PM

TAleSe • THe SIleNT SeASON Of A HeRO

607

autograph, to say, “Joe, you look great.” And early the next morning, and for the
next 30 mornings, DiMaggio arrived punctually at the baseball park and wore his
uniform with the famous No. 5, and the tourists seated in the sunny grandstands
clapped when he first appeared on the field each time, and then they watched
with nostalgia as he picked up a bat and played “pepper” with the younger Yankees, some of whom were not even born when, 25 years ago this summer, he hit
in 56 straight games and became the most celebrated man in America.
But the younger spectators in the Fort Lauderdale park, and the sports writers, too, were more interested in Mantle and Maris, and nearly every day there
were news dispatches reporting how Mantle and Maris felt, what they did, what
they said, even though they said and did very little except walk around the field
frowning when photographers asked for another picture and when sports writers
asked how they felt.
After seven days of this, the big day arrived — Mantle and Maris would swing
a bat — and a dozen sports writers were gathered around the big batting cage
that was situated beyond the left-field fence; it was completely enclosed in wire,
meaning that no baseball could travel more than 30 or 40 feet before being
trapped in rope; still Mantle and Maris would be swinging, and this, in spring,
makes news.
Mantle stepped in first. He wore black gloves to help prevent blisters. He
hit right-handed against the pitching of a coach named Vern Benson, and soon
Mantle was swinging hard, smashing line drives against the nets, going ahhh ahhh
as he followed through with his mouth open.
Then Mantle, not wanting to overdo it on his first day, dropped his bat in the
dirt and walked out of the batting cage. Roger Maris stepped in. He picked up
Mantle’s bat.
“This damn thing must be 38 ounces,” Maris said. He threw the bat down
into the dirt, left the cage, and walked toward the dugout on the other side of the
field to get a lighter bat.
DiMaggio stood among the sports writers behind the cage, then turned when
Vern Benson, inside the cage, yelled, “Joe, wanna hit some?”
“No chance,” DiMaggio said.
“Com’on Joe,” Benson said.
The reporters waited silently. Then DiMaggio walked slowly into the cage
and picked up Mantle’s bat. He took his position at the plate but obviously it was
not the classic DiMaggio stance; he was holding the bat about two inches from
the knob, his feet were not so far apart, and when DiMaggio took a cut at Benson’s
first pitch, fouling it, there was none of that ferocious follow-through, the blurred
bat did not come whipping all the way around, the No. 5 was not stretched full
across his broad back.
DiMaggio fouled Benson’s second pitch, then he connected solidly with the
third, the fourth, the fifth. He was just meeting the ball easily, however, not smashing it, and Benson called out, “I didn’t know you were a choke hitter, Joe.”

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 607

140

145

6/18/12 3:12 PM

608

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

“I am now,” DiMaggio said, getting ready for another pitch.
He hit three more squarely enough, and then he swung again and there was
a hollow sound.
“Ohhh,” DiMaggio yelled, dropping his bat, his fingers stung. “I was waiting
for that one.” He left the batting cage, rubbing his hands together. The reporters
watched him. Nobody said anything. Then DiMaggio said to one of them, not in
anger or in sadness, but merely as a simply stated fact, “There was a time when
you couldn’t get me out of there.”

Questions for Discussion
1. How does Gay Talese create a picture of Joe DiMaggio at loose ends that nevertheless suggests his heroism?
2. What does Talese tell us about the position of sports in American popular culture?
3. Talese describes DiMaggio as “a kind of male Garbo,” referring to the legendary,
reclusive film star Greta Garbo (para. 85). The comparison suggests that DiMaggio’s
detachment was a masculine ideal. Does this ideal still resonate? How does it square
with the image of today’s superstar athletes? Does our media-crazy era demand
more engagement from our heroes? Are we still capable of being “moved by the
mystique” (para. 85)?
4. Talese has said that his work is a highly personal response to the world as an Italian
American outsider. What evidence do you find that it is an outsider’s voice? How
does the authorial voice of an outsider add nuance to the profile of Joe DiMaggio?
5. Why is spring the silent season? Consider the title from the perspective of fishing
and baseball.

Questions on Rhetoric and Style
1. What is the effect of juxtaposing details of Joe DiMaggio’s legendary baseball
prowess with details of his everyday life in San Francisco as a retired athlete?
2. Why does “The Silent Season of a Hero” open with a quotation from Hemingway’s
The Old Man and the Sea? Cite specific passages from Talese’s essay to support
your answer.
3. The “tall gray-haired man in a dark suit” in the first paragraph is obviously Joe
DiMaggio, but Talese waits until the end of paragraph 2 to name him. What is the
effect of delaying identification of the essay’s subject?
4. Characterize the narrator. Does he step forward at any time? Who is the “man from
New York” (para. 12)? Who is asked by the narrator to comment on DiMaggio?
5. Although DiMaggio was a baseball player, the essay sometimes sounds as if it’s
about a fisherman. Trace both the language of baseball and the language of fishing. Which is predominant?
6. Talese suggests — but doesn’t come out and say — that Joe DiMaggio and Marilyn
Monroe were competitive about their celebrity. How does Talese use Monroe’s

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 608

6/18/12 3:12 PM

TAleSe • THe SIleNT SeASON Of A HeRO

609

mythical status to develop his portrait of DiMaggio? Is he sympathetic to her?
Does his profile of DiMaggio deepen our understanding of Monroe, or does she
remain as tantalizingly out of reach as she seems to have been to DiMaggio?
Explain your responses.
7. Several parts of the essay — especially paragraphs 3 and 41 — evoke Hemingway.
How do the images and language of those allusions create another level of meaning? How do they add to the portrait of DiMaggio?
8. What is the overall tone of the essay? How does Talese achieve his tone? How does
the tone add a layer of meaning?
9. Talese notes that sportswriters have called DiMaggio an “immortal” (para. 124).
How does the essay both support and debunk that myth?
10. Explain the assumptions Talese makes about his audience based on his portrait of
DiMaggio as an aging hero.

Suggestions for Writing
1. Write an essay in which you analyze the strategies that Talese uses in paragraphs
116–124 to add complexity and nuance to his portrayal of Joe DiMaggio.
2. In this profile of the Yankee player, Talese doesn’t hide the fact that DiMaggio
smokes, drinks alcohol, and is dismissive of women. Write an essay in which you
examine the responsibility of sportswriters. Should they airbrush their subjects to
ensure that they meet their obligations as role models? Or should sportswriters
give us the unvarnished truth?
3. Examine the parts of the selection that are about Marilyn Monroe, especially the
anecdote about her performing for the troops in Korea (paras. 48–50). Write an
essay about how, in the absence of details about why her marriage to DiMaggio
failed, the language suggests that perhaps the marriage could not accommodate
two egos as strong as DiMaggio’s and Monroe’s. Read other accounts of the marriage to see if they support or contradict Talese’s, and refer to them in your essay.
4. Read “Sinatra Has a Cold,” Talese’s profile of Frank Sinatra. Compare and contrast
it with “The Silent Season of a Hero.” How is the author’s voice similar or different? Compare the treatment of DiMaggio and Sinatra as embodiments of a masculine ideal.
5. Paragraphs 53–56 recount DiMaggio’s 1941 hitting streak, which ended at a
record-breaking fifty-six games. During this streak, the New York Yankees went
from fourth place in the American League to victory in the World Series. The
missing bat — returned by a rueful fan — seems to have been the magic charm.
Compare this account with other tales of heroes who depend on the power of a
sword, a shield, or some other special piece of equipment.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 609

6/18/12 3:12 PM

The Four Horsemen
Grantland Rice
Known as the Dean of American Sports Writers, Grantland Rice
(1880–1954) was born in Murfreesboro, Tennessee. He attended
Vanderbilt University, where he majored in latin and Greek, and
worked at newspapers in Nashville, Atlanta, New York, and Washington, D.C. In addition to writing about sports, Rice published books
of light verse. One of his most frequently quoted poetic couplets is
“for when the One Great Scorer comes to mark against your name, /
He writes — not that you won or lost — but how you played the Game.”
Rice’s style was easy to recognize; he elevated the sporting events he reported on
beyond mere games. He made heroes out of the athletes he admired, including
Jack Dempsey, Babe Ruth, Babe Didrikson Zaharias, and the horse Seabiscuit. In
this famous 1924 piece from the New York Herald Tribune, Rice reports on the
football game between Notre Dame and Army, which was played at the Polo
Grounds in New York City.

O

utlined against a blue-gray October sky, the Four Horsemen rode again.
In dramatic lore they are known as Famine, Pestilence, Destruction and
Death. These are only aliases. Their real names are Stuhldreher, Miller, Crowley
and Layden. They formed the crest of the South Bend cyclone before which
another fighting Army football team was swept over the precipice at the Polo
Grounds yesterday afternoon as 55,000 spectators peered down on the bewildering panorama spread on the green plain below.
A cyclone can’t be snared. It may be surrounded, but somewhere it breaks
through to keep on going. When the cyclone starts from South Bend, where the
candle lights still gleam through the Indiana sycamores, those in the way must
take to storm cellars at top speed.
Yesterday the cyclone struck again as Notre Dame beat the Army, 13 to 7,
with a set of backfield stars that ripped and crashed through a strong Army
defense with more speed and power than the warring cadets could meet.
Notre Dame won its ninth game in twelve Army starts through the driving
power of one of the greatest backfields that ever churned up the turf of any gridiron in any football age. Brilliant backfields may come and go, but in Stuhldreher,
Miller, Crowley and Layden, covered by a fast and charging line, Notre Dame can
take its place in front of the field.
Coach McEwan sent one of his finest teams into action, an aggressive organization that fought to the last play around the first rim of darkness, but when
Rockne rushed his Four Horsemen to the track they rode down everything in
sight. It was in vain that 1,400 gray-clad cadets pleaded for the Army line to hold.

5

610

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 610

6/18/12 3:12 PM

RICe • THe fOUR HORSeMeN

611

The Army line was giving all it had, but when a tank tears in with the speed of a
motorcycle, what chance had flesh and blood to hold? The Army had its share of
stars as Garbisch, Farwick, Wilson, Wood, Ellinger and many others, but they
were up against four whirlwind backs who picked up at top speed from the first
step as they swept through scant openings to slip on by the secondary defense.
The Army had great backs in Wilson and Wood, but the Army had no such quartet, who seemed to carry the mixed blood of the tiger and the antelope.
Rockne’s light and tottering line was just about as tottering as the Rock of
Gibraltar. It was something more than a match for the Army’s great set of forwards, who had earned their fame before. Yet it was not until the second period
that the first big thrill of the afternoon set the great crowd into a cheering whirl
and brought about the wild flutter of flags that are thrown to the wind in exciting
moments. At the game’s start Rockne sent in almost entirely a second-string cast.
The Army got the jump and began to play most of the football. It was the Army
attack that made three first downs before Notre Dame had caught its stride. The
South Bend cyclone opened like a zephyr.
And then, in the wake of a sudden cheer, out rushed Stuhldreher, Miller,
Crowley and Layden, the four star backs who helped to beat Army a year ago.
Things were to be a trifle different now. After a short opening flurry in the second period, Wood, of the Army, kicked out of bounds on Notre Dame’s 20 yard
line. There was no sign of a tornado starting. But it happened to be at just
this spot that Stuhldreher decided to put on his attack and began the long and
dusty hike.
On the first play the fleet Crowley peeled off 15 yards and the cloud from
the west was now beginning to show signs of lightning and thunder. The fleet,
powerful Layden got 6 yards more and then Don Miller added 10. A forward
pass from Stuhldreher to Crowley added 12 yards, and a moment later Don
Miller ran 20 yards around Army’s right wing. He was on his way to glory when
Wilson, hurtling across the right of way, nailed him on the 10 yard line and
threw him out of bounds. Crowley, Miller and Layden — Miller, Layden and
Crowley — one or another, ripping and crashing through, as the Army defense
threw everything it had in the way to stop this wild charge that had now come
70 yards. Crowley and Layden added 5 yards more and then, on a split play,
Layden went 10 yards across the line as if he had just been fired from the black
mouth of a howitzer.
In that second period Notre Dame made eight first downs to the Army’s
none, which shows the unwavering power of the Western attack that hammered
relentlessly and remorselessly without easing up for a second’s breath. The Western line was going its full share, led by the crippled Walsh with a broken hand.
But there always was Miller or Crowley or Layden, directed through the right
spot by the cool and crafty judgment of Stuhldreher, who picked his plays with
the finest possible generalship. The South Bend cyclone had now roared 85 yards
to a touchdown through one of the strongest defensive teams in the game. The

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 611

10

6/18/12 3:12 PM

612

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

cyclone had struck with too much speed and power to be stopped. It was the
preponderance of Western speed that swept the Army back.
The next period was much like the second. The trouble began when the alert
Layden intercepted an Army pass on the 48 yard line. Stuhldreher was ready for
another march.
Once again the cheering cadets began to call for a rallying stand. They are
never overwhelmed by any shadow of defeat as long as there is a minute of fighting left. But silence fell over the cadet sector for just a second as Crowley ran
around the Army’s right wing for 15 yards, where Wilson hauled him down on
the 33 yard line. Walsh, the Western captain, was hurt in the play but soon
resumed. Miller got 7 and Layden got 8 and then, with the ball on the Army’s
20 yard line, the cadet defense rallied and threw Miller in his tracks. But the halt
was only for the moment. On the next play Crowley swung out and around the
Army’s left wing, cut in and then crashed over the line for Notre Dame’s second
touchdown.
On two other occasions the Notre Dame attack almost scored. Yeomans
saved one touchdown by intercepting a pass on his 5 yard line as he ran back
35 yards before he was nailed by two tacklers. It was a great play in the nick of
time. On the next drive Miller and Layden in two hurricane dashes took the ball
42 yards to the Army’s 14 yard line, where the still game Army defense stopped
four plunges on the 9 yard line and took the ball.
Up to this point the Army had been outplayed by a crushing margin. Notre
Dame had put underway four long marches and two of these had yielded touchdowns. Even the stout and experienced Army line was meeting more than it could
hold. Notre Dame’s brilliant backs had been provided with the finest possible
interference, usually led by Stuhldreher, who cut down tackler after tackler by
diving at some rival’s flying knees. Against this, each Army attack had been
smothered almost before it got underway. Even the great Wilson, the star from
Penn State, one of the great backfield runners of his day and time, rarely had a
chance to make any headway through a massed wall of tacklers who were blocking every open route.
The sudden change came late in the third quarter, when Wilson, raging like a
wild man, suddenly shot through a tackle opening to run 34 yards before he was
finally collared and thrown with a jolt. A few minutes later Wood, one of the best
of all punters, kicked out of bounds on Notre Dame’s 5 yard line. Here was the
chance. Layden was forced to kick from behind his own goal. The punt soared up
the field as Yeomans called for a free catch on the 35 yard line. As he caught the
ball he was nailed and spilled by a Western tackler, and the penalty gave the Army
15 yards, with the ball on Notre Dame’s 20 yard line.
At this point Harding was rushed to quarter in place of Yeomans, who had
been one of the leading Army stars. On the first three plays the Army reached the
12 yard line, but it was now fourth down, with two yards to go. Harding’s next
play was the feature of the game.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 612

15

6/18/12 3:12 PM

RICe • THe fOUR HORSeMeN

613

As the ball was passed, he faked a play to Wood, diving through the line, held
the oval for just a half breath, then, tucking the same under his arm, swung out
around Notre Dame’s right end. The brilliant fake worked to perfection. The
entire Notre Dame defense had charged forward in a surging mass to check the
line attack and Harding, with open territory, sailed on for a touchdown. He traveled those last 12 yards after the manner of food shot from guns. He was over the
line before the Westerners knew what had taken place. It was a fine bit of strategy,
brilliantly carried over by every member of the cast.
The cadet sector had a chance to rip open the chilly atmosphere at last, and
most of the 55,000 present joined in the tribute to football art. But that was
Army’s last chance to score. From that point on, it was seesaw, up and down, back
and forth, with the rivals fighting bitterly for every inch of ground. It was harder
now to make a foot than it had been to make 10 yards. Even the all-star South
Bend cast could no longer continue to romp for any set distances, as Army tacklers, inspired by the touchdown, charged harder and faster than they had charged
before.
The Army brought a fine football team into action, but it was beaten by a
faster and smoother team. Rockne’s supposedly light, green line was about as
heavy as Army’s, and every whit as aggressive. What is even more important, it
was faster on its feet, faster in getting around.
It was Western speed and perfect interference that once more brought the
Army doom. The Army line couldn’t get through fast enough to break up the
attacking plays; and once started, the bewildering speed and power of the Western backs slashed along for 8, 10, and 15 yards on play after play. And always in
front of these offensive drivers could be found the whirling form of Stuhldreher,
taking the first man out of the play as cleanly as though he had used a hand grenade at close range. This Notre Dame interference was a marvelous thing to look
upon.
It formed quickly and came along in unbroken order, always at terrific speed,
carried by backs who were as hard to drag down as African buffaloes. On receiving the kick-off, Notre Dame’s interference formed something after the manner
of the ancient flying wedge, and they drove back up the field with the runner
covered from 25 and 30 yards at almost every chance. And when a back such as
Harry Wilson finds few chances to get started, you can figure upon the defensive
strength that is barricading the road. Wilson is one of the hardest backs in the
game to suppress, but he found few chances yesterday to show his broken-field
ability. You can’t run through a broken field unless you get there.
One strong feature of the Army play was its headlong battle against heavy
odds. Even when Notre Dame had scored two touchdowns and was well on its
way to a third, the Army fought on with fine spirit until the touchdown chance
came at last. And when the chance came, Coach McEwan had the play ready for
the final march across the line. The Army has a better team than it had last year.
So has Notre Dame. We doubt that any team in the country could have beaten

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 613

20

6/18/12 3:12 PM

614

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

Rockne’s array yesterday afternoon, East or West. It was a great football team brilliantly directed, a team of speed, power and team play. The Army has no cause to
gloom over its showing. It played first-class football against more speed than it
could match.
Those who have tackled a cyclone can understand.

Questions for Discussion
1. In the time when Grantland Rice wrote, the only people reading his recap who had
actually seen the game were those in attendance, unlike today when fans can watch
a game on television, listen to it on the radio, stream it on the Internet, or follow
it on their phones. How do you think this difference in the sports fan’s experience has affected sportswriting? How did Rice make the game come alive for his
readers?
2. Can you discern a bias? Does Rice seem to favor one team over the other? If so,
how can you tell? If not, how does he maintain his neutrality?
3. While most readers consider “The Four Horsemen” an example of great sportswriting, it has also been roundly criticized. What faults can you find in Rice’s
writing?
4. Rice has been compared to epic poets such as Homer for the way he created myths
out of the events and athletes he reported on. What do you think Rice would have
thought of today’s sports media with their close scrutiny of athletes, both on the
field and off?
5. Rice’s lead (the first paragraph of a news article) gave the four Notre Dame football stars — none of whom weighed more than 162 pounds or stood taller than six
feet — the name the Four Horsemen, but it was a clever student publicity man
(who later became the sports editor of the Chicago Tribune) who posed the four
players on horses and created the legend. Analyze the photo on the facing page,
and consider how it compares to the instant and ever-changing images of players
and games we see today.

Questions on Rhetoric and Style
1. How does Rice’s lead set the stage for the story?
2. What assumptions does Rice make about his readership? How can you tell?
3. Characterize the tone of “The Four Horsemen.” Is the tone consistent throughout,
or does it change over the course of the piece?
4. Rice was known for his poetic style. Certainly metaphors are a hallmark of that
style. Identify at least four metaphors, and describe their effects.
5. Remembering that few of his readers would have seen the game he is describing,
consider how Rice re-creates the event for his readers. Look carefully at his descriptions of the scene and the fans, as well as his description of the game.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 614

6/18/12 3:12 PM

RICe • THe fOUR HORSeMeN

615

6. Rice calls Notre Dame (from South Bend, Indiana) “West” or “Westerners” repeatedly (paras. 8–10, 12, 15, 17, 20, 22). He calls the Army team (from West Point,
New York) “East” only once (para. 22). Why might he have characterized Notre
Dame as the western team (even though Indiana is in the Midwest)? Why do you
think he only calls Army “East” once?
7. With few exceptions, Rice identifies the players — even the “Four Horsemen” — by
last name only. What is the effect of that decision?
8. In the New Testament of the Bible, the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse are summoned forth when Jesus opens a scroll that is closed with seven seals. As he opens
the first four seals, four riders come forth, representing Conquest, War, Famine,
and Death — the apocalyptic vision of the Last Judgment. Rice surely was alluding
to the Bible but may have also been referring to a popular silent film of 1921, called
The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse, starring matinee idol Rudolph Valentino.
How do these allusions help Rice re-create the thrilling game?
9. Rice’s extravagant style may feel overblown to us now, but he comes from a
storytelling tradition that characterized sportswriting in the early twentieth century. According to David Maraniss, Pulitzer Prize–winning biographer of Vince
Lombardi, sportswriters like Rice “served as the nation’s tribe of storytellers, popular artists invested with enormous powers to reinforce cultural mores and shape
the public imagination.” In what ways does “The Four Horsemen” reinforce cultural

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 615

6/18/12 3:12 PM

616

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

mores and shape the public’s imagination? What rhetorical strategies does Rice
use to make his story so influential?

Suggestions for Writing
1. Rewrite “The Four Horsemen” using only eight hundred words, the typical word
count of sports columns today.
2. The nineteenth-century American poet Walt Whitman called baseball the “hurrah
game!” and wrote this about it: “Well — it’s our game: that’s the chief fact in connection with it: America’s game: has the snap, go, fling, of the American atmosphere — belongs as much to our institutions, fits into them as significantly, as our
constitutions, laws: is just as important in the sum total of our historic life.” Write
an essay in which you show how Whitman may have influenced Grantland Rice’s
style and outlook in “The Four Horsemen.”
3. Simon Maxwell Apter, writing in Lapham’s Quarterly (2010), says, “It’s a minorleague mind that chooses to make sport of sports. Not that there aren’t majorleague authors who do so, among them George Orwell (‘Serious sport is war
minus the shooting’) and H.L. Mencken (‘It is impossible to imagine Goethe or
Beethoven being good at billiards or golf ’).” Write an essay in which you support,
challenge, or qualify Apter’s, Orwell’s, or Mencken’s assertion.
4. In his memoir, An Accidental Sportswriter (2011), Robert Lipsyte says the following about Grantland Rice:
[T]he writer who likens a ballplayer to Hercules or Grendel’s mother is displaying
the ultimate contempt — the ballplayer no longer exists as a person or a performer,
but as an object, a piece of matter to be used, in this case, for the furtherance of the
sportswriter’s career by pandering to the emotional titillation of the reader/fan. Rice
populated the press boxes with lesser talents who insisted, like the old master, that
they were just sunny fellows who loved kids’ games and the jolly apes who played
them.

Write an essay in which you agree or disagree with Lipsyte’s assessment of Rice’s
style and portrayal of athletes.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 616

6/18/12 3:12 PM

The Proper Place for Sports
Theodore Roosevelt
Theodore Roosevelt (1858–1919) was only forty-two when he became the twentysixth president of the United States following William McKinley’s assassination in
1901. During his first term he spearheaded the construction of the Panama Canal,
and during his second he won the Nobel Peace Prize — the first American to do
so — for his mediation in the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–1905. Prior to holding
office, he commanded the famed Rough Riders, an all-volunteer cavalry that led the
charge on San Juan Hill in the Spanish-American War, for which he was awarded
the Congressional Medal of Honor. Roosevelt led what he called the “strenuous
life,” which included being a cowboy in the Wild West, going on safari in Africa,
and exploring the Amazon basin. His letters to his children, originally published in
1919, capture Roosevelt’s view that “for unflagging interest and enjoyment, a
household of children, if things go reasonably well, certainly makes all other forms
of success and achievement lose their importance by comparison.” In the following
1903 letter to his son Ted, Roosevelt puts participation in sports in perspective.

White House, Oct. 4, 1903.
Dear Ted:
In spite of the “Hurry! Hurry!” on the outside of your envelope, I did not like
to act until I had consulted Mother and thought the matter over; and to be frank
with you, old fellow, I am by no means sure that I am doing right now. If it were
not that I feel you will be so bitterly disappointed, I would strongly advocate your
acquiescing in the decision to leave you off the second squad this year. I am proud
of your pluck, and I greatly admire football — though it was not a game I was ever
able to play myself, my qualities resembling Kermit’s rather than yours. But the
very things that make it a good game make it a rough game, and there is always
the chance of your being laid up. Now, I should not in the least object to your
being laid up for a season if you were striving for something worth while, to get
on the Groton school team, for instance, or on your class team when you entered
Harvard — for of course I don’t think you will have the weight to entitle you to
try for the ’varsity. But I am by no means sure that it is worth your while to run
the risk of being laid up for the sake of playing in the second squad when you are
a fourth former, instead of when you are a fifth former. I do not know that the
risk is balanced by the reward. However, I have told the Rector that as you feel so
strongly about it, I think that the chance of your damaging yourself in body is
outweighed by the possibility of bitterness of spirit if you could not play. Understand me, I should think mighty little of you if you permitted chagrin to make
you bitter on some point where it was evidently right for you to suffer the chagrin. But in this case I am uncertain, and I shall give you the benefit of the doubt.

617

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 617

6/18/12 3:12 PM

618

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

If, however, the coaches at any time come to the conclusion that you ought not to
be in the second squad, why you must come off without grumbling.
I am delighted to have you play football. I believe in rough, manly sports. But
I do not believe in them if they degenerate into the sole end of any one’s existence.
I don’t want you to sacrifice standing well in your studies to any over-athleticism;
and I need not tell you that character counts for a great deal more than either
intellect or body in winning success in life. Athletic proficiency is a mighty good
servant, and like so many other good servants, a mighty bad master. Did you ever
read Pliny’s letter to Trajan, in which he speaks of [it] being advisable to keep the
Greeks absorbed in athletics, because it distracted their minds from all serious
pursuits, including soldiering, and prevented their ever being dangerous to the
Romans? I have not a doubt that the British officers in the Boer War had their
efficiency partly reduced because they had sacrificed their legitimate duties to an
inordinate and ridiculous love of sports. A man must develop his physical prowess up to a certain point; but after he has reached that point there are other things
that count more. In my regiment nine-tenths of the men were better horsemen
than I was, and probably two-thirds of them better shots than I was, while on the
average they were certainly hardier and more enduring. Yet after I had had them
a very short while they all knew, and I knew too, that nobody else could command them as I could. I am glad you should play football; I am glad that you
should box; I am glad that you should ride and shoot and walk and row as well as
you do. I should be very sorry if you did not do these things. But don’t ever get into
the frame of mind which regards these things as constituting the end to which all
your energies must be devoted, or even the major portion of your energies.
Yes, I am going to speak at Groton on prize day. I felt that while I was President, and while you and Kermit were at Groton I wanted to come up there and
see you, and the Rector wished me to speak, and so I am very glad to accept.
By the way, I am working hard to get Renown accustomed to automobiles.
He is such a handful now when he meets them that I seriously mind encountering
them when Mother is along. Of course I do not care if I am alone, or with another
man, but I am uneasy all the time when I am out with Mother. Yesterday I tried
Bleistein over the hurdles at Chevy Chase. The first one was new, high and stiff,
and the old rascal never rose six inches, going slap through it. I took him at it
again and he went over all right.
I am very busy now, facing the usual endless worry and discouragement, and
trying to keep steadily in mind that I must not only be as resolute as Abraham
Lincoln in seeking to achieve decent ends, but as patient, as uncomplaining, and
as even-tempered in dealing, not only with knaves, but with the well-meaning
foolish people, educated and uneducated, who by their unwisdom give the knaves
their chance.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 618

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

fAUlKNeR • AN INNOCeNT AT RINKSIDe

619

Exploring the Text
1. Theodore Roosevelt is credited with having said, “In short, in life, as in a football
game, the principle to follow is: Hit the line hard; don’t foul and don’t shirk, but
hit the line hard!” In what ways does the letter to Ted offer similar advice? How is
the advice tempered for his young son? Does the letter contradict the “hit the line
hard” quotation in any way? Explain your response.
2. Roosevelt argues against sports if they “degenerate into the sole end of any one’s
existence” (para. 2). What examples does he give to support his argument? Are
they effective? Do they withstand the test of time? Can you apply his argument to
participation in sports today? If so, how?
3. What assumptions about his son underlie Roosevelt’s argument?
4. Characterize the letter’s tone. Do some parts seem more presidential than fatherly?
Identify and explain.
5. How does the first paragraph of the letter balance appeals to logos and pathos?
6. Analyze the following two sentences, considering the effects of Roosevelt’s diction.
In which ways does the language support or undermine his argument?
Understand me, I should think mighty little of you if you permitted chagrin to make
you bitter on some point where it was evidently right for you to suffer the chagrin.
(para. 1)
I don’t want you to sacrifice standing well in your studies to any over-athleticism;
and I need not tell you that character counts for a great deal more than either intellect or body in winning success in life. (para. 2)

7. Roosevelt begins the letter by saying he did not hurry his response because he
wanted to confer with Ted’s mother. He doesn’t mention her again until paragraph 4. What is the effect of this rhetorical decision?
8. How does Roosevelt achieve his measured response to what was obviously a sense
of urgency in the letter to which he is responding? Look particularly at the ways he
uses the word if.
9. Think about this letter in light of the current generation of parents, considered by
many to be overly involved in their children’s lives. Could one accuse Roosevelt of
being an early-twentieth-century soccer dad?

An Innocent at Rinkside
William Faulkner
William faulkner (1897–1962) grew up in Oxford, Mississippi. except for some
time in the Canadian and then the British Royal Air force during World War I, a
bookstore in New York City, and a newspaper in New Orleans, faulkner seldom

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 619

6/18/12 3:12 PM

620

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

left Oxford. His fiction — including The Sound and the Fury (1929), Light in August
(1932), Absalom, Absalom! (1936), and Intruder in the Dust (1962), among
others — takes place in the imaginary Yoknapatawpha County and features a
revolving cast of recurring characters. faulkner won the Nobel Prize in literature
in 1949. The piece presented here, offering faulkner’s impressions of his first
National Hockey league game, appeared in Sports Illustrated in 1955.

T

he vacant ice looked tired, though it shouldn’t have. They told him it had
been put down only a few minutes ago following a basketball game, and
after the hockey match it would be taken up again to make room for something
else. But it looked not expectant but resigned, like the mirror simulating ice in the
Christmas store window, not before the miniature fir trees and reindeer and cosy
lamplit cottage were arranged upon it, but after they had been dismantled and
cleared away.
Then it was filled with motion, speed. To the innocent, who had never seen it
before, it seemed discorded and inconsequent, bizarre and paradoxical like the
frantic darting of the weightless bugs which run on the surface of stagnant pools.
Then it would break, coalesce through a kind of kaleidoscopic whirl like a child’s
toy, into a pattern, a design almost beautiful, as if an inspired choreographer had
drilled a willing and patient and hard-working troupe of dancers — a pattern, a
design which was trying to tell him something, say something to him urgent and
important and true in that second before, already bulging with the motion and
the speed, it began to disintegrate and dissolve.
Then he learned to find the puck and follow it. Then the individual players
would emerge. They would not emerge like the sweating barehanded behemoths
from the troglodyte mass of football, but instead as fluid and fast and effortless as
rapier thrusts or lightning — Richard with something of the passionate glittering
fatal alien quality of snakes, Geoffrion like an agile ruthless precocious boy who
maybe couldn’t do anything else but then he didn’t need to; and others — the
veteran Laprade, still with the know-how and the grace. But he had time too now,
or rather time had him, and what remained was no longer expendable that recklessly, heedlessly, successfully; not enough of it left now to buy fresh passion and
fresh triumph with.

Like the Rapier
Excitement: men in rapid, hard, close physical conflict, not just with bare hands,
but armed with the knife blades of skates and the hard, fast, deft sticks which
could break bones when used right. He had noticed how many women were
among the spectators, and for just a moment he thought that perhaps this was
why — that here actual male blood could flow, not from the crude impact of a
heavier fist but from the rapid and delicate stroke of weapons, which, like the
European rapier or the frontier pistol, reduced mere size and brawn to its proper

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 620

6/18/12 3:12 PM

fAUlKNeR • AN INNOCeNT AT RINKSIDe

621

perspective to the passion and the will. But only for a moment because he, the
innocent, didn’t like that idea either. It was the excitement of speed and grace,
with the puck for catalyst, to give it reason, meaning.
He watched it — the figure-darted glare of ice, the concentric tiers rising in
sections stipulated by the hand-lettered names of the individual fanclub idols,
vanishing upward into the pall of tobacco smoke trapped by the roof — the roof
which stopped and trapped all that intent and tense watching, and concentrated
it downward upon the glare of ice frantic and frenetic with motion; until the
byproduct of the speed and the motion — their violence — had no chance to
exhaust itself upward into space and so leave on the ice only the swift glittering
changing pattern. And he thought how perhaps something is happening to sport
in America (assuming that by definition sport is something you do yourself, in
solitude or not, because it is fun), and that something is the roof we are putting
over it and them. Skating, basketball, tennis, track meets and even steeplechasing
have moved indoors; football and baseball function beneath covers of arc lights
and in time will be rain- and coldproofed too. There still remain the proper working of a fly over trout water or the taking of a rise of birds in front of a dog or the
right placing of a bullet in a deer or even a bigger animal which will hurt you if
you don’t. But not for long: in time that will be indoors too beneath lights and the
trapped pall of spectator tobacco, the concentric sections bearing the name and
device of the lion or the fish as well as that of the Richard or Geoffrion of the
scoped rifle or four-ounce rod.

5

The Same Little Boys
But (to repeat) not for long, because the innocent did not quite believe that either.
We — Americans — like to watch; we like the adrenalic discharge of vicarious
excitement or triumph or success. But we like to do also: the discharge of the
personal excitement of the triumph and the fear to be had from actually setting
the horse at the stone wall or pointing the overcanvased sloop or finding by actual
test if you can line up two sights and one buffalo in time. There must have been
little boys in that throng too, frantic with the slow excruciating passage of time,
panting for the hour when they would be Richard or Geoffrion or Laprade — the
same little Negro boys whom the innocent has seen shadow-boxing in front of a
photograph of Joe Louis in his own Mississippi town, the same little Norwegian
boys he watched staring up the snowless slope of the Holmenkollen jump one
July day in the hills above Oslo.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 621

6/18/12 3:12 PM

622

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

Exploring the Text
1. How does William Faulkner bring to life a game that many people have only seen
on television?
2. Find examples of figurative language — similes and metaphors in particular. What
is the effect of these literary devices, which are more common in fiction and poetry
than in sportswriting?
3. Faulkner refers to himself as “the innocent” and in the third person. Why do you
think he has avoided the first person? Do you think this is an effective technique?
Explain your response.
4. What statement does Faulkner make about the future of sports? To what extent
have his predictions come true?
5. What do you think Faulkner’s sports biases are? How can you tell?

The Cruelest Sport
Joyce Carol Oates
Joyce Carol Oates was born in lockport, New York, in 1938. With a typewriter
she received at age fourteen, Oates wrote “novel after novel” in high school and
college in order to train herself to be a writer. Oates, who received a bachelor’s
degree from Syracuse University and a master’s in english from the University of
Wisconsin, is currently the Roger S. Berlind Distinguished Professor of the Humanities at Princeton. She is the youngest author to receive the National Book Award —
for her novel Them (1969). Novelist, playwright, poet, and journalist, Oates is highly
prolific, having published more than thirty novels, including Black Water (1992),
We Were the Mulvaneys (1996), and The Falls (2004). Her work often addresses
the violence and suspense lurking beneath ordinary life. This essay was originally
published in the New York Review of Books in february 1992.

And if the body does not do fully as much as the soul?
And if the body were not the soul, what is the soul?
— Walt Whitman, “I Sing the Body Electric”
A boxer’s victory is gained in blood.
— Greek inscription

P

rofessional boxing is the only major American sport whose primary, and
often murderous, energies are not coyly deflected by such artifacts as
balls and pucks. Though highly ritualized, and as rigidly bound by rules, traditions, and taboos as any religious ceremony, it survives as the most primitive and
terrifying of contests: two men, near-naked, fight each other in a brightly lit, ele-

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 622

6/18/12 3:12 PM

OATeS • THe CRUeleST SPORT

623

vated space roped in like an animal pen (though the ropes were originally to keep
rowdy spectators out); two men climb into the ring from which only one, symbolically, will climb out. (Draws do occur in boxing, but are rare, and unpopular.)
Boxing is a stylized mimicry of a fight to the death, yet its mimesis is an
uncertain convention, for boxers do sometimes die in the ring, or as a consequence
of a bout; their lives are sometimes, perhaps always, shortened by the stress and
punishment of their careers (in training camps no less than in official fights).
Certainly, as in the melancholy case of Muhammad Ali, the most acclaimed and
beloved heavyweight in boxing history, the quality of the boxer’s post-retirement
life is frequently diminished. For the great majority of boxers, past and present,
life in the ring is nasty, brutish, and short — and not even that remunerative.
Yet, for inhabitants of the boxing world, the ideal conclusion of a fight is a
knockout, and not a decision; and this, ideally, not the kind in which a man is
counted “out” on his feet, still less a TKO (“technical knockout” — from injuries),
but a knockout in the least ambiguous sense — one man collapsed and unconscious, the other leaping about the ring with his gloves raised in victory, the
very embodiment of adolescent masculine fantasy. Like a tragedy in which no
one dies, the fight lacking a classic knockout seems unresolved, unfulfilled: the
strength, courage, ingenuity, and desperation of neither boxer have been adequately measured. Catharsis is but partial, the Aristotelian principle of an action
complete in itself has been thwarted. (Recall the fury of young Muhammad Ali at
the too-readily-defeated Sonny Liston in their second, notorious title fight, of
1965: instead of going to a neutral corner, Ali stood over his fallen opponent with
his fist cocked, screaming, “Get up and fight, sucker!”)
This is because boxing’s mimesis is not that of a mere game, but a powerful
analogue of human struggle in the rawest of life-and-death terms. When the analogue is not evoked, as, in most fights, it is not, the action is likely to be unengaging, or dull; “boxing” is the art, but “fighting” is the passion. The delirium of the
crowd at one of those matches called “great” must be experienced firsthand to be
believed (Frazier–Ali I, 1971, Hagler–Hearns, 1986, for instance); identification
with the fighters is so intense, it is as if barriers between egos dissolve, and one is
in the presence of a Dionysian rite of cruelty, sacrifice, and redemption. “The
nearest thing to death,” Ali described it, after his third title match with Joe Frazier,
in 1975, which he won when the fight was stopped after the fourteenth round. Or:
“This is some way to make a living, isn’t it?” as the superlightweight Saoul Mamby
said, badly battered after a title fight with the champion Billy Costello, in 1984.
A romance of (expendable) maleness — in which The Fight is honored, and
even great champions come, and go.

5

Y
For these reasons, among others, boxing has long been America’s most popularly
despised sport: a “so-called” sport, even a “meta-” or an “anti-” sport: a “vicious
exploitation of maleness”1 as prostitution and pornography may be said to be a

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 623

6/18/12 3:12 PM

624

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

vicious exploitation of femaleness. It is not, contrary to common supposition, the
most dangerous sport (the American Medical Association, arguing for boxing’s
abolition, acknowledges that it is statistically less dangerous than speedway racing, thoroughbred racing, downhill skiing, professional football, et al.), but it is
the most spectacularly and pointedly cruel sport, its intention being to stun one’s
opponent’s brain; to affect the orgasmic communal “knockout” that is the culminating point of the rising action of the ideal fight. The humanitarian argues that
boxing’s very intentions are obscene, which sets it apart, theoretically at least,
from purer (i.e., Caucasian) establishment sports bracketed above.
Boxing is only possible if there is an endless supply of young men hungry to
leave their impoverished ghetto neighborhoods, more than willing to substitute
the putative dangers of the ring for the more evident, possibly daily, dangers of
the street; yet it is rarely advanced as a means of eradicating boxing that poverty
itself be abolished; that it is the social conditions feeding boxing that are obscene.
The pious hypocrisy of Caucasian moralists vis-à-vis the sport that has become
almost exclusively the province of black and ethnic minorities has its analogue in
a classic statement of President Bush’s of some months ago, that he is worried
about the amount of “filth” flooding America by way of televised hearings and
trials: not that the Clarence Thomas–Anita Hill hearing and the William Kennedy
Smith rape trial revealed “filth” at the core of certain male–female relations in our
society, but that public airings of such, the very hearings and trials, are the problem. Ban the spectacle, and the obscenity will cease to exist.

Y
Black boxers from the time of Jack Johnson (the first and most flamboyant of the
world’s black heavyweight champions, 1908–1915) through Joe Louis, Sugar Ray
Robinson, Muhammad Ali, Larry Holmes, Sugar Ray Leonard, and Mike Tyson
have been acutely conscious of themselves as racially other from the majority of
their audiences, whom they must please in one way or another, as black villains,
or honorary whites. (After his pulverizing defeat of the “good, humble Negro”
Floyd Patterson, in a heavyweight title match in 1962, Sonny Liston gloated in his
role as black villain; when he lost so ingloriously to Muhammad Ali, a brash newstyle black who drew upon Jack Johnson, Sugar Ray Robinson, and even the
campy professional wrestler Gorgeous George for his own public persona, Liston
lost his mystique, and his career soon ended.)
To see race as a predominant factor in American boxing is inevitable, but the
moral issues, as always in this paradoxical sport, are ambiguous. Is there a moral
distinction between the spectacle of black slaves in the Old South being forced by
their white owners to fight, for purposes of gambling, and the spectacle of contemporary blacks fighting for multimillion-dollar paydays, for TV coverage from
Las Vegas and Atlantic City? When, in 1980, in one of the most cynically promoted boxing matches in history, the aging and ailing Muhammad Ali fought the
young heavyweight champion Larry Holmes, in an “execution” of a fight that was

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 624

6/18/12 3:12 PM

OATeS • THe CRUeleST SPORT

625

stopped after ten rounds, did it alleviate the pain, or the shame, that Ali was guaranteed $8 million for the fight? (Of which, with characteristic finesse, promoter
Don King cheated him of nearly $1 million.) Ask the boxers.
Boxing today is very different from the boxing of the past, which allowed a
man to be struck repeatedly while trying to get to his feet (Dempsey–Willard,
1919), or to be knocked down seven times in three wholly one-sided rounds
(Patterson–Johansson I, 1959), or so savagely and senselessly struck in the head
with countless unanswered blows that he died in a coma ten days later (Griffith–
Paret, 1962); the more immediate danger, for any boxer fighting a Don King
opponent, is that the fight will be stopped prematurely, by a zealous referee protective of King’s investment.
As boxing is “reformed,” it becomes less satisfying on a deep, unconscious
level, more nearly resembling amateur boxing; yet, as boxing remains primitive,
brutal, bloody, and dangerous, it seems ever more anachronistic, if not in fact
obscene, in a society with pretensions of humanitarianism. Its exemplary figure is
that of the warrior, of some mythopoeic time before weapons were invented; the
triumph of physical genius, in a technologically advanced world in which the
physical counts for very little, set beside intellectual skills. Even in the gritty world
of the underclass, who, today, would choose to fight with mere fists? Guns abound,
death to one’s opponents at a safe distance is possible even for children. Mike
Tyson’s boast, after his defeat of the twelve-to-one underdog Carl Williams in a
heavyweight title defense of 1989, “I want to fight, fight, fight and destruct the
world,” strikes a poignantly hollow note, even if we knew nothing of subsequent
disastrous events in Tyson’s life and career.2
Consider the boxing trainer’s time-honored adage: They all go if you hit them
right.
These themes are implicit in Thomas Hauser’s Muhammad Ali: His Life and
Times and The Black Lights: Inside the World of Professional Boxing, but it is only
in the latter work that theoretical, historical, and psychological issues are considered — Hauser sees boxing as “the red light district of professional sports,” in
which individuals of exceptional talent, courage, and integrity nonetheless prevail. His Ali is the heftier and more ambitious of the two, befitting its prodigious
subject — the most famous athlete of all time, until recent years the most highly
paid athlete of all time. An authorized biography, it would appear to be definitive,
and is certainly exhaustive; Hauser spent thousands of hours with his subject, as
well as approximately two hundred other people, and was given access to Ali’s
medical records. The text arranges these testimonies into a chronological history
in which (is this New Age biography?) the author’s voice alternates with, but
rarely comments upon, still less criticizes, what these others have said. Compassionate, intelligent, fair-minded, Muhammad Ali: His Life and Times might have
benefited from further editing and paraphrase. Specific subjects (an imminent
fight, financial deals, Ali’s marital problems, Ali’s health problems, the Nation of
Islam, et al.) become lost in a welter of words; frequently, it is difficult to locate

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 625

10

6/18/12 3:12 PM

626

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

dates, even for important fights. And no ring record of Ali in the appendix! — a
baffling omission, as if Ali’s performance as an athlete were not the primary reason for the book.
As it happens, Hauser’s succinct commentary on the Ali phenomenon and
his shrewd analysis of the boxing world, including Don King’s role in it, in his
earlier book, The Black Lights, can provide, for the reader of the biography, a kind
of companion gloss; the books are helpfully read in tandem. It is a remark of Ali’s,
in 1967, that gives The Black Lights its ominous title:
They say when you get hit and hurt bad you see black lights — the black lights of
unconsciousness. But I don’t know nothing about that. I’ve had twenty-eight fights
and twenty-eight wins. I ain’t never been stopped.

Muhammad Ali, born Cassius Marcellus Clay in Louisville, Kentucky, on
January 17, 1942, grandson of a slave, began boxing at the age of twelve, and, by
eighteen, had fought 108 amateur bouts. How is it possible that the young man
who, in his twenties, would astonish the world not just with the brilliance of his
boxing but the sharpness of his wit seems to have been a dull-average student in
high school who graduated 376th out of a class of 391? In 1966, his score on a
mental aptitude test was an Army IQ of 78, well below military qualification. In
1975, Ali confessed to a reporter that he “can’t read too good” and had not read
ten pages of all the material written about him. I remember the television interview in which, asked what else he might have done with his life, Ali paused, for
several seconds, clearly not knowing how to reply. All he’d ever known, he said
finally, was boxing.
Mental aptitude tests cannot measure genius except in certain narrow ranges,
and the genius of the body, the play of lightning-swift reflexes coupled with
unwavering precision and confidence, eludes comprehension. All great boxers
possess this genius, which scrupulous training hones, but can never create. “Styles
make fights,” as Ali’s great trainer Angelo Dundee says, and “style” was young Ali’s
trademark. Yet even after early wins over such veterans as Archie Moore and
Henry Cooper, the idiosyncrasies of Ali’s style aroused skepticism in boxing
experts. After winning the Olympic gold medal in 1960, Ali was described by A. J.
Leibling as “skittering . . . like a pebble over water.” Everyone could see that this
brash young boxer held his hands too low; he leaned away from punches instead
of properly slipping them; his jab was light and flicking; he seemed to be perpetually on the brink of disaster. As a seven-to-one underdog in his first title fight with
Sonny Liston, the twenty-two-year-old challenger astounded the experts with his
performance, which was like none other they had ever seen in the heavyweight
division; he so out-boxed and demoralized Liston that Liston “quit on his stool”
after the sixth round. A new era in boxing had begun, like a new music.

15

Ali rode the crest of a new wave of athletes — competitors who were both big and
fast. . . . Ali had a combination of size and speed that had never been seen in a fighter

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 626

6/18/12 3:12 PM

OATeS • THe CRUeleST SPORT

627

before, along with incredible will and courage. He also brought a new style to boxing.
Jack Dempsey changed fisticuffs from a kind of constipated science where fighters
fought in a tense defensive style to a wild sensual assault. Ali revolutionized boxing
the way black basketball players have changed basketball today. He changed what
happened in the ring, and elevated it to a level that was previously unknown.
— Larry Merchant, quoted in Muhammad Ali

Y
In the context of contemporary boxing — the sport is in one of its periodic
slumps — there is nothing more instructive and rejuvenating than to see again
these old, early fights of Ali’s, when, as his happy boast had it, he floated like a
butterfly and stung like a bee and threw punches faster than opponents could
see — like the “mystery” right to the temple of Liston that felled him, in the first
minute of the first round of their rematch. These early fights, the most brilliant
being against Cleveland Williams, in 1966, predate by a decade the long, grueling,
punishing fights of Ali’s later career, whose accumulative effects hurt Ali irrevocably, resulting in what doctors call, carefully, his “Parkinsonianism” — to distinguish it from Parkinson’s disease. There is a true visceral shock in observing a
heavyweight with the grace, agility, swiftness of hands and feet, defensive skills,
and ring cunning of a middleweight Ray Robinson, or a featherweight Willie
Pep — like all great athletes, Ali has to be seen to be believed.
In a secular, yet pseudo-religious and sentimental nation like the United
States, it is quite natural that sports stars emerge as “heroes” — “legends” —
“icons.” Who else? George Santayana described religion as “another world to live
in” and no world is so set off from the disorganization and disenchantment of the
quotidian than the world, or worlds, of sports. Hauser describes, in considerable
detail, the transformation of the birth of Ali out of the unexpectedly stubborn
and idealistic will of young Cassius Clay: how, immediately following his first victory over Liston, he declared himself a convert to the Nation of Islam (more popularly known as the Black Muslims) and “no longer a Christian.” He repudiated
his “slave name” of Cassius Marcellus Clay to become Muhammad Ali (a name
which, incidentally, The New York Times, among other censorious white publications, would not honor through the 1960s). Ali became, virtually overnight, a
spokesman for black America as no other athlete, certainly not the purposefully
reticent Joe Louis, had ever done — “I don’t have to be what you want me to be,”
he told white America. “I’m free to be me.” Two years later, refusing to be inducted
into the army to fight in Vietnam, Ali, beleaguered by reporters, uttered one of
the memorable incendiary remarks of that era: “Man, I ain’t got no quarrel with
them Vietcong.”
How ingloriously white America responded to Ali: the government retaliated
by overruling a judge who had granted Ali the status of conscientious objector,
fined Ali $10,000, and sentenced him to five years in prison; he was stripped of his
heavyweight title and deprived of his license to box. Eventually, the U.S. Supreme

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 627

6/18/12 3:12 PM

628

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

Court would overturn the conviction, and, as the tide of opinion shifted in the
country, in the early 1970s as the Vietnam War wound down Ali returned triumphantly to boxing again, and regained the heavyweight title not once but twice.
Years of exile during which he’d endured the angry self-righteousness of the conservative white press seemed, wonderfully, not to have embittered him. He had
become a hero. He had entered myth.

Y
Yet the elegiac title of Angelo Dundee’s chapter in Dave Anderson’s In the
Corner 3 — “We Never Saw Muhammad Ali at His Best” — defines the nature of
Ali’s sacrifice for his principles, and the loss to boxing. When, after the three-anda-half-year layoff, Ali returned to the ring, he was of course no longer the seemingly invincible boxer he’d been; he’d lost his legs, thus his primary line of defense.
Like the maturing writer who learns to replace the incandescent head-on energies
of youth with what is called technique, Ali would have to descend into his physical being and experience for the first time the punishment (“the nearest thing to
death”) that is the lot of the great boxer willing to put himself to the test. As Ali’s
personal physician at that time, Ferdie Pacheco, said,

20

[Ali] discovered something which was both very good and very bad. Very bad in that
it led to the physical damage he suffered later in his career; very good in that it eventually got him back the championship. He discovered that he could take a punch.

The secret of Ali’s mature success, and the secret of his tragedy: he could take a
punch.
For the remainder of his twenty-year career, Muhammad Ali took punches,
many of the kind that, delivered to a nonboxer, would kill him or her outright — from Joe Frazier in their three exhausting marathon bouts, from George
Foreman, from Ken Norton, Leon Spinks, Larry Holmes. Where in his feckless
youth Ali was a dazzling figure combining, say, the brashness of Hotspur and the
insouciance of Lear’s Fool, he became in these dark, brooding, increasingly willed
fights the closest analogue boxing contains to Lear himself; or, rather, since there
is no great fight without two great boxers, the title matches Ali–Frazier I (which
Frazier won by a decision) and Ali–Frazier III (which Ali won, just barely, when
Frazier virtually collapsed after the fourteenth round) are boxing’s analogues to
King Lear — ordeals of unfathomable human courage and resilience raised to the
level of classic tragedy. These somber and terrifying boxing matches make us
weep for their very futility; we seem to be in the presence of human experience
too profound to be named — beyond the strategies and diminishments of language. The mystic’s dark night of the soul, transmogrified as a brutal meditation
of the body.
And Ali–Foreman, Zaire, 1974: the occasion of the infamous “rope-a-dope”
defense, by which the thirty-two-year-old Ali exhausted his twenty-six-year-old
opponent by the inspired method of, simply, and horribly, allowing him to punch

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 628

6/18/12 3:12 PM

OATeS • THe CRUeleST SPORT

629

himself out on Ali’s body and arms. This is a fight of such a magical quality that
even to watch it closely is not to see how it was done, its fairy-tale reversal in the
eighth round executed. (One of Norman Mailer’s most impassioned books, The
Fight, is about this fight; watching a tape of Ali on the ropes enticing, and infuriating, and frustrating, and finally exhausting his opponent by an offense in the
guise of a defense, I pondered what sly lessons of masochism Mailer absorbed
from being at ringside that day, what deep-imprinted resolve to outwear all
adversaries.)

Y
These hard-won victories began irreversible loss: progressive deterioration of
Ali’s kidneys, hands, reflexes, stamina. By the time of that most depressing of
modern-day matches, Ali–Holmes, 1980, when Ali was thirty-eight years old,
Ferdie Pacheco had long departed the Ali camp, dismissed for having advised Ali
to retire; those who supported Ali’s decision to fight, like the bout’s promoter,
Don King, had questionable motives. Judging from Hauser’s information, it is a
wonder that Ali survived this fight at all: the fight was, in Sylvester Stallone’s
words, “like watching an autopsy on a man who’s still alive.” (In The Black Lights,
Hauser describes the bedlam that followed this vicious fight at Caesar’s Palace,
Las Vegas, where gamblers plunged in an orgy of gambling, as in a frenzy of feeding, or copulation: “Ali and Holmes had done their job.”) Incredibly, Ali was
allowed to fight once more, with Trevor Berbick, in December 1981, before retiring permanently.
Hauser’s portrait of Ali is compassionate and unjudging: Is the man to be
blamed for having been addicted to his body’s own adrenaline, or are others to be
blamed for indulging him — and exploiting him? The brash rap-style egoism of
young Cassius Clay underwent a considerable transformation during Ali’s long
public career, yet strikes us, perhaps, as altered only in tone: “Boxing was just to
introduce me to the world,” Ali has told his biographer. Mystically involved in the
Nation of Islam, Ali sincerely believes himself an international emissary for peace,
love, and understanding (he who once wreaked such violence upon his opponents!); and who is to presume to feel sorry for one who will not feel sorry for
himself ?

Y
The Black Lights: Inside the World of Professional Boxing describes a small, selfcontained arc — a few years in the career of a boxer named Billy Costello, at one
time a superlightweight titleholder from Kingston, New York. Like Muhammad
Ali, it is a sympathetic study of its primary subject, Costello, his manager Mike
Jones, and their families and associates; yet, in the interstices of a compelling narrative taking us through the preparation for a successful title defense of 1984, it
illuminates aspects of the boxing world generally unknown to outsiders — the
routine and discipline of the boxer in training; the complex role of the fight

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 629

25

6/18/12 3:12 PM

630

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

manager; the exhausting contractual negotiations; the state of this “red-light
district” —
Professional boxing is no longer worthy of civilized society. It’s run by self-serving
crooks, who are called promoters. . . . Except for the fighters, you’re talking about
human scum. . . . Professional boxing is utterly immoral. It’s not capable of reformation. I now favor the abolition of professional boxing. You’ll never clean it up. Mud
can never be clean.
— Howard Cosell, quoted in The Black Lights

Like others sympathetic with boxers, who are in fact poorly paid, nonunionized workers with no benefits in a monopolistic business without antitrust control, Hauser argues strongly for a national association to regulate the sport; a
federal advisory panel to protect boxers from exploitation. His portrait of Billy
Costello allows us to see why a young man will so eagerly risk injuries in the ring,
which is perceived as a lifeline, and not a place of exploitation; why he will devote
himself to the rigors of training in a sport in which, literally, one’s entire career
can end within a few seconds.
Black Lights ends dramatically, with Costello retaining his title against a
thirty-seven-year-old opponent, Saoul Mamby, and with his hope of moving up
in weight and making more money. Since its publication in 1986, the book has
become a boxing classic; it is wonderfully readable, and, unlike Ali, judiciously
proportioned. Yet to end the book with this victory is surely misleading, and even,
to this reader, perplexing. The “black lights of unconsciousness” would be experienced by Billy Costello shortly, in a bout with a dazzlingly arrogant and idiosyncratic Ali-inspired young boxer named, at that time, “Lightning” Lonnie Smith,
who would KO Costello in one of those nightmares all boxers have, before a
hometown audience in Kingston. Following that devastating loss, Costello would
fight the aging Alexis Arguello, one of the great lightweights of contemporary
times, who would beat him savagely and end his career. To end with a tentative
victory and not supply at least a coda to take us to the collapse of Billy Costello’s
career deprives Black Lights of the significance it might have had — for boxing is
about failure far more than it is about success. In the words of the battered Saoul
Mamby, “I’ll miss it. I love boxing. Everything passed too soon.”

Notes
1. See Gerald Early’s brilliantly corrosive essays on boxing in Tuxedo Junction: Essays on
American Culture (Ecco, 1989).
2. See Montieth Illingworth, Mike Tyson: Money, Myth and Betrayal (Birch Lane, 1991),
p. 330.
3. See both Dave Anderson, In the Corner: Great Boxing Trainers Talk about Their Art
(Morrow, 1991), and Ronald K. Fried, Corner Men: Great Boxing Trainers (Four Walls,
Eight Windows, 1991). Irresistibly readable and informative books of interviews: Angelo

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 630

6/18/12 3:12 PM

VeRVAeCKe • A SPeCTATOR’S NOTeBOOK

631

Dundee, Eddie Futch, Ray Arcel, Charley Goldman, Lou Duva, Emanuel Steward,
Kevin Rooney, et al.

Exploring the Text
1. What does Joyce Carol Oates think about boxing?
2. What do the two epigraphs — one from Walt Whitman and the other a Greek
inscription — suggest about how Oates will approach the subject of boxing?
3. Oates alludes to Thomas Hobbes, a seventeenth-century philosopher, who described
the life of man as “nasty, brutish, and short,” to characterize the life of a boxer
(para. 2), adding “and not even that remunerative.” What is the effect of this allusion? What other literary allusions does Oates make? How do they help her develop
her ideas about boxing?
4. What rhetorical strategies does Oates use in paragraph 6 to respond to the counterargument that boxing is “America’s most popularly despised sport.”
5. In paragraph 9, Oates states that American boxing is about race, but that the
moral issues are ambiguous, posing a rhetorical question about whether there is a
moral distinction between “the spectacle of black slaves in the Old South being
forced by their white owners to fight . . . and the spectacle of contemporary blacks
fighting for multimillion-dollar paydays. . . .” Do you think there is a moral distinction? Does Oates answer the question? If so, how does her answer differ from
yours?
6. Explain why Oates finds the sport of boxing paradoxical. Give examples to support your answer.
7. Oates cites African American writer Gerald Early (para. 6), who compared boxing’s exploitation of maleness to prostitution and pornography’s exploitation of
femaleness. Do you agree? Explain why or why not.
8. Look carefully at paragraph 21, in which Oates creates a parallel between
Muhammad Ali’s later fights with Joe Frazier and Shakespeare’s dark tragedy, King
Lear. What is the effect of this comparison? How does the allusion help you understand the complexity of the sport of boxing and Oates’s feelings about it?

A Spectator’s Notebook
Kris Vervaecke
A native of Nebraska, Kris Vervaecke is a graduate of the Iowa Writers’ Workshop. She has published essays and stories in literary magazines and in books
such as Of Mothers and Sons: Women Writers Talk about Having Sons and Raising Men (2001), The Healing Circle: Authors Writing of Recovery (1998), and
Writers on Sports (1998), where this essay appeared.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 631

6/18/12 3:12 PM

632

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

W

hen I was a girl, I played brutish softball on hot summer days in a cow
pasture with the other girls in the neighborhood, a neighborhood
which was actually a scattering of a few houses outside the city limits of Omaha.
These were homes inhabited almost solely by females: There was the widow
Edgerton and her daughter, the Hellerman twin girls, the Kosinsky girl, two
Martin girls, and three Vervaecke girls, of which I was the oldest. The Hellerman,
Kosinsky, Martin, and Vervaecke fathers were gone all day and most evenings,
some not returning even at night, except for Mr. Hellerman, who created a kind
of father emergency for the rest of us by rolling into their driveway Monday
through Friday evenings at 5:30 sharp. (Nancy Kosinsky’s father did sometimes
drink at home instead of out, which created another sort of father emergency,
because he’d dress up in his Shriner’s outfit and ride roughshod over everyone’s
lawns in his little Shriner’s jeep, shearing through my mother’s canna bed, sending up humiliations of red petals.) We envied the Hellerman girls, but the other
mothers said that Mr. Hellerman was a very nice man, but not a man’s man —
a distinction I found confusing, along with the implication that a real woman
would want a man’s man.
No mother or father or brother ever came down to the pasture to coach or
referee our games, so we girls were left to our own devices. Mary Hellerman and
I were always the captains of opposing teams; no one challenged this arrangement because it was understood that the whole point of the game was to build
tension between Mary and me until we had no choice but to lay down our bats
and balls and injure each other.
The pretense for our fights was an alleged infraction of the rules, which were
crudely drawn, like the diamond, in the rising dust. Mary would accuse me, or I’d
accuse her, and our shouts (“You cheater! You fat, ugly liar!”) would bring us
close enough to smell each other. The Herefords would lift their heads in mild
interest; the other girls would draw near. Then we’d sharpen our taunts until one
of us landed the first slap. I still remember the satisfaction of smacking Mary’s
bony, sunburned arm. And the coarseness of her long brown hair, coated with
sweat and dust, sticking to my fingers as I pulled it. She was several inches taller
than I, which allowed me to punch her stomach. Her mother never seemed to
make her cut her fingernails, so Mary left long furrows down my arms. Blood!
What a thrill and relief it was to see it bubbling up through our sultry sleep of
resignation and resentment.
Later some boys moved into the neighborhood, and most of the girls retreated inside to talk about them on the telephone. I played baseball and football
with the boys: They were stuck halfway out of nowhere, too, and so they needed
me and sometimes even weeny-armed Mary, to play. These games were also
primitive, tackle-and-roll-in-the-cow-dirt affairs. Then, one January afternoon
during my eighth-grade year, running laps around the gymnasium for seventhperiod coed gym class, I broke out in a sweat. Perspiration spread under the
sleeves of my prison blue uniform like twin maps of Texas, and, quite abruptly, it

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 632

6/18/12 3:12 PM

VeRVAeCKe • A SPeCTATOR’S NOTeBOOK

633

mattered to me that my corporeality was revealing itself so grossly in the presence
of boys. In panic and humiliation, I plastered my arms to my sides, slowed down
to a trot, and became a girl.
It would be years before it dawned on me that a game might be more than a
prelude to a fight, more than a release from preadolescent boredom. Through the
eyes of my daughter and sons, who play in school and community league sports,
I began to see a game as a sustaining drama dreamed up by the will and the
scarcely imaginable possibilities of the body. And although I see that the game
claims vital parts of their imaginations, I can never experience it in the same way.

5

Driving home from work, I catch part of a radio quiz show:
Game Show Host: Question number one. Who won the 1991 Super Bowl?
buzz!
Male Contestant: The New York Giants!
Host: Sorry. I’m afraid that’s not the right answer.
Male Contestant: But it is! The Giants beat the Buffalo Bills, 20–19, in
Tampa Stadium!
Host: Sorry! Who won the 1991 Super Bowl?
buzz!
Female Contestant: I don’t know, and I don’t care!
Host (also female): Yes!!! That’s correct!!! [bells ring and whistles
sound.] Yeah!!! Congratulations!!!
I’d be a whiz on that show. Although I grew up in the Nebraska vortex of Big Red
football and should be capable of being swept up by my nation’s preoccupation,
even as a kid, I was too embarrassed. I hated it when everybody was supposed to
dress in red, gather around the television set, and feel excited. Or maybe it is
closer to the truth to say that I was embarrassed to find that it was over watching
a football game that the passions of others were aroused, while I, who was usually
the one to go around feeling things, could not manufacture even a fleeting rivalrous impulse toward the state of Oklahoma, a wind-worn, sun-dulled place much
like the place I lived.
Years later, after living on the West Coast, I returned to Nebraska, showing up
one autumn Saturday to do some research at the university library. In my characteristically oblivious way, I had failed to find out whether there was a home game,
and so it took two hours to make my way through the traffic in Lincoln, and,
finally parked, through the throngs of hoarse, red-polyester-suited people to the
library door.
Where I found the door locked and library closed, because it was a Big Red
Saturday.
Fortunately for me and my prejudices, my kids — Ben, Emily, and Andrew —
were never interested in playing football. Basketball’s their game, and sometimes
soccer, or tennis. They run track and practice martial arts. When Ben went

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 633

6/18/12 3:12 PM

634

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

through a Dan Quayle phase when he was fifteen — deciding that when he was
grown he would abandon the income bracket to which his mother belongs and
possibly even vote Republican — he took up golf, practiced every day for an entire
summer, and won the city championship for his age division. For a few moments,
he was a kind of celebrity, at least to some sweet old men we ran into at the grocery store. I was proud of him, but he was already discarding the polo shirts he’d
begun wearing and letting his golf clubs gather dust. He started paying more
attention to politics and environmental policy and thinking about what he
wanted to do with his life. I suspected it was closely listening to Republicans that
soured him on golf, but I can’t say for sure, because I wanted only to listen and
observe, not pry. Sports has been one of the ways he’s defined and differentiated himself, stretched far beyond and past his mother, surprising her with the
slam dunk.

Y
For me, the experience of raising children has no equivalent in terror and love. For
long stretches of years as a single parent, I’ve watched as the game dreamed up my
sons and daughter, giving them things I could not, letting them shed, for the game’s
duration, grief, rage, loneliness, or boredom, and allowing them to take on skill
and cunning, filling them with inspiration and determination, sometimes awe.
December 1987. At ten years old, a stubby little blond boy, Ben sits in rapt
attention during any game, understanding it intuitively, committing himself
wholly. At a Kansas Jayhawks basketball game, I take him down to the court so he
can watch his team jog into the locker room. We are so close to their immense,
shining bodies that, as Milt Newton trots past (he’d scored eighteen points and
accomplished several steals), Ben is able to scoop up, into his cupped palm, a few
drops of Newton’s sweat. For a moment, Ben holds his breath, staring down at his
glistening palm. Then he straightens and begins carefully applying the sweat to
his own skin, up and down his arms, patting it into his very pores.
August 1992. Over speed bumps so pronounced you need a forty-thousanddollar vehicle to get to the other side with your teeth intact, I wind up the narrow
road to the country club, to which we don’t belong, to pick up Ben after his eighteen holes. He is nowhere to be seen. It’s 105 degrees, and so I get out of the car,
with my book, and settle myself under the stingy shade of an ornamental tree
next to the parking lot.
“Mom!” I hear Ben say. “What are you doing?”
“Well, I’m just waiting for you,” I say, bewildered.
“Get up! Get up!” he says.
After we’re settled in the car, I ask what’s wrong.
He struggles, not wanting to hurt my feelings. Wiping sweat from his forehead, he then passes his hand over his eyes.
“Sitting in the grass?” he finally reproaches, a bit incredulous. I don’t get it.
“Mom, my God, you looked like a hippie!”

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 634

10

15

6/18/12 3:12 PM

VeRVAeCKe • A SPeCTATOR’S NOTeBOOK

635

August 1995. Everything has been loaded into the car: clothes, photos of the
family members and the dogs; Ben’s iguana (“Jay”) is resting securely among
the rocks in his aquarium, wedged, in the backseat, between the lifting equipment and the reference books I insist he take. We’ve hugged and cried and said
everything there is to say about his going off to college. He does not want me to
drive to the university with him, not this time; we’ve already done this for parent
orientation and his enrollment in the honors program. He says he’ll look like a
baby if his mom helps him move into the dorm.
“One more thing before I leave,” he says. “Mom, will you watch this with me?”
He slides Michael Jordan’s Air Time into the VCR, and, sitting together on the
couch, we endure the strains of the background music massacred by the wornout sound track on our VCR. As we watch Jordan’s volitant performance, his
pure, vibrant grace and athleticism, the way, under pressure, his quotient of joy
increases — he fakes, spins, and drives through, dunking over the head of somebody who’s at least seven feet tall — Ben says, “I get chills, Mom, I really do.”
Unsophisticated? My son, whose father died, as Jordan’s did a few years ago,
a senseless, violent death: What spiritual toll does that exact on a child? What does
he understand the body to mean, knowing his father’s body was robbed of life?
I remember his martial arts phase, which followed the Republican golf phase,
all the demonstrations I attended of Filipino, Korean, and Chinese stylized fighting: Ben whirling nunchuks, throwing and catching knives, breaking the requisite
boards and bricks. At home, when his sister or brother or the dog came up behind
him, he’d leap up and chop the air, spinning off an instantaneous dramatization
of his charged, secure masculinity. Then he’d get down on the floor to reassure
the startled dog. “It’s okay, baby,” he’d croon. “Benny would never hurt you.”
He doesn’t need a role model, exactly, isn’t interested in the personal or moral
failures of athletes, isn’t drawn to their celebrity. Instead he needs the example of
pure jubilation in the body, the triumph of spirit, strength, determination, and
talent.

20

Y
I teach at a small liberal arts college thirty miles from where I live, a Division III
school with an active athletic program. While the college cannot offer athletic
scholarships, many of the students are there primarily to play sports, and it is
their athletic not scholastic achievement that inspires the college to find sufficient
financial aid for them to attend. These are mostly white kids from farms, or towns
such as Beebeetown, Mechanicsville, Altoona, Correctionville, or What Cheer,
Iowa. (I listen closely as my students tell me the names of their towns, hoping for
an ironic inflection, but I’m always disappointed.) Some of the students are fairly
bright, but, because they were stars of their high school classes — football, wrestling, basketball, track, or golf — they haven’t read any books.
I don’t mean that they haven’t read many books, or that they haven’t read the
great books. I mean that, except for comic books, they haven’t read even one

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 635

25

6/18/12 3:12 PM

636

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

book, that is, you know, sitting down, opening a book, and reading it, beginning
sentence to the next, sentence by sentence, paragraph by paragraph, all the way to
the end. They’ve simply been passed from one class to the next without doing the
work.
“Do we really have to read the whole thing?” they ask me plaintively, as we
begin the first book on the syllabus.
Because my children and I live in a university community that insists on
higher educational standards than most (although, believe me, these standards
are nothing to boast about), by the time my children were in fifth grade they
could read and write better than most of my college freshmen. Because my children attend a public school where, although there are drugs and skirmishes and
occasionally weapons, there is a reasonable expectation of safety and order and
the opportunity to be educated, they will be able to compete with their academic
achievements, not a reverse layup or three-point shot. They are fortunate because
games are play for them. On the other hand, because my children are not particularly gifted athletes, they’ve not had the playing time or attention from coaches
that their more talented or parent-coached peers have had. All three of them need
those things, not because they will bring glory to their schools, but because we all
need joy in our physicality. When I travel to a school in Altoona or someplace like
it to attend one of my daughter’s basketball games, at first I’m distracted by my
awareness that this town is one of countless others where we’re failing to sufficiently educate some, if not many, of the children. Then I pick a spot in the
bleachers several rows behind where her team will sit and wait for my daughter to
come jogging in.
As Emily bounces onto the floor in her green-and-gold uniform, her eyes scan the
crowd to meet mine. She’s always happy before a game, and now, a few minutes
before the whistle, she’s luminous with excitement. The girls warm up, shoot,
huddle, then go to the bench. Emily’s one of the shorter girls, but she moves fast.
I take inordinate pride in the fact that it wouldn’t occur to her to go out for cheerleading. Sometimes when I pick her up after practice, ready with food she can
stuff into her mouth, she cannot contain her exuberance: “Mom, I swear to God!
We worked so hard, it was the most fun I’ve had in my entire life!” Sometimes,
watching them practice, I think back to our cow-pasture softball and wish, well,
that Mary and I had learned to play the game.
The girls are on the sidelines, waiting for the game to begin. I look at Emily’s
golden brown head among all the other bright heads with their French and cornrow braids (the girls braid each others’ hair as they ride the bus to the game). The
whistle blows, the ball’s in play; the air is filled with shouts and squeaking shoes
and the bouncing of the ball. Each time there is a substitution of players I watch
my daughter’s slender back lift with hope then go slack with disappointment.
Unlike most of the other parents, I do not give a damn whether West High’s teams
win State or anything else; I want all the kids to have their playing time. The game

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 636

30

6/18/12 3:12 PM

VeRVAeCKe • A SPeCTATOR’S NOTeBOOK

637

wears on; West High is once again kicking butt. Not until the last minute or two
of the game, when her team has maintained a twenty-point lead over the second
half, do Emily and several other girls get to play.
She maintains her composure until we get in the car, then crumples in humiliation. Once we’re on the highway, forty miles to home, freezing rain coats our
windows, but I can’t see well enough to find a safe place to pull off. I drive with
trepidation over the slippery road, through the foggy darkness, while Emily cries
so hard it sounds as though she will break apart. “Mommy, I’m such a failure!”
she weeps. At first my attempts to comfort her only increase her misery, so I shut
up. I’m left to listen and worry about the road and think my resentful thoughts. I
remember all the years in elementary school when she was “benched” in the classroom — left to do bulletin boards for the teacher — because she’d already mastered what was being taught. I think about the studies that suggest that girls who
compete in athletics are far less likely to drink or take drugs or become pregnant.
To make myself feel better, I remember her thirteenth birthday, when she was
the high scorer on her team with nineteen points. I can still see her dribbling the ball
down the court, passing, rebounding, shooting, so far from any self-consciousness
about her body it was as though the game had dreamed her up, supplying her
with a body that moved as though sure of itself and its momentary grace.

Y
One of Ben’s names for his younger brother, Andrew, is “Trancer.” Years ago, when
Andrew played outfield in Little League, he often faced away from the batter in
deep contemplation, and it was only with difficulty that his coach or I would pull
his attention away from his thoughts and redirect it toward the real danger he
might be smacked in the back of the skull by the ball.
“Andrew, get your head in the game!” the coach would holler, but Andrew
never actually did. It worked out better when he went out for track. Long-distance
running gave him plenty of time to think. Until recently, I thought the last thing
he’d ever want to be was a jock.
July 1996. A Saturday morning, the window open while I work at home, bringing
in the breeze fragrant with freshly cut grass and the steady thump thump thump
of the basketball on the driveway. Andrew, who has just turned fourteen, bounces
a ball in order to think. Two hours might pass in bouncing and shooting hoops
before he appears in the office, as if from a dream, to tell me what’s on his mind.
He wanders in wearing a wrinkled T-shirt and shorts, barefoot, his dark hair
mussed. I’m surprised again by how graceful and muscular he is, how tall —
five-foot-ten last time I measured him — but it seems possible that he’s grown
another inch since I fed him breakfast.
He plops down on a chair next to mine. Up close there’s a little acne and a
few whiskers, new this year, and the chickenpox scar on his cheek from when he
was three.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 637

35

6/18/12 3:12 PM

638

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

“Hi, Mom.” Here’s something familiar: It’s obvious he hasn’t gotten around
to brushing his teeth. He’s lost in thought. “I love you, Mom,” he says absently.
“I love you,” I say, patting his rather huge and hairy knee, adding, “You look
like a derelict.”
He registers this and looks pleased.
Then he wakes up, turns toward me, says in a voice heavy with portent,
“Tomorrow.”
“Tomorrow,” I say cheerfully, because this is my role: to refute the objections
he’ll make because he’s scared to go to the two-week writing scholarship workshop that begins the next day.
“It’s going to suck! They’ll treat us like babies, probably make us go to bed at
ten o’clock!”
This will be the first time he’s been away from home for two weeks, one of the
few times he’s ever been away, even to stay with family. Three summers ago, when
he stayed at my mother’s, he got so homesick he went on a hunger strike so that
he could come home. Since that time, he’s grown a foot, his voice has dropped an
octave, and his shin bones are as thick as the beef bones we buy for the puppy to
chew.
“Oh, I doubt it,” I say. “They chose you based on your manuscripts and test
scores, so they know you’re not babies.”
“Yeah,” he says. “But I bet everybody will already know each other except
for me.”
“They come from all over the state, so I don’t know how they’d already know
each other.”
“Yeah, well, I don’t care,” he says, sounding satisfied. “They’re probably all a
bunch of nerds, anyway.”
“Probably.”
“What do you think?” he asks, pushing up the sleeve of his T-shirt, revealing
what I can genuinely describe to him as an amazingly well-developed biceps.
“Wow,” I say, trying to take in the irony — or anti-irony — that all that grunting and weight lifting in the basement had been in preparation for a smart kids’
workshop.
The next day I drive him to the university where the workshop will be held;
after the three-hour orientation, I am to return to drive him to the dorm. At the
appointed time, I pull into the parking lot. There is a cluster of girls at the shelter,
surreptitiously watching the boys playing basketball. I scan the crowd of boys as
they jump and shoot, and four times I think spot my son, but from this distance
and with the sun in my eyes, I can’t discern Andrew from the others. As I step out
of the car to go look for him, he opens the passenger door.
“Mom!” he says. “Get in the car!”
His face is flushed, jaw set. Someone might see me, confirming the rumor he
has a mother.
“How was it?” I ask, backing out.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 638

40

45

50

55

6/18/12 3:12 PM

VeRVAeCKe • A SPeCTATOR’S NOTeBOOK

639

“It sucks,” he says. “We’re on such a short leash. we have to go to bed at
ten o’clock! And the boys are like all into role-playing games, though some of
them are pretending to be intellectuals. It sucks so bad you wouldn’t believe it.
The books they go around recommending to each other are like science-fiction
stuff they think is great literature.”
“That’s too bad,” I say.
“It might be okay, though,” he says. “Some of the kids are pretty cool.”
“That’s good,” I say, noticing the lovely cumulus between us and the enormous sky.
“One kid asked me what kind of game system I have, and I said, ‘Game system?’ And he said, ‘You know like Sega or Super Nintendo,’ and I said, ‘Game
system? I don’t play game systems.’ ”
“You really shut him off,” I say.
“Well, I didn’t really shut him off,” he says, hedging.
Trailing him down the hall of the dorm where he’ll live for the next two
weeks, I watch as he nods to the other boys. As he unlocks the door to his room,
he whispers, “Nobody I couldn’t take if I had to,” and grins before giving me the
briefest and most furtive of hugs good-bye.
Over the next two weeks, he phones only once, and, in a breezy tone, tells me
he’s having, definitely, the best time of his life. My friend who lives across the
street from the dorm and has promised to spy on my child, reports that every
evening Andrew’s out shooting hoops with the R.A. and a couple of the other
scholarship guys.
In the remarks at the closing ceremony, Andrew’s muscles emerge as a kind
of theme, and, in the final ritual of parting, each kid autographs my son’s manly
biceps.

60

65

Y
When I mention to Ben that I’m writing an essay about sports, he looks stricken.
“I don’t think that’s a good idea, Mom,” he says, honesty overriding tact. “I mean
it’s not something you can read about and understand in that way. You have to
have a feel for it, an intuition. You have to love it.”
“I’m not pretending to love it,” I say a bit defensively.
Is there anything about sports I love?
Closing my eyes, I remember swinging my bat and solidly hitting the ball, the
shudder of the connection a physical exultation traveling down my arm. I remember tossing the bat aside, and, as though suddenly released into the wild, racing
through the shimmering heat, toeing each dried cow pie base and sliding into
home.
I remember running hard, free of ambivalence, of pity. I remember the powdery dirt and the minty smell of the weeds and the unreasonable beauty of the sky.
“Mom,” someone is calling. “Mom!”
I open my eyes.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 639

70

6/18/12 3:12 PM

640

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

“You’re as bad as Andrew,” Emily informs me. “Why are you just sitting here?”
“I was remembering when I was a kid, playing softball.”
“Oh, my gosh,” she says, mildly exasperated, “playing in the dirt with your
friends doesn’t count, Mom. I thought you were going to write about when I was
the high scorer on my basketball team with nineteen points. On my thirteenth
birthday, remember?”
“When did I say I was going to write about that?”
“You didn’t, but I told you you should. It was so awesome. We were playing
Southeast, the gym was packed, and everybody from Northwest was yelling my
name. I kept throwing the ball up there, and it kept going in. My team was pounding the floor, yelling ‘Em-i-ly!’ Then I did a layup, and it won the game. Don’t you
remember?”
“Of course, I remember.”
“Well, all right then,” she says, satisfied. “That’s the story to tell.”

75

Exploring the Text
1. Kris Vervaecke describes as “brutish” the softball she played as a young girl in
Nebraska (para. 1). What satisfactions did she derive from the game? How did the
game define her and her nemesis, Mary Hellerman?
2. Vervaecke describes her neighborhood as “inhabited almost solely by females”
(para. 1). How does that fact connect to the game she and her friends play? How
might it connect to the end of Vervaecke’s sports career, when she “became a girl”
(para. 4)?
3. How does paragraph 5 provide a transition to Vervaecke’s role as the mother of
athletes?
4. How and why does Vervaecke characterize herself as an uninterested spectator
(paras. 6–8)? What rhetorical strategies does she use? Are they effective? Explain
your response.
5. At the beginning of the second section (para. 10), Vervaecke says that sports has
given her children what she, as a single mother, could not: “letting them shed, for
the game’s duration, grief, rage, loneliness, or boredom, and allowing them to take
on skill and cunning, filling them with inspiration and determination, sometimes
awe” (para. 10). How does each of the anecdotes that follow illustrate some part of
that statement?
6. Why does Vervaecke begin the third section (para. 25), which is about a game in
which her daughter Emily barely plays, by noting that the athletes who attend the
college where she teaches have never read a book?
7. What is the connection between Andrew’s enjoyment of the writing workshop and
his highly developed biceps (paras. 35–65)?
8. In what ways does the last section of the essay connect playing sports, watching
sports, and motherhood — the main threads of the piece? Why does the essay end
with Emily’s exasperation at her mother’s memory of playing softball?

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 640

6/18/12 3:12 PM

SMIleY • BARBARO, THe HeART IN THe WINNeR’S CIRCle

641

Barbaro, The Heart in the Winner’s Circle
Jane Smiley
Jane Smiley was born in 1949 in los Angeles and grew up in a suburb of St. louis.
She went to Vassar College and received her MA and PhD from the University of
Iowa. She taught creative writing at Iowa State University for fifteen years. Her
novel A Thousand Acres (1991) won the Pulitzer Prize for fiction. Her other works
include the novels The Greenlanders (1988), Ordinary Love and Good Will (1989),
Moo (1995), Horse Heaven (2000), and Private Lives (2010); nonfiction works
such as Thirteen Ways of Looking at the Novel (2005); and articles including “Say
It Ain’t So, Huck: Second Thoughts on Mark Twain’s Masterpiece” (Harper’s,
1996). The piece that follows was the Washington Post’s obituary for Barbaro, the
racehorse who died in 2007. He won the Kentucky Derby in 2006 but broke two
legs a few weeks later in the Preakness Stakes, which resulted in his death.

N

ine years ago, I had a thoroughbred mare who came down with colic in
the night, and was too far gone to save by the time she was found at
6 a.m. After she was euthanized, I remember staring at her body, which was
stretched out in the grass, running my hands over her. Her coat was shining. Her
haunch was rounded and firm. Her feet and legs were perfect. Only that one thing
had been wrong, that twist in her gut, but it was enough, and it killed her. So it is
with all horses.
They are engineered so close to the margins of what is physically possible
that when one thing fails, it can cause the failure of the whole animal.
So it was with Barbaro, who was euthanized yesterday. When we saw his pictures over the last months, his ears were up, he was attentive and beautiful and
interested. He looked pretty good, except for those casts.
His vets warned us all along that the odds were against him, but we didn’t
really believe them. They had hope, too. How could a horse who appeared so full
of life break his leg and be so suddenly close to death? His head was fine. His back
was fine. His lungs and heart and chest were fine. In fact, after a while, his broken
leg was fairly fine. It was another leg that was so worrisome, since the weight of
his body constantly bearing down on the delicate structures inside his foot eventually damaged and destroyed them.

Y
A horse’s hoof is wondrous structure — the outside horn is lined with delicate
membranes and blood vessels that feed and support the bones of the foot. The
bones of the foot are analogous to a person’s fingertips, since a horse’s knee is
analogous to a person’s wrist. The racehorse carries a thousand pounds at 35 to
40 miles per hour using a few slender bones supported by an apparatus of ligaments and tendons that have no analogues in human anatomy. Every part of the
system depends on every other part. What happened to Barbaro was that the

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 641

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

642

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

engineering couldn’t take it. When it was right, as in the Kentucky Derby, it was
perfectly right, and when it became wrong, it became irredeemably wrong.
Some observers have been angered by the outpouring of sympathy toward
Barbaro, but there is something extra large about the death of a horse.
And the death of a thoroughbred seems to me to be even more shocking,
because thoroughbreds have been bred to press on and prevail where other breeds
of horse throw in the towel. When we saw Barbaro in last May’s Kentucky Derby
fly away from the field so gracefully and effortlessly, he was doing something
thoroughbreds have been bred to do for 300 years — to sense the encroaching
fatigue of three-quarters of a mile at top speed and want only to run faster, to
push ahead and take the lead.
We say that thoroughbreds have “blood,” meaning the DNA of desert Arab
horses, and “heart,” meaning fortitude, desire and competitive spirit.
It was heart that we saw in Barbaro, not only on Derby Day, but also on
Preakness Day, when he stood injured in the middle of the track, touching his toe
to the ground and snatching it up again, somehow impatient, somehow not truly
aware of the pain, somehow still ready to get going.
I watched the Preakness with some lifelong racing people. When Barbaro was
injured, we turned the TV off. All of us had seen it before; everyone who loves
racing has seen it all too many times. It is the paradox of racing. His dynamic
beauty and his exceptional heart were gifts Barbaro inherited from his racing
forebears, who had the luck and toughness to run and win and prove themselves
worthy of reproducing.
And then, during his medical saga, he showed that he was intelligent, too.
According to a friend of mine who talked to trainer Michael Matz in the summer,
Barbaro knew when he needed some pain relief — he would stand by the sling
and shake it until they put him in it, and when he was tired of it, he would shake
himself so that it rattled, signaling he was ready to be taken out. And then he
would go to his stall and lie down.
Did he want to survive? It seemed as though he did.
In a great racehorse, the heart and mind do the running, and the body tries
to hold up.
Yes, to those who don’t care about horses, terrible things are happening all
over the world these days, and they demand from many people an unprecedented
level of endurance, but we horse lovers say: This, too? That this beautiful and
innocent animal should also die?
When I think of Barbaro, I like to think also of some of the tough ones — John
Henry, Seabiscuit, a horse I bred a mare to once named Loyal Pal. Among the
three of them, they ran hundreds of times. They managed to avoid the bad steps
and the bad luck, to go to the races as if a race were a trot in the park, coming back
afterward to a bucket of grain and a long nap. Sometimes, thousands of fans
thrilled to their exploits. Sometimes, the only ones watching were the owner, the
trainer and a few punters. Like Barbaro, they did it because they were born and

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 642

10

15

6/18/12 3:12 PM

GlADWell • OffeNSIVe PlAY

643

bred to do it, because a thoroughbred loves to run, and because they didn’t know
what it meant not to keep on trying.

Exploring the Text
1. How is Jane Smiley’s piece both similar to and different from an obituary?
2. How does Smiley establish ethos?
3. Why do you think Smiley uses the personal pronoun in paragraph 4?
4. Why do you think Smiley provides anatomical information about horses in paragraph 5? What is the effect of that information?
5. What do you think Smiley means by “the paradox of racing” (para. 10)?
6. What purpose do the rhetorical questions in paragraphs 12 and 14 serve?
7. To whom does Smiley seem to be responding in paragraph 14? What issue might
she be commenting on when she says “to those who don’t care about horses”?
8. Is Smiley convincing when she says she knows what a horse is thinking: “a thoroughbred loves to run” (para. 15)? Explain your answer.

Offensive Play
How Different Are Dogfighting and Football?

Malcolm Gladwell
Malcolm Gladwell was born in england in 1963. He was raised in rural Ontario,
Canada, and graduated from the University of Toronto, Trinity College. from 1986
to 1996 he worked at the Washington Post, where he covered business and science and was the newspaper’s New York City bureau chief. Since 1996 he has
been a staff writer with the New Yorker magazine. Gladwell’s books include The
Tipping Point: How Little Things Make a Big Difference (2000), Blink: The Power of
Thinking without Thinking (2005), and Outliers: The Story of Success (2008). The
piece presented here appeared in the New Yorker in 2009, at about the time
that football player Michael Vick was released from prison, where he served a
23-month term for felony charges connected to illegal dogfighting.

O

ne evening in August, Kyle Turley was at a bar in Nashville with his wife
and some friends. It was one of the countless little places in the city that
play live music. He’d ordered a beer, but was just sipping it, because he was driving home. He had eaten an hour and a half earlier. Suddenly, he felt a sensation of
heat. He was light-headed, and began to sweat. He had been having episodes like
that with increasing frequency during the past year — headaches, nausea. One
month, he had vertigo every day, bouts in which he felt as if he were stuck to a

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 643

6/18/12 3:12 PM

644

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

wall. But this was worse. He asked his wife if he could sit on her stool for a
moment. The warmup band was still playing, and he remembers saying, “I’m just
going to take a nap right here until the next band comes on.” Then he was lying
on the floor, and someone was standing over him. “The guy was freaking out,”
Turley recalled. “He was saying, ‘Damn, man, I couldn’t find a pulse,’ and my wife
said, ‘No, no. You were breathing.’ I’m, like, ‘What? What?’ ”
They picked him up. “We went out in the parking lot, and I just lost it,” Turley
went on. “I started puking everywhere. I couldn’t stop. I got in the car, still puking. My wife, she was really scared, because I had never passed out like that before,
and I started becoming really paranoid. I went into a panic. We get to the emergency room. I started to lose control. My limbs were shaking, and I couldn’t speak.
I was conscious, but I couldn’t speak the words I wanted to say.”
Turley is six feet five. He is thirty-four years old, with a square jaw and blue
eyes. For nine years, before he retired, in 2007, he was an offensive lineman in the
National Football League. He knew all the stories about former football players.
Mike Webster, the longtime Pittsburgh Steeler and one of the greatest players in
N.F.L. history, ended his life a recluse, sleeping on the floor of the Pittsburgh
Amtrak station. Another former Pittsburgh Steeler, Terry Long, drifted into chaos
and killed himself four years ago by drinking antifreeze. Andre Waters, a former
defensive back for the Philadelphia Eagles, sank into depression and pleaded with
his girlfriend — “I need help, somebody help me” — before shooting himself in
the head. There were men with aching knees and backs and hands, from all those
years of playing football. But their real problem was with their heads, the one part
of their body that got hit over and over again.
“Lately, I’ve tried to break it down,” Turley said. “I remember, every season,
multiple occasions where I’d hit someone so hard that my eyes went cross-eyed,
and they wouldn’t come uncrossed for a full series of plays. You are just out there,
trying to hit the guy in the middle, because there are three of them. You don’t
remember much. There are the cases where you hit a guy and you’d get into a collision where everything goes off. You’re dazed. And there are the others where you
are involved in a big, long drive. You start on your own five-yard line, and drive
all the way down the field — fifteen, eighteen plays in a row sometimes. Every
play: collision, collision, collision. By the time you get to the other end of the field,
you’re seeing spots. You feel like you are going to black out. Literally, these white
explosions — boom, boom, boom — lights getting dimmer and brighter, dimmer
and brighter.
“Then, there was the time when I got knocked unconscious. That was in St.
Louis, in 2003. My wife said that I was out a minute or two on the field. But I was
gone for about four hours after that. It was the last play of the third quarter. We
were playing the Packers. I got hit in the back of the head. I saw it on film a little
while afterward. I was running downfield, made a block on a guy. We fell to the
ground. A guy was chasing the play, a little guy, a defensive back, and he jumped
over me as I was coming up, and he kneed me right in the back of the head. Boom!

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 644

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

GlADWell • OffeNSIVe PlAY

645

“They sat me down on the bench. I remember Marshall Faulk coming up and
joking with me, because he knew that I was messed up. That’s what happens in
the N.F.L: ‘Oooh. You got effed up. Oooh.’ The trainer came up to me and said,
‘Kyle, let’s take you to the locker room.’ I remember looking up at a clock, and
there was only a minute and a half left in the game — and I had no idea that much
time had elapsed. I showered and took all my gear off. I was sitting at my locker. I
don’t remember anything. When I came back, after being hospitalized, the guys
were joking with me because Georgia Frontiere” — then the team’s owner —
“came in the locker room, and they said I was butt-ass naked and I gave her a big
hug. They were dying laughing, and I was, like, ‘Are you serious? I did that?’
“They cleared me for practice that Thursday. I probably shouldn’t have. I
don’t know what damage I did from that, because my head was really hurting. But
when you’re coming off an injury you’re frustrated. I wanted to play the next
game. I was just so mad that this happened to me that I’m overdoing it. I was just
going after guys in practice. I was really trying to use my head more, because I was
so frustrated, and the coaches on the sidelines are, like, ‘Yeah. We’re going to win
this game. He’s going to lead the team.’ That’s football. You’re told either that
you’re hurt or that you’re injured. There is no middle ground. If you are hurt, you
can play. If you are injured, you can’t, and the line is whether you can walk and if
you can put on a helmet and pads.”
Turley said that he loved playing football so much that he would do it all
again. Then he began talking about what he had gone through in the past year.
The thing that scared him most about that night at the bar was that it felt exactly
like the time he was knocked unconscious. “It was identical,” he said. “It was my
worst episode ever.”

Y
In August of 2007, one of the highest-paid players in professional football, the
quarterback Michael Vick, pleaded guilty to involvement in a dogfighting ring.
The police raided one of his properties, a farm outside Richmond, Virginia, and
found the bodies of dead dogs buried on the premises, along with evidence that
some of the animals there had been tortured and electrocuted. Vick was suspended from football. He was sentenced to twenty-three months in prison. The
dogs on his farm were seized by the court, and the most damaged were sent to an
animal sanctuary in Utah for rehabilitation. When Vick applied for reinstatement
to the National Football League, this summer, he was asked to undergo psychiatric testing. He then met with the commissioner of the league, Roger Goodell, for
four and a half hours, so that Goodell could be sure that he was genuinely
remorseful.
“I probably considered every alternative that I could think of,” Goodell told
reporters, when he finally allowed Vick back into the league. “I reached out to an
awful lot of people to get their views — not only on what was right for the young
man but also what was right for our society and the N.F.L.”

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 645

10

6/18/12 3:12 PM

646

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

Goodell’s job entails dealing with players who have used drugs, driven drunk
and killed people, fired handguns in night clubs, and consorted with thugs and
accused murderers. But he clearly felt what many Americans felt as well — that
dogfighting was a moral offense of a different order.
Here is a description of a dogfight given by the sociologists Rhonda Evans
and Craig Forsyth in “The Social Milieu of Dogmen and Dogfights,” an article
they published some years ago in the journal Deviant Behavior. The fight took
place in Louisiana between a local dog, Black, owned by a man named L.G., and
Snow, whose owner, Rick, had come from Arizona:
The handlers release their dogs and Snow and Black lunge at one another. Snow rears
up and overpowers Black, but Black manages to come back with a quick locking of
the jaws on Snow’s neck. The crowd is cheering wildly and yelling out bets. Once a
dog gets a lock on the other, they will hold on with all their might. The dogs flail back
and forth and all the while Black maintains her hold.

In a dogfight, whenever one of the dogs “turns” — makes a submissive gesture with its head — the two animals are separated and taken back to their corners. Each dog, in alternation, then “scratches” — is released to charge at its
opponent. After that first break, it is Snow’s turn to scratch. She races toward
Black:
Snow goes straight for the throat and grabs hold with her razor-sharp teeth. Almost
immediately, blood flows from Black’s throat. Despite a serious injury to the throat,
Black manages to continue fighting back. They are relentless, each battling the other
and neither willing to accept defeat. This fighting continues for an hour. [Finally, the
referee] gives the third and final pit call. It is Black’s turn to scratch and she is severely
wounded. Black manages to crawl across the pit to meet her opponent. Snow attacks
Black and she is too weak to fight back. L.G. realizes that this is it for Black and calls
the fight. Snow is declared the winner.

Afterward, Snow’s owner collects his winnings; L.G. carries Black from the ring.
“Her back legs are broken and blood is gushing from her throat,” Evans and
Forsyth write. “A shot rings out barely heard over the noise in the barn. Black’s
body is wrapped up and carried by her owner to his vehicle.”
It’s the shot ringing out that seals the case against dogfighting. L.G. willingly
submitted his dog to a contest that culminated in her suffering and destruction.
And why? For the entertainment of an audience and the chance of a payday. In
the nineteenth century, dogfighting was widely accepted by the American public.
But we no longer find that kind of transaction morally acceptable in a sport. “I
was not aware of dogfighting and the terrible things that happen around dogfighting,” Goodell said, explaining why he responded so sternly in the Vick case.
One wonders whether, had he spent as much time talking to Kyle Turley as he did
to Michael Vick, he’d start to have similar doubts about his own sport.

Y

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 646

6/18/12 3:12 PM

GlADWell • OffeNSIVe PlAY

647

In 2003, a seventy-two-year-old patient at the Veterans Hospital in Bedford,
Massachusetts, died, fifteen years after receiving a diagnosis of dementia. Patients
in the hospital’s dementia ward are routinely autopsied, as part of the V.A.’s
research efforts, so the man’s brain was removed and “fixed” in a formaldehyde
solution. A laboratory technician placed a large slab of the man’s cerebral tissue
on a microtome — essentially, a sophisticated meat slicer — and, working along
the coronal plane, cut off dozens of fifty-micron shavings, less than a hairbreadth
thick. The shavings were then immunostained — bathed in a special reagent that
would mark the presence of abnormal proteins with a bright, telltale red or brown
stain on the surface of the tissue. Afterward, each slice was smoothed out and
placed on a slide.
The stained tissue of Alzheimer’s patients typically shows the two trademarks
of the disease — distinctive patterns of the proteins beta-amyloid and tau. Betaamyloid is thought to lay the groundwork for dementia. Tau marks the critical
second stage of the disease: it’s the protein that steadily builds up in brain cells,
shutting them down and ultimately killing them. An immunostain of an Alzheimer’s patient looks, under the microscope, as if the tissue had been hit with a
shotgun blast: the red and brown marks, corresponding to amyloid and tau, dot
the entire surface. But this patient’s brain was different. There was damage only
to specific surface regions of his brain, and the stains for amyloid came back
negative. “This was all tau,” Ann McKee, who runs the hospital’s neuropathology
laboratory, said. “There was not even a whiff of amyloid. And it was the most
extraordinary damage. It was one of those cases that really took you aback.” The
patient may have been in an Alzheimer’s facility, and may have looked and acted
as if he had Alzheimer’s. But McKee realized that he had a different condition,
called chronic traumatic encephalopathy (C.T.E.), which is a progressive neurological disorder found in people who have suffered some kind of brain trauma.
C.T.E. has many of the same manifestations as Alzheimer’s: it begins with behavioral and personality changes, followed by disinhibition and irritability, before
moving on to dementia. And C.T.E. appears later in life as well, because it takes a
long time for the initial trauma to give rise to nerve-cell breakdown and death.
But C.T.E. isn’t the result of an endogenous disease. It’s the result of injury.
The patient, it turned out, had been a boxer in his youth. He had suffered from
dementia for fifteen years because, decades earlier, he’d been hit too many times
in the head.
McKee’s laboratory does the neuropathology work for both the giant Framingham heart study, which has been running since 1948, and Boston University’s New England Centenarian Study, which analyzes the brains of people who
are unusually long-lived. “I’m looking at brains constantly,” McKee said. “Then I
ran across another one. I saw it and said, ‘Wow, it looks just like the last case.’ This
time, there was no known history of boxing. But then I called the family, and
heard that the guy had been a boxer in his twenties.” You can’t see tau except in an
autopsy, and you can’t see it in an autopsy unless you do a very particular kind of

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 647

15

6/18/12 3:12 PM

648

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

screen. So now that McKee had seen two cases, in short order, she began to wonder: how many people who we assume have Alzheimer’s — a condition of mysterious origin — are actually victims of preventable brain trauma?
McKee linked up with an activist named Chris Nowinski, a former college
football player and professional wrestler who runs a group called the Sports Legacy Institute, in Boston. In his football and wrestling careers, Nowinski suffered
six concussions (that he can remember), the last of which had such severe side
effects that he has become a full-time crusader against brain injuries in sports.
Nowinski told McKee that he would help her track down more brains of exathletes. Whenever he read an obituary of someone who had played in a contact
sport, he’d call up the family and try to persuade them to send the player’s brain
to Bedford. Usually, they said no. Sometimes they said yes. The first brain McKee
received was from a man in his mid-forties who had played as a linebacker in the
N.F.L. for ten years. He accidentally shot himself while cleaning a gun. He had at
least three concussions in college, and eight in the pros. In the years before his
death, he’d had memory lapses, and had become more volatile. McKee immunostained samples of his brain tissue, and saw big splotches of tau all over the frontal and temporal lobes. If he hadn’t had the accident, he would almost certainly
have ended up in a dementia ward.
Nowinski found her another ex-football player. McKee saw the same thing.
She has now examined the brains of sixteen ex-athletes, most of them ex-football
players. Some had long careers and some played only in college. Some died of
dementia. Some died of unrelated causes. Some were old. Some were young. Most
were linemen or linebackers, although there was one wide receiver. In one case,
a man who had been a linebacker for sixteen years, you could see, without the
aid of magnification, that there was trouble: there was a shiny tan layer of scar
tissue, right on the surface of the frontal lobe, where the brain had repeatedly
slammed into the skull. It was the kind of scar you’d get only if you used your
head as a battering ram. You could also see that some of the openings in the brain
were larger than you’d expect, as if the surrounding tissue had died and shrunk
away. In other cases, everything seemed entirely normal until you looked under
the microscope and saw the brown ribbons of tau. But all sixteen of the exathlete brains that McKee had examined — those of the two boxers, plus the ones
that Nowinski had found for her — had something in common: every one had
abnormal tau.
The other major researcher looking at athletes and C.T.E. is the neuropathologist Bennet Omalu. He diagnosed the first known case of C.T.E. in an exN.F.L. player back in September of 2002, when he autopsied the former Pittsburgh
Steelers center Mike Webster. He also found C.T.E. in the former Philadelphia
Eagles defensive back Andre Waters, and in the former Steelers linemen Terry
Long and Justin Strzelczyk, the latter of whom was killed when he drove the
wrong way down a freeway and crashed his car, at ninety miles per hour, into a
tank truck. Omalu has only once failed to find C.T.E. in a professional football

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 648

20

6/18/12 3:12 PM

GlADWell • OffeNSIVe PlAY

649

player, and that was a twenty-four-year-old running back who had played in the
N.F.L. for only two years.
“There is something wrong with this group as a cohort,” Omalu says. “They
forget things. They have slurred speech. I have had an N.F.L. player come up to
me at a funeral and tell me he can’t find his way home. I have wives who call me
and say, ‘My husband was a very good man. Now he drinks all the time. I don’t
know why his behavior changed.’ I have wives call me and say, ‘My husband was a
nice guy. Now he’s getting abusive.’ I had someone call me and say, ‘My husband
went back to law school after football and became a lawyer. Now he can’t do his
job. People are suing him.’ ”
McKee and Omalu are trying to make sense of the cases they’ve seen so far.
At least some of the players are thought to have used steroids, which has led to the
suggestion that brain injury might in some way be enhanced by drug use. Many
of the players also share a genetic risk factor for neurodegenerative diseases, so
perhaps deposits of tau are the result of brain trauma coupled with the weakened
ability of the brain to repair itself. McKee says that she will need to see at least fifty
cases before she can draw any firm conclusions. In the meantime, late last month
the University of Michigan’s Institute for Social Research released the findings of
an N.F.L.-funded phone survey of just over a thousand randomly selected retired
N.F.L. players — all of whom had played in the league for at least three seasons.
Self-reported studies are notoriously unreliable instruments, but, even so, the
results were alarming. Of those players who were older than fifty, 6.1 per cent
reported that they had received a diagnosis of “dementia, Alzheimer’s disease, or
other memory-related disease.” That’s five times higher than the national average
for that age group. For players between the ages of thirty and forty-nine, the
reported rate was nineteen times the national average. (The N.F.L. has distributed
five million dollars to former players with dementia.)
“A long time ago, someone suggested that the [C.T.E. rate] in boxers was
twenty per cent,” McKee told me. “I think it’s probably higher than that among
boxers, and I also suspect that it’s going to end up being higher than that among
football players as well. Why? Because every brain I’ve seen has this. To get this
number in a sample this small is really unusual, and the findings are so far out of
the norm. I only can say that because I have looked at thousands of brains for a
long time. This isn’t something that you just see. I did the same exact thing for all
the individuals from the Framingham heart study. We study them until they die.
I run these exact same proteins, make these same slides — and we never see this.”
McKee’s laboratory occupies a warren of rooms, in what looks like an old
officers’ quarters on the V.A. campus. In one of the rooms, there is an enormous
refrigerator, filled with brains packed away in hundreds of plastic containers.
Nearby is a tray with small piles of brain slices. They look just like the ginger
shavings that come with an order of sushi. Now McKee went to the room next to
her office, sat down behind a microscope, and inserted one of the immunostained slides under the lens.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 649

6/18/12 3:12 PM

650

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

“This is Tom McHale,” she said. “He started out playing for Cornell. Then he
went to Tampa Bay. He was the man who died of substance abuse at the age of
forty-five. I only got fragments of the brain. But it’s just showing huge accumulations of tau for a forty-five-year-old — ridiculously abnormal.”
She placed another slide under the microscope. “This individual was forty-nine
years old. A football player. Cognitively intact. He never had any rage behavior.
He had the distinctive abnormalities. Look at the hypothalamus.” It was dark with
tau. She put another slide in. “This guy was in his mid-sixties,” she said. “He died
of an unrelated medical condition. His name is Walter Hilgenberg. Look at the
hippocampus. It’s wall-to-wall tangles. Even in a bad case of Alzheimer’s, you
don’t see that.” The brown pigment of the tau stain ran around the edge of the
tissue sample in a thick, dark band. “It’s like a big river.”
McKee got up and walked across the corridor, back to her office. “There’s one
last thing,” she said. She pulled out a large photographic blowup of a brain-tissue
sample. “This is a kid. I’m not allowed to talk about how he died. He was a good
student. This is his brain. He’s eighteen years old. He played football. He’d been
playing football for a couple of years.” She pointed to a series of dark spots on the
image, where the stain had marked the presence of something abnormal. “He’s
got all this tau. This is frontal and this is insular. Very close to insular. Those same
vulnerable regions.” This was a teen-ager, and already his brain showed the kind
of decay that is usually associated with old age. “This is completely inappropriate,” she said. “You don’t see tau like this in an eighteen-year-old. You don’t see tau
like this in a fifty-year-old.”
McKee is a longtime football fan. She is from Wisconsin. She had two statuettes of Brett Favre, the former Green Bay Packers quarterback, on her bookshelf.
On the wall was a picture of a robust young man. It was McKee’s son — nineteen
years old, six feet three. If he had a chance to join the N.F.L., I asked her, what
would she advise him? “I’d say, ‘Don’t. Not if you want to have a life after football.’ ”

25

Y
At the core of the C.T.E. research is a critical question: is the kind of injury being
uncovered by McKee and Omalu incidental to the game of football or inherent in
it? Part of what makes dogfighting so repulsive is the understanding that violence
and injury cannot be removed from the sport. It’s a feature of the sport that dogs
almost always get hurt. Something like stock-car racing, by contrast, is dangerous,
but not unavoidably so.
In 2000 and 2001, four drivers in NASCAR’s élite Sprint Cup Series were
killed in crashes, including the legendary Dale Earnhardt. In response, NASCAR
mandated stronger seats, better seat belts and harnesses, and ignition kill switches,
and completed the installation of expensive new barriers on the walls of its
racetracks, which can absorb the force of a crash much better than concrete.
The result is that, in the past eight years, no one has died in NASCAR’s three
national racing series. Stock-car fans are sometimes caricatured as bloodthirsty,

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 650

30

6/18/12 3:12 PM

GlADWell • OffeNSIVe PlAY

651

eagerly awaiting the next spectacular crash. But there is little blood these days in
NASCAR crashes. Last year, at Texas Motor Speedway, Michael McDowell hit an
oil slick, slammed head first into the wall at a hundred and eighty miles per hour,
flipped over and over, leaving much of his car in pieces on the track, and, when
the vehicle finally came to a stop, crawled out of the wreckage and walked away.
He raced again the next day. So what is football? Is it dogfighting or is it stock-car
racing?
Football faced a version of this question a hundred years ago, after a series of
ugly incidents. In 1905, President Theodore Roosevelt called an emergency summit at the White House, alarmed, as the historian John Sayle Watterson writes,
“that the brutality of the prize ring had invaded college football and might end up
destroying it.” Columbia University dropped the sport entirely. A professor at the
University of Chicago called it a “boy-killing, man-mutilating, money-making,
education-prostituting, gladiatorial sport.” In December of 1905, the presidents
of twelve prominent colleges met in New York and came within one vote of abolishing the game. But the main objection at the time was to a style of play — densely
and dangerously packed offensive strategies — that, it turns out, could be largely
corrected with rule changes, like the legalization of the forward pass and the doubling of the first-down distance from five yards to ten. Today, when we consider
subtler and more insidious forms of injury, it’s far from clear whether the problem is the style of play or the play itself.
Take the experience of a young defensive lineman for the University of North
Carolina football team, who suffered two concussions during the 2004 season.
His case is one of a number studied by Kevin Guskiewicz, who runs the university’s Sports Concussion Research Program. For the past five seasons, Guskiewicz
and his team have tracked every one of the football team’s practices and games
using a system called HITS, in which six sensors are placed inside the helmet of
every player on the field, measuring the force and location of every blow he
receives to the head. Using the HITS data, Guskiewicz was able to reconstruct
precisely what happened each time the player was injured.
“The first concussion was during preseason. The team was doing two-adays,” he said, referring to the habit of practicing in both the morning and the
evening in the preseason. “It was August 9th, 9:55 a.m. He has an 80-g hit to the
front of his head. About ten minutes later, he has a 98-g acceleration to the front
of his head.” To put those numbers in perspective, Guskiewicz explained, if you
drove your car into a wall at twenty-five miles per hour and you weren’t wearing
your seat belt, the force of your head hitting the windshield would be around
100 gs: in effect, the player had two car accidents that morning. He survived
both without incident. “In the evening session, he experiences this 64-g hit to the
same spot, the front of the head. Still not reporting anything. And then this happens.” On his laptop, Guskiewicz ran the video from the practice session. It was a
simple drill: the lineman squaring off against an offensive player who wore the
number 76. The other player ran toward the lineman and brushed past him, while

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 651

6/18/12 3:12 PM

652

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

delivering a glancing blow to the defender’s helmet. “Seventy-six does a little
quick elbow. It’s 63 gs, the lowest of the four, but he sustains a concussion.”
“The second injury was nine weeks later,” Guskiewicz continued. “He’s now
recovered from the initial injury. It’s a game out in Utah. In warmups, he takes a
76-g blow to the front of his head. Then, on the very first play of the game, on
kickoff, he gets popped in the earhole. It’s a 102-g impact. He’s part of the wedge.”
He pointed to the screen, where the player was blocking on a kickoff: “Right here.”
The player stumbled toward the sideline. “His symptoms were significantly worse
than the first injury.” Two days later, during an evaluation in Guskiewicz’s clinic,
he had to have a towel put over his head because he couldn’t stand the light. He
also had difficulty staying awake. He was sidelined for sixteen days.
When we think about football, we worry about the dangers posed by the heat
and the fury of competition. Yet the HITS data suggest that practice — the routine part of the sport — can be as dangerous as the games themselves. We also
tend to focus on the dramatic helmet-to-helmet hits that signal an aggressive and
reckless style of play. Those kinds of hits can be policed. But what sidelined the
U.N.C. player, the first time around, was an accidental and seemingly innocuous
elbow, and none of the blows he suffered that day would have been flagged by a
referee as illegal. Most important, though, is what Guskiewicz found when he
reviewed all the data for the lineman on that first day in training camp. He didn’t
just suffer those four big blows. He was hit in the head thirty-one times that day.
What seems to have caused his concussion, in other words, was his cumulative
exposure. And why was the second concussion — in the game at Utah — so much
more serious than the first? It’s not because that hit to the side of the head was
especially dramatic; it was that it came after the 76-g blow in warmup, which, in
turn, followed the concussion in August, which was itself the consequence of the
thirty prior hits that day, and the hits the day before that, and the day before that,
and on and on, perhaps back to his high-school playing days.
This is a crucial point. Much of the attention in the football world, in the past
few years, has been on concussions — on diagnosing, managing, and preventing
them — and on figuring out how many concussions a player can have before he
should call it quits. But a football player’s real issue isn’t simply with repetitive
concussive trauma. It is, as the concussion specialist Robert Cantu argues, with
repetitive subconcussive trauma. It’s not just the handful of big hits that matter.
It’s lots of little hits, too.
That’s why, Cantu says, so many of the ex-players who have been given a
diagnosis of C.T.E. were linemen: line play lends itself to lots of little hits. The
HITS data suggest that, in an average football season, a lineman could get struck
in the head a thousand times, which means that a ten-year N.F.L. veteran, when
you bring in his college and high-school playing days, could well have been hit in
the head eighteen thousand times: that’s thousands of jarring blows that shake
the brain from front to back and side to side, stretching and weakening and tearing the connections among nerve cells, and making the brain increasingly vulner-

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 652

35

6/18/12 3:12 PM

GlADWell • OffeNSIVe PlAY

653

able to long-term damage. People with C.T.E., Cantu says, “aren’t necessarily
people with a high, recognized concussion history. But they are individuals who
collided heads on every play — repetitively doing this, year after year, under levels
that were tolerable for them to continue to play.”
But if C.T.E. is really about lots of little hits, what can be done about it? Turley
says that it’s impossible for an offensive lineman to do his job without “using his
head.” The position calls for the player to begin in a crouch and then collide with
the opposing lineman when the ball is snapped. Helmet-to-helmet contact is
inevitable. Nowinski, who played football for Harvard, says that “proper” tackling
technique is supposed to involve a player driving into his opponent with his
shoulder. “The problem,” he says, “is that, if you’re a defender and you’re trying to
tackle someone and you decide to pick a side, you’re giving the other guy a way to
go — and people will start running around you.” Would better helmets help? Perhaps. And there have been better models introduced that absorb more of the
shock from a hit. But, Nowinski says, the better helmets have become — and the
more invulnerable they have made the player seem — the more athletes have been
inclined to play recklessly.
“People love technological solutions,” Nowinski went on. “When I give
speeches, the first question is always: ‘What about these new helmets I hear
about?’ What most people don’t realize is that we are decades, if not forever, from
having a helmet that would fix the problem. I mean, you have two men running
into each other at full speed and you think a little bit of plastic and padding could
absorb that 150 gs of force?”
At one point, while he was discussing his research, Guskiewicz showed a videotape from a 1997 college football game between Arizona and Oregon. In one
sequence, a player from Oregon viciously tackles an Arizona player, bringing his
head up onto the opposing player’s chin and sending his helmet flying with the
force of the blow. To look at it, you’d think that the Arizona player would be
knocked unconscious. Instead, he bounces back up. “This guy does not sustain a
concussion,” Guskiewicz said. “He has a lip laceration. Lower lip, that’s it. Now,
same game, twenty minutes later.” He showed a clip of an Arizona defensive back
making a dramatic tackle. He jumps up, and, as he does so, a teammate of his
chest-bumps him in celebration. The defensive back falls and hits his head on
the ground. “That’s a Grade 2 concussion,” Guskiewicz said. “It’s the fall to the
ground, combined with the bounce off the turf.”
The force of the first hit was infinitely greater than the second. But the difference is that the first player saw that he was about to be hit and tensed his neck,
which limited the sharp back-and-forth jolt of the head that sends the brain
crashing against the sides of the skull. In essence, he was being hit not in the head
but in the head, neck, and torso — an area with an effective mass three times
greater. In the second case, the player didn’t see the hit coming. His head took the
full force of the blow all by itself. That’s why he suffered a concussion. But how do
you insure, in a game like football, that a player is never taken by surprise?

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 653

40

6/18/12 3:12 PM

654

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

Guskiewicz and his colleagues have come up with what they believe is a much
better method of understanding concussion. They have done a full cognitive
workup of the players on the U.N.C. team, so that they can track whatever effect
might arise from the hits each player accumulates during his four years. U.N.C.’s
new coach, Butch Davis, has sharply cut back on full-contact practices, reducing
the toll on the players’ heads. Guskiewicz says his data show that a disproportionate number of serious head impacts happen on kickoffs, so he wonders whether
it might make sense, in theory, anyway, to dispense with them altogether. But, like
everyone else who’s worried about football, he still has no idea what the inherent
risks of the game are. What if you did everything you could, and banned kickoffs
and full-contact practices and used the most state-of-the-art techniques for diagnosing and treating concussion, and behaved as responsibly as NASCAR has in
the past several years — and players were still getting too many dangerous little
hits to the head?
After the tape session, Guskiewicz and one of his colleagues, Jason Mihalik,
went outside to watch the U.N.C. football team practice, a short walk down the
hill from their office. Only when you see football at close range is it possible
to understand the dimensions of the brain-injury problem. The players were
huge — much larger than you imagine them being. They moved at astonishing
speeds for people of that size, and, long before you saw them, you heard them: the
sound of one two-hundred-and-fifty-pound man colliding with another echoed
around the practice facility. Mihalik and Guskiewicz walked over to a small building, just off to the side of the field. On the floor was a laptop inside a black storage
crate. Next to the computer was an antenna that received the signals from the
sensors inside the players’ helmets. Mihalik crouched down and began paging
through the data. In one column, the HITS software listed the top hits of the
practice up to that point, and every few moments the screen would refresh,
reflecting the plays that had just been run on the field. Forty-five minutes into
practice, the top eight head blows on the field measured 82 gs, 79 gs, 75 gs, 79 gs,
67 gs, 60 gs, 57 gs, and 53 gs. One player, a running back, had received both the
79 gs and the 60 gs, as well as another hit, measuring 27.9 gs. This wasn’t a fullcontact practice. It was “shells.” The players wore only helmets and shoulder pads,
and still there were mini car crashes happening all over the field.

Y
The most damaged, scarred, and belligerent of Michael Vick’s dogs — the hardest
cases — were sent to the Best Friends Animal Sanctuary, on a thirty-seven-hundredacre spread in the canyons of southern Utah. They were housed in a specially
modified octagon, a one-story, climate-controlled cottage, ringed by individual
dog runs. The dogs were given a final walk at 11 p.m. and woken up at 7 a.m., to
introduce them to a routine. They were hand-fed. In the early months, the staff
took turns sleeping in the octagon — sometimes in the middle, sometimes in a
cot in one of the runs — so that someone would be with the dogs twenty-four

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 654

6/18/12 3:12 PM

GlADWell • OffeNSIVe PlAY

655

hours a day. Twenty-two of Vick’s pit bulls came to Best Friends in January of
2008, and all but five of them are still there.
Ray lunged at his handlers when he first came to Best Friends. He can’t be
with other dogs. Ellen lies on the ground and wants her stomach scratched, and
when the caregivers slept in the octagon she licked them all night long. Her face
is lopsided, as if it had been damaged from fighting. She can’t be with other dogs,
either. Georgia has a broken tail, and her legs and snout are covered with scars.
She has no teeth. At some point, in her early life, they had been surgically removed.
The court-ordered evaluation of the Vick dogs labelled Meryl, a medium-sized
brown-and-white pit-bull mix, “human aggressive,” meaning that she is never
allowed to be taken out of the Best Friends facility. “She had a hard time meeting
people — she would preëmpt anyone coming by charging and snapping at them,”
Ann Allums, one of the Best Friends dog trainers, said, as she walked around
Meryl’s octagon, on a recent fall day.
She opened the gate to Meryl’s dog run and crouched down on the ground
next to her. She hugged the dog, and began playfully wrestling with her, as Meryl’s
tail thumped happily. “She really doesn’t mind new people,” Allums said. “She’s
very happy and loving. I feel totally comfortable with her. I can grab and kiss her.”
She gave Meryl another hug. “I am building a relationship,” she said. “She needed
to see that when people were around bad things would not happen.”
What happens at Best Friends represents, by any measure, an extravagant
gesture. These are dogs that will never live a normal life. But the kind of crime
embodied by dogfighting is so morally repellent that it demands an extravagant
gesture in response. In a fighting dog, the quality that is prized above all others is
the willingness to persevere, even in the face of injury and pain. A dog that will
not do that is labelled a “cur,” and abandoned. A dog that keeps charging at its
opponent is said to possess “gameness,” and game dogs are revered.
In one way or another, plenty of organizations select for gameness. The
Marine Corps does so, and so does medicine, when it puts young doctors through
the exhausting rigors of residency. But those who select for gameness have a
responsibility not to abuse that trust: if you have men in your charge who would
jump off a cliff for you, you cannot march them to the edge of the cliff — and
dogfighting fails this test. Gameness, Carl Semencic argues, in The World of Fighting Dogs (1984), is no more than a dog’s “desire to please an owner at any expense
to itself.” The owners, Semencic goes on,

45

understand this desire to please on the part of the dog and capitalize on it. At any
organized pit fight in which two dogs are really going at each other wholeheartedly,
one can observe the owner of each dog changing his position at pit-side in order to
be in sight of his dog at all times. The owner knows that seeing his master rooting
him on will make a dog work all the harder to please its master.

This is why Michael Vick’s dogs weren’t euthanized. The betrayal of loyalty
requires an act of social reparation.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 655

6/18/12 3:12 PM

656

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

Professional football players, too, are selected for gameness. When Kyle Turley
was knocked unconscious, in that game against the Packers, he returned to practice four days later because, he said, “I didn’t want to miss a game.” Once, in the
years when he was still playing, he woke up and fell into a wall as he got out of
bed. “I start puking all over,” he recalled. “So I said to my wife, ‘Take me to practice.’ I didn’t want to miss practice.” The same season that he was knocked unconscious, he began to have pain in his hips. He received three cortisone shots, and
kept playing. At the end of the season, he discovered that he had a herniated disk.
He underwent surgery, and four months later was back at training camp. “They
put me in full-contact practice from day one,” he said. “After the first day, I knew
I wasn’t right. They told me, ‘You’ve had the surgery. You’re fine. You should just
fight through it.’ It’s like you’re programmed. You’ve got to go without question — I’m a warrior. I can block that out of my mind. I go out, two days later. Full
contact. Two-a-days. My back locks up again. I had re-herniated the same disk
that got operated on four months ago, and bulged the disk above it.” As one of
Turley’s old coaches once said, “He plays the game as it should be played, all out,”
which is to say that he put the game above his own well-being.
Turley says he was once in the training room after a game with a young linebacker who had suffered a vicious hit on a kickoff return. “We were in the cold
tub, which is, like, forty-five degrees, and he starts passing out. In the cold tub. I
don’t know anyone who has ever passed out in the cold tub. That’s supposed to
wake you up. And I’m, like, slapping his face. ‘Richie! Wake up!’ He said, ‘What,
what? I’m cool.’ I said, ‘You’ve got a concussion. You have to go to the hospital.’ He
said, ‘You know, man, I’m fine.’ ” He wasn’t fine, though. That moment in the cold
tub represented a betrayal of trust. He had taken the hit on behalf of his team. He
was then left to pass out in the cold tub, and to deal — ten and twenty years down
the road — with the consequences. No amount of money or assurances about risk
freely assumed can change the fact that, in this moment, an essential bond had
been broken. What football must confront, in the end, is not just the problem of
injuries or scientific findings. It is the fact that there is something profoundly
awry in the relationship between the players and the game.
“Let’s assume that Dr. Omalu and the others are right,” Ira Casson, who cochairs an N.F.L. committee on brain injury, said. “What should we be doing differently? We asked Dr. McKee this when she came down. And she was honest, and
said, ‘I don’t know how to answer that.’ No one has any suggestions — assuming
that you aren’t saying no more football, because, let’s be honest, that’s not going
to happen.” Casson began to talk about the research on the connection between
C.T.E. and boxing. It had been known for eighty years. Boxers ran a twentypercent risk of dementia. Yet boxers continue to box. Why? Because people still go
to boxing matches.
“We certainly know from boxers that the incidence of C.T.E. is related to the
length of your career,” he went on. “So if you want to apply that to football — and
I’m not saying it does apply — then you’d have to let people play six years and

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 656

50

6/18/12 3:12 PM

GlADWell • OffeNSIVe PlAY

657

then stop. If it comes to that, maybe we’ll have to think about that. On the other
hand, nobody’s willing to do this in boxing. Why would a boxer at the height of
his career, six or seven years in, stop fighting, just when he’s making milliondollar paydays?” He shrugged. “It’s a violent game. I suppose if you want to you
could play touch football or flag football. For me, as a Jewish kid from Long
Island, I’d be just as happy if we did that. But I don’t know if the fans would be
happy with that. So what else do you do?”
Casson is right. There is nothing else to be done, not so long as fans stand and
cheer. We are in love with football players, with their courage and grit, and nothing else — neither considerations of science nor those of morality — can compete
with the destructive power of that love.
In “Dogmen and Dogfights,” Evans and Forsyth write:

55

When one views a staged dog fight between pit bulls for the first time, the most macabre aspect of the event is that the only sounds you hear from these dogs are those
of crunching bones and cartilage. The dogs rip and tear at each other; their blood,
urine and saliva splatter the sides of the pit and clothes of the handlers. . . . The emotions of the dogs are conspicuous, but not so striking, even to themselves, are the
passions of the owners of the dogs. Whether they hug a winner or in the rare case,
destroy a dying loser, whether they walk away from the carcass or lay crying over it,
their fondness for these fighters is manifest.

Exploring the Text
1. The subtitle of Malcolm Gladwell’s article asks, “How different are dogfighting
and football?” Does he explicitly answer the question? What does he think? What
do you think?
2. What elements of fiction does Gladwell use to create his story?
3. Why do you think Gladwell introduces Kyle Turley so early in his piece? What are
your impressions of Turley? How does Gladwell’s characterization of him help
Gladwell develop his argument?
4. The article shifts gears in paragraph 9, moving from football to dogfighting. What
strategies does Gladwell use to introduce the subject of dogfighting and Michael
Vick? How does he establish his credibility on the subject?
4. Paragraphs 16–29 are about research into chronic traumatic encephalopathy (C.T.E.),
a condition that has symptoms similar to Alzheimer’s but is the result of head
trauma. How does Gladwell make this scientific study accessible to the lay reader?
How does he bring the statistics of the disease to life?
5. Why does Gladwell provide some personal background for neuropathologist Ann
McKee in paragraph 28?
6. Having read “Offensive Play,” what do you think is the answer to the question
Gladwell poses in paragraph 29: “is the kind of injury being uncovered by McKee
and Omalu incidental to the game of football or inherent in it?” How is that

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 657

6/18/12 3:12 PM

658

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

question connected to the questions he asks in the next paragraph: “So what is
football? Is it dogfighting or is it stock-car racing?”
7. Gladwell describes early efforts to reform football in paragraph 31. The visual text
on page 668 is a cartoon from that era. How are Gladwell’s arguments similar to
and different from the argument made by the cartoon?
8. Paragraph 49 comprises only two sentences. In what ways are those two sentences
central to Gladwell’s argument? How are the ideas in that paragraph illustrated in
paragraph 51?
9. How does Gladwell appeal to logos in the conclusion of “Offensive Play”?

Why I Love My Job
Rick Reilly
Born in Boulder, Colorado, in 1958, Richard Paul “Rick” Reilly was a longtime
columnist for Sports Illustrated, but in 2007 he joined eSPN as a back-page columnist for ESPN The Magazine and as a regular columnist for eSPN.com. He has also
published a number of books, including the autobiographical Who’s Your Caddy?
(2003) and a golf novel, Missing Links (1996), and its sequel, Shanks for Nothing
(2007). Reilly is known for his humorous — and sometimes scathing — writing. This
column appeared in the December 14, 2009, edition of ESPN The Magazine, the
100-years-in-review issue.

W

hen I was a college sophomore and just starting to write for the Boulder sports section, my journalism professor edged me aside, looked
me in the eye and said, “You’re better than sports.”
Lurching into my fifth decade in this business, I still think she’s wrong. I will
never be better than sports. This is why:
Sports is real. It can’t be faked. If you’re Henry Fonda’s son and you want to
act, you get to act. If you’re Chelsea Clinton and want to govern, you get to govern. But just because you’re Nolan Ryan’s son doesn’t mean you get to pitch in the
Show. Money, family, looks mean diddly in sports. If Tom Brady suddenly can’t
throw the 30-yard out, he’s benched, dimple or no dimple.
Sports is Oprah for guys. I knew a Boston dad and son who hadn’t spoken in
five years. Some disagreement that just grew too big to see around. But when the
Red Sox won it all in 2004, the son came home. They hugged and cried and
laughed, and if you think it was about baseball, you don’t know men.
Sports fans can be buried in a coffin that is painted in their favorite team’s
colors and logo. Anybody buried in a Chicago Symphony Orchestra coffin lately?
Sports has mercy. The big and strong take care of the small and weak. In an
Illinois prep football game this year, a Downers Grove South kick returner broke

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 658

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

ReIllY • WHY I lOVe MY JOB

659

into the open at the 40 and was gone. Except, when he got to the 1-yard line, he
stopped and went out of bounds. He and his teammates wanted to get an autistic
teammate the only touchdown of his life. He got it on the second play. Ever see
that on Wall Street?
Sports is woven deeper into American life than you know. You may change
religion or politics, but not teams. “I was raised a Packers fan and taught my kids
the same,” writes a mom in Milwaukee. “Everyone comes to my house for games.
My oldest son is battling addiction, and he comes too. We shout and curse and eat
green and gold food. Whatever the joy or drama in our lives, we live and die with
the Packers together.”
Sports has no gray areas. It’s black or white, win or lose, hero or goat. Nobody
has to form a committee to figure it out. Not true in dance or art. Who was better,
head to head, Matisse or Monet? If it were sports, we’d know. (Matisse, 13–8.)
Sports is unscripted. President Obama just went to China, a trip choreographed from touchdown to takeoff. He knew exactly where he’d sit and eat and
what he’d say. Knew it before he left. And yet, in the PGA Championship this year,
a nobody named Y.E. Yang came from behind to beat the god named Tiger Woods.
No wonder Obama doesn’t watch Headline News. He watches SportsCenter.
College football teams fill 100,000-seat stadiums. Seen the history department do that?
Sports has honor. In a Texas girls high school volleyball playoff this season,
one of the East Texas Christian Academy girls suffered a head injury and was
taken away on a stretcher. The East Texas girls were too upset to continue and
forfeited. But their opponents — Summit Christian — refused. They insisted on
rescheduling. They said they couldn’t win that way. And yet last year in Alaska,
Senator Ted Stevens (R) ran for reelection despite seven felony convictions.
Sports has the best words, and every CEO steals them. It’s a slam dunk. It’s a
grand slam. It’s a complete whiff. And yet, in 32 years, I have never heard an athlete say, “That was just a total filibuster out there!”
If sportswriters are so trivial, why did Frank Sinatra want to be one? Hell, the
first Heisman winner, Jay Berwanger, turned his nose up at being the NFL’s No. 1
draft pick in 1936 to write for the Chicago Daily News. Berwanger said, “It paid
better.”
Sports has a heart the size of a knuckleball mitt. A man in Oahu named Chris
Pablo once found a golf ball stamped with the words BEAT LEUKEMIA. Weird,
since he’d just learned he had leukemia. Pablo decided he hadn’t found the ball,
the ball had found him. His story got out and, next thing you know, hundreds of
people volunteered for bone marrow donation. Now there are purposely lost balls
on courses all over the country that say BEAT LEUKEMIA. Golfers find them
and feel obligated to help. Sometimes they don’t just save $3 — they save a life.
Lastly — and most important — sports is the place where beer tastes best.
So here’s to you, professor. I’m glad to know I’m not better than sports. But
you did show me I’m better than one thing: advice from professors.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 659

10

15

6/18/12 3:12 PM

660

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

Exploring the Text
1. How would you describe the tone of “Why I Love My Job”?
2. Why do you think Rick Reilly says he is “Lurching into [his] fifth decade” (para. 2)?
What is the effect of the word “lurching”?
3. Describe the structure of “Why I Love My Job.” Do you think it is effective? Why?
4. In what ways does Reilly appeal to pathos?
5. There is a common thread in the examples Reilly uses to develop his argument.
Describe that thread, and analyze at least three of the examples.
6. Reilly begins his piece with a comment from his journalism professor and ends
with his response to the professor. What is the effect of this framing device?
7. In May 2011, Rick Reilly was the graduation speaker at his alma mater, the School
of Journalism and Mass Communication at the University of Colorado. He urged
the graduates to “get out there and say things that people have never said before.”
Does he follow his own advice here? Do you find his ideas original, or have you
heard them before? Explain your view.

The Great Game
Caroline Alexander
Born in 1956, Caroline Alexander graduated from florida State University, where
she received a Rhodes Scholarship to study at Oxford University. She subsequently
came back to fSU to tutor football players in reading and writing and wrote
Battle’s End (1995) about her experience and the lives of the players she worked
with. She has written for the New Yorker, Granta, and National Geographic. Her
books include The Endurance: Shackleton’s Legendary Antarctic Expedition (1996)
and The War That Killed Achilles: The True Story of Homer’s Iliad and the Trojan
War (2009). The essay presented here appeared in Lapham’s Quarterly in 2010.

I

n 1977 I spent what was to be the first of three summers at Fort Sam Houston
in San Antonio, Texas, working out in blurring near-hundred-degree heat
at the U.S. Modern Pentathlon Training Center, opened that year for the first time
to women. Modern pentathlon is a composite competition, devised in 1912
by Baron Pierre de Coubertin, the founder of the modern Olympics, to mirror
the prestigious pentathlon centerpiece of the ancient games. The eccentric selection of modern events, however — show jumping, épée fencing, pistol shooting,
swimming, and cross-country running — was predicated on the belief, already
anachronistic in 1912, that these were the skills a good soldier should possess. In
my day, the majority of American male pentathletes, as well as a sprinkling of the
inaugural group of women, held rank. The indelible military cast of some memories of this time now seem surreal, such as practicing cavalry drills on the parade
field, or shooting, dueling style, at the range. “How you score is between God and

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 660

6/18/12 3:12 PM

AlexANDeR • THe GReAT GAMe

661

your conscience,” our marine-sergeant coach would say. America’s most conspicuous modern pentathlete was the twenty-six-year-old West Point graduate
George Patton, who came in fifth at the event’s premiere in 1912, having performed poorly in the shooting.
The equation of sport with war, or more dangerously, war with sport, is universal and enduring, but occasionally lurches into particularly sharp focus. As is
made clear in The War Lovers: Roosevelt, Lodge, Hearst, and the Rush to Empire,
1898, Evan Thomas’ new book about the easily avoidable steps that led to the
Spanish American war, personal fixations on exercise and competitive strife
morphed with appalling ease into national policy.
“In the last two decades of the nineteenth century, the young men of the
upper and middle classes took to sweaty gyms, lifting weights and tossing medicine balls,” Thomas writes. Although manifested in very different ways, this susceptibility to sports mania was shared by three of the key figures directing
America’s rush to war with Spain. Henry Cabot Lodge, the influential senator
from Massachusetts, had been “a frail boy and, though he tried, never very adept
at games,” reading books of tales of derring-do as a substitute for action. For
William Randolph Hearst, the publisher of the war-mongering New York Morning
Journal, sports could be counted on to sell papers: one of the first big stories he
had commissioned when taking over the Journal had been the annual Princeton–
Yale football game. When the battleship Maine was blown up in Havana harbor
by what was trumpeted as enemy action but was probably an accident, Hearst,
with shrewd understanding of the potent sports–war equation, had “proposed
recruiting a regiment of giant athletes — heavyweight boxers, football players,
and baseball sluggers — to overawe the pitiful Spaniards.”
The last man in Thomas’ triumvirate is Teddy Roosevelt, whose devotion to
manly sporting activities is too well known to require much amplification. As a
young boy suffering from myopia and asthma, “Teedie” heaved himself into a
regime of weightlifting, mountain climbing, and boxing, the bloody details of
which he reported proudly to his father. Blood was an important aspect of Rooseveltian sport, hence the organization he founded in 1887, the Boone and Crockett Club, whose membership was limited to men who, in his words, “had killed
with the rifle in fair chase.” The club’s purpose was “to promote manly sport with
the rifle.” The distance between “manly sport with the rifle” and the perceived
sport of war was perilously short. Roosevelt’s own ardently desired military
blooding was achieved with his eventual command of the First U.S. Voluntary
Cavalry, the eccentric “Rough Riders,” whose exploits in the battle for San Juan
Heights in Cuba were both significant and overplayed by the press and later by
himself. The volunteer regiment was top heavy with sporting men, including an
America’s Cup yachtsman, reputedly the best quarterback who had ever played
for Harvard, a steeplechase rider, a “crack” polo player, a tennis player, and a high
jumper.
Informing Roosevelt’s sporting ethos was the belief, widely prevalent at the
time, that without physical strife America would lose her frontier spirit to effeteness.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 661

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

662

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

In an 1896 speech that Thomas characterizes as a “paean to the ideal of sports as
preparation for war,” Lodge urged his Harvard classmates to consider that the
“time given to athletic contests and the injuries incurred on the playing field
are part of the price which the English-speaking race has paid for being world
conquerors.”

Y
In England itself, whose shining empire seemed to testify to the imperial destiny
of the Anglo-Saxon race, the fears for the inferiority of the nation’s fighting men
had some empirical basis. An inspection conducted during the Boer War of
1899–1902 — in which Britain had not performed particularly well — revealed
the alarming fact that based upon measurements of chest size, height, and weight,
a full 30 percent of its volunteer recruits were “unfit”; the average height of the
British Tommy was only five foot six. In Britain as in America, sports were seen as
an antidote to this racial degeneracy, and yet, for all their striking common
ground, British and Rooseveltian sporting values were directed toward very different ideals of manhood. As befit the rough-riding frontier ethic, American athleticism was about being stronger, clobbering the competition, blood lust — in
Roosevelt’s words, letting “the wolf rise in the heart.” The cult of British athleticism, on the other hand, was about playing games.
The fountainhead of this particular brand of the sports–war equation was
undoubtedly the British public school, whose values and moral ethos prevailed
throughout English society from the Victorian era well into the aftermath of the
Great War. “The schools’ secular trinity,” according to one scholar, “was imperialism, militarism, and athleticism.” The centrality of athletic games had not arisen
naturally but was very much the product of a determined reformation of a failing
educational system: the weak masters were often incapable of controlling their
entitled and high-spirited charges. Riots, rebellions, strikes, mass displays of disobedience — and at Eton an attempt to blow up one of the school houses with
gunpowder — were standing features of early Victorian public-school life. One
future headmaster, who had been schooled through the reforming period of the
late 1870s, while at Eton recalled the transition there from “open barbarism” to
“something like decorum.”
Games did more than keep boys too busy and too tired to cause trouble; they
also fostered team tribalism and school pride. When an outstanding team or individual athlete won both the adulation of his schoolmates and the approving recognition of the master, a bond was formed between boys and authority. The first
symptom of games mania, as one observer recalled, “was the taking over of games
by the clergy as a proper theme for the pulpit”: one sermon preached to boys at
Exeter indicated that the performance of the school’s cricket team had been
displeasing to God.
Complementing a classically oriented curriculum that celebrated the imperial militarism of the revered ancient world, athletic games strengthened the Brit-

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 662

6/18/12 3:12 PM

AlexANDeR • THe GReAT GAMe

663

ish race, giving young boys the physical training to become hardy servants of the
empire, as intrepid missionaries as well as soldiers. A good captain of the first
eleven would undoubtedly make a good officer. Games taught a chap to play
straight and not “offside.” “[A] truly chivalrous football player,” as it was put in
Marlborough’s school magazine, “was never yet guilty of lying, or deceit, or
meanness whether of word or action.” This insistence on the decency and
“straightness” of the young athlete bolstered the attendant belief that just as the
soldier-athlete was invariably decent, so too was his imperial cause. “In all this
war there is nothing for us to be ashamed of,” Sir James Yoxall, an MP and educational reformer declared at the outset of the First World War. “We fight for honor.
You know what honor is among schoolboys — straight dealing, truth speaking,
and ‘playing the game.’ Well, we are standing up for honor among nations, while
Germany is playing the sneak and the bully in the big European school. Germany
must be taught to ‘play cricket.’ ”
That the apogee of this sporting faith would overlap the years of Europe’s
most catastrophic conflict is one of the many ironies that render the Great War so
very pitiable and tragic. By 1914 it had been a long time since the English people
as a whole had experienced warfare at first hand. Even the Boer War, in which
22,000 British troops died, had taken place safely out of sight, in faraway South
Africa. As Richard van Emden points out in Boy Soldiers of the Great War, “Britain’s colonial conflicts had been described but not seen, drawn but hardly photographed.” At the same time, however, they were covered in the written press: the
stories of thrilling conquests playing out in the exotic places of the empire — on
the veld, in the East — that streamed in to fill British newspapers and, most particularly, Boy’s Own Paper, portrayed war as a romantic and glorious adventure.
By van Emden’s estimate, the number of underage British boys who enlisted in
the Great War was well in excess of a quarter of a million. Henry Newbolt’s “Vitaï
Lampada,” with its relentless refrain of “Play up! Play up! And play the game,”
made clear the continuity between athlete and soldier. One youth recalled a picture that was hung in his nursery showing “a boy trumpeter with a bandaged
head, galloping madly through bursting shells for reinforcements.” Played “straight”
and not “offside,” war was the very best of games. “Dear Lord Kitchner,” wrote one
Irish boy of nine years of age, to the secretary of state for war, “I want to go to the
front. I can ride jolley quick on my bycycle and would go as dispatch rider . . . I
am very strong and often win a fight with lads twice as big as myself.” (He received
a reply from Kitchener’s private secretary. “Lord Kitchener asks me to thank you
for your letter, but he is afraid that you are not quite old enough to go to the
front.”)
For applicants of every age, the recruiting process could draw on familiar
schoolboy criteria, as van Emden quotes:

10

“Where were you at school?” one seventeen-year-old applicant was asked by the
recruiting officer.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 663

6/18/12 3:12 PM

664

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

“Eton, sir.”
“In the Corps?”
“Yes sir, Sergeant.”
“Play any games? Cricket?”

Y
War was sport. Or so it must have seemed at first. The military exercises alone
brought first-rate athletic benefits. “There’s no doubt it did me good,” one veteran
recalled of his days of rifle drills and physical training. “What with the open air
and exercise, I broadened out, gained confidence, and went in for boxing.” Whole
regiments of men, it was noted, with the benefit of good food and hardy exercise,
added an inch to their height and a full stone, or fourteen pounds, of weight.
Beyond the training fields, the fiction that this was all a great game was maintained in the trenches. One young soldier recalled how as his battalion advanced,
it was cheered, as if in a match, by the First Battalion Black Watch. “You feel like
in a race, you’re waiting to start,” he recalled, “waiting for the signal, then the
sergeant would shout, ‘Right lads,’ and you’re over the top.”
Of the 1,200,000 British men who joined the Army in 1914 as volunteers,
almost half a million had done so through the influence of popular soccer organizations. “Join and be in at the final,” one recruiting poster advertised, while a
rugby poster exhorted men to “Play the Game!” And it was soccer that gave the
war one of its most indelible and heartbreakingly pointless images: that of a soldier dribbling a soccer ball toward enemy lines. While this sporting feat was
enacted in several campaigns, it was Captain “Billie” Nevill’s exploit at the Somme
that caught British imagination. As one veteran recalled, when “the gunfire died
away I saw an infantry man climb onto the parapet of no man’s land, beckoning
others to follow. As he did so, he kicked off a football. A good kick.” The stirring
example of such sporting style, for the sentimental public, was made no less
potent by the fact that enemy fire had at once cut Billie Nevill down.
When the war ended, Britain had far fewer sporting men. Some 885,000 had
been killed outright, and another 1,700,000 soldiers grievously maimed and
wounded. One woman recalled a scene toward the end of the war in Brighton, a
seaside town to which the injured were sent for recuperation. “The sight of hundreds of men on crutches going about in groups, many having lost one leg, many
others both legs, caused sickness and horror. The maiming of masses of strong
young men thus brought home was appalling.” Possibly it was these ubiquitous
legions of disfigured men that, by their fearful, negative examples, kept the sporting
ethic alive. The desire to see whole, healthy young men was painfully strong for a
nation desperate to be healed, and sports held sway at public schools into the 1930s,
by which time a new generation of chaps had arisen to shoulder the next war.
The association of war with sport is not likely to disappear, given the physicality and competitiveness embedded in the practice of both. More surprising are the enduring associations of sport with war, often occurring in ways that

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 664

15

6/18/12 3:12 PM

UPDIKe • ex-BASKeTBAll PlAYeR

665

rely on historic memory. Soccer matches played between England and Germany
produce a flurry of admonitions for rowdy English fans — no impersonating
Hitler, no shouting of “stand up if you won the war,” no goose stepping. When in
2001 England defeated Germany in a preliminary World Cup match in Munich,
the British tabloids commemorated the victory with the thundering headline:
“Blitzed!”

Exploring the Text
1. Caroline Alexander’s essay begins with a personal anecdote about her experience
training for a pentathlon. What is the purpose of the anecdote? How does it lend
credibility to her argument?
2. Alexander distinguishes between equating “sport with war” and, what she considers more dangerous, “war with sport” in paragraph 2. She comes back to that equation in the last paragraph of the essay. What do you think is the difference between
the two?
3. Find at least three examples of appeals to pathos. Explain why they are or are not
effective.
4. What type of sentence is this one in paragraph 4: “The volunteer regiment was top
heavy with sporting men, including an America’s Cup yachtsman, reputedly the
best quarterback who had ever played for Harvard, a steeplechase rider, a ‘crack’
polo player, a tennis player, and a high jumper”? Why do you think Alexander
chose that structure and language to describe the Rough Riders?
5. What argument is Alexander making about the connection between sports and
war? What strategies does she use to develop it?
6. Alexander considers it ironic that faith in the positive aspects of sport was at its
peak during the Great War (World War I). Explain why and whether you agree or
disagree.
7. What do you think is the connection today between athletics and the armed forces?
8. How does Alexander characterize the differences between American and British
athleticism?

Ex-Basketball Player
John Updike
John Updike (1932–2009) grew up in Pennsylvania and attended Harvard University on a full scholarship, before graduating summa cum laude. At Harvard, he
was president of the Harvard Lampoon. Updike is known for his careful craftsmanship and for writing about the world of the Protestant middle class. In his novels
and short stories he often explores the interrelationship of sex, faith, and death. His

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 665

6/18/12 3:12 PM

666

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

series of novels about Harry “Rabbit” Angstrom, a former high-school basketball
star, defined the suburban experience. Two of these novels won the Pulitzer Prize.
Updike is also known for his criticism and poetry.

Pearl Avenue runs past the high-school lot,
Bends with the trolley tracks, and stops, cut off
Before it has a chance to go two blocks,
At Colonel McComsky Plaza. Berth’s Garage
Is on the corner facing west, and there,
Most days, you’ll find Flick Webb, who helps Berth out.
Flick stands tall among the idiot pumps —
Five on a side, the old bubble-head style,
Their rubber elbows hanging loose and low.
One’s nostrils are two S’s, and his eyes
An E and O. And one is squat, without
A head at all — more of a football type.
Once Flick played for the high-school team, the Wizards.
He was good: in fact, the best. In ’46
He bucketed three hundred ninety points,
A county record still. The ball loved Flick.
I saw him rack up thirty-eight or forty
In one home game. His hands were like wild birds.
He never learned a trade, he just sells gas,
Checks oil, and changes flats. Once in a while,
As a gag, he dribbles an inner tube,
But most of us remember anyway.
His hands are fine and nervous on the lug wrench.
It makes no difference to the lug wrench, though.
Off work, he hangs around Mae’s Luncheonette.
Grease-gray and kind of coiled, he plays pinball,
Smokes those thin cigars, nurses lemon phosphates.
Flick seldom says a word to Mae, just nods
Beyond her face toward bright applauding tiers
Of Necco Wafers, Nibs, and Juju Beads.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 666

5

10

15

20

25

30

6/18/12 3:12 PM

NEW YORK WORLD • THe TWelfTH PlAYeR IN eVeRY fOOTBAll GAMe

667

Exploring the Text
1. In addition to creating a portrait of Flick Webb, the former basketball star, John
Updike also creates a setting. What details does he use to set the scene?
2. Updike uses figurative language sparingly. Consider the effects of personification
and simile in this poem.
3. What statement does the poem make about high school sports?
4. Compare the effect of the following excerpt about a pickup basketball game from
Updike’s novel Rabbit, Run (1960) with the effect of “Ex-Basketball Player” (1957).
Yet in his time Rabbit was famous through the county; in basketball in his junior
year he set a B-league scoring record that in his senior year he broke with a record
that was not broken until four years later, that is, four years ago.
He sinks shots one-handed, two-handed, underhanded, flat-footed, and out of
the pivot, jump, and set. Flat and soft the ball lifts. That his touch still lives in his
hands elates him. He feels liberated from long gloom.

The Twelfth Player in Every Football Game
New York World
The cartoon on the following page appeared in the New York World in 1897 as
a comment on violence in football. It was reprinted in the New Yorker in 2011,
accompanying an article by Ben McGrath entitled “Does football Have a future?”
It is subtitled “The Nfl and the Concussion Crisis.”

Exploring the Text
1. Consider the words and the image separately. What is the relationship between
them? Does the image support the words or vice versa?
2. What point does the cartoon make about the relationship between football and
violence? Do you agree with the cartoon’s thesis? Explain your response.
3. According to Ben McGrath, it was Yale football coach Walter Camp, the so-called
Father of American Football, whose “preference for order over chaos led to the
primary differentiating element between the new sport (football) and its parent,
English rugby: a line of scrimmage, with discrete plays, or downs, instead of
scrums,” and who, in the 1890s, tried to present football as an upper-class training
ground, not as a “middle class spectator sport.” What do you suppose Walter Camp
would think of the NFL now? Do you think this cartoon has resonance today?
Explain your answer.
4. Read Malcolm Gladwell’s essay “Offensive Play” in this chapter (p. 643). In what
ways does this cartoon illustrate his thesis?

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 667

6/18/12 3:12 PM

668

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

5. A cartoon can be analyzed through the rhetorical triangle. Consider the cartoon’s
subject, the artist, and the audience separately; then analyze the relationships
among those three elements. Also consider the context: the time and place of the
work’s creation, and how and where it is viewed. What do you think are differences
and similarities between today’s audience and the audience when the cartoon was
originally published in 1897?
6. There is a tradition in football of the “12th Player,” which supposedly began in
1921 when E. King Gill, a player on the Texas A&M football squad who had left the
team to play basketball, came down from the stands and suited up for a game in
which many of his former teammates had been injured. His willingness to do what
he could for his team led to the idea that the fans within a stadium become the

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 668

6/18/12 3:12 PM

SPORTS ILLuSTRATED • YeS!

669

“12th Player” on an eleven-player team; their support — and sometimes distracting noise — can be very influential. In this cartoon the twelfth player is Death.
How does it contrast with the present-day tradition of the twelfth player? Might
this cartoon have resonance today, despite the current meaning of the “12th Player”?

Yes!
Sports Illustrated
Sports Illustrated ran this cover on July 19, 1999, after soccer player Brandi Chastain made the winning penalty kick in the 1999 World Cup.

Exploring the Text
1. What argument does this photo make? Why do you think Sports Illustrated chose
to use it for a cover?
2. When this photo appeared, reactions ranged from appalled (a woman in a bra!) to
ecstatic (a strong, athletic woman!). Do you think there is a double standard when
it comes to images of women in sports? What is your response to the photo?
3. Consider the layout of the Sports Illustrated cover. How much space does the photograph of Chastain take up? What is the effect of obscuring part of the title of the
magazine? How is the cover’s text balanced by the image of Chastain?
4. Chastain’s take on the incident was this: “Momentary insanity, nothing more,
nothing less. I wasn’t thinking about anything. . . . This is the greatest moment of
my life on the soccer field.” In what ways does the photo communicate Chastain’s
explanation? Do you think a male athlete would be asked to explain his response?
Why or why not?
5. Chastain has written a book entitled It’s Not about the Bra: Play Hard, Play Fair
and Put the Fun Back into Competitive Sports (2004). How does this photo help
Chastain establish ethos? Do you think this iconic photo makes her more or less
credible? Explain your response.
6. When asked about the popularity of her team — and their attractiveness — Chastain
responded by saying, “There are those people who come purely for soccer. There
are those people who come purely for the event. And there are those people who
come because they like us, to look at us. Those are three great reasons to come.”
Which do you think is the most important reason people watch women’s sports?
Is it different for men’s sports? Why or why not?

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 669

6/18/12 3:12 PM

670

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

(See insert for color version.)

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 670

6/18/12 3:12 PM

Conversation
Paying College Athletes
Following are seven selections that comment directly or indirectly on the issue of
whether college athletes should be paid.

Sources
1. Boris Drucker, “I’m Glad We Won . . .” (cartoon)
2. Frank Deford, Pay Dirt: College Athletes Deserve the Same Rights as Other
Students
3. Michael Lewis, Serfs of the Turf
4. Bill Walton, My Priceless Opportunity
5. Michael Wilbon, As Colleges’ Greed Grows, So Does the Hypocrisy
6. Steve Weiberg, Despite Criticism, NCAA Takes a Firm Stance on
Professionalism
7. National Collegiate Athletic Association, Why Students Aren’t Paid to Play
After using the questions to discuss individual selections, synthesize the pieces
through one of the suggested assignments on page 685.

671

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 671

6/18/12 3:12 PM

672

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

1. “I’m Glad We Won . . .”
Boris Drucker
In this cartoon, published in the New Yorker in 1997, a football coach
responds to a reporter after a game.

Questions
1. Characterize the cartoon’s audience. What assumptions does Boris Drucker make
about the people who will look at his cartoon?
2. Who are the characters in the cartoon? How does their placement help Drucker
make his argument? What can you tell from their facial expressions?

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 672

6/18/12 3:12 PM

CONVeRSATION

673

3. Do you agree with Drucker’s point, or do you think he is overstating his case?
Explain your response.

2. Pay Dirt: College Athletes Deserve the Same Rights
as Other Students
Frank Deford
The following viewpoint piece was posted on SI.com in May 2003.

Last month at the Masters, a senior at the University of Arizona, Ricky Barnes,
played with Tiger Woods and not only outshot Woods over the first 36 holes but
also finished the tournament only three strokes over par. Barnes should have
pocketed a nice paycheck, but instead he had to settle for a pat on the back.
That is, Barnes played the same course as Woods and all the other PGA
players — he even beat most of them — but while they got paid, he didn’t. That’s
because, of course, Ricky Barnes is something called an amateur — and while
we have reached the 21st century, American sports still have these antiquated
19th century rules about amateurism.
Essentially, we can thank the British upper classes for amateurism. They
wanted to keep sports to themselves, so as long as they made it so poor people
couldn’t afford to take time to play without reward, only the rich could practice
and compete. Then, when we adopted Victorian amateurism in many of our
sports, we covered it with the veil of the Olympics. Only it wasn’t so. The old
Greeks didn’t waste their time running and jumping just to get a laurel wreath.
The Greeks paid their Olympic champions handsomely. But the myth persists.
When the NCAA was established, amateur rules were ironclad, and it’s
awfully hard to break them because we in America have big-time sports tied up
with academics. In most sports, American players have little chance to compete
unless they go to college and play by the college rules.
I think good arguments can be made that Division I football and basketball
players should be paid by their schools. I’ll grant, though, it is an expensive and
debatable proposition. But, pray tell, what are the arguments that say an athlete
such as Ricky Barnes should be denied compensation when he is not competing
for his college? If Barnes wants to accept a scholarship to Arizona and play for the
Wildcats for free, fine, but why should Arizona deny him remuneration when he
is only competing as Ricky Barnes?
The NCAA is, simply, a cartel when it disallows athletes that right. Why
should a college student who happens to be a good athlete be denied the same
rights as a college student who is a good musician or a good writer or a good
actor? The kid who has those talents is, in fact, encouraged to get a paying summer job in his specialty to improve his skills. Why should a college basketball
player be denied the same rights as a college piano player?

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 673

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

674

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

And the answer, of course, is because the NCAA adopted Victorian rules a
century ago and maintains them today because it has the power to do so. The
irony is, too, that if the NCAA lifted those old-fashioned regulations it would
help college sports. The NBA, say, could draft a college player who is not yet quite
good enough for the league, pay him and let him stay in college, where he would
get good coaching and develop while boosting the popularity of his team and his
sport.
Why should the NCAA care — or bear any authority — about where or how
a college player makes money outside of college? Amateur is supposed to be about
the love of the game. In truth, it’s about how the NCAA loves the way it controls our
athletes and denies them the same rights our other talented young people enjoy.

Questions
1. How does Frank Deford define “amateur”? How does his brief history of amateurism aid his argument?
2. Why is the example of Ricky Barnes an effective part of Deford’s argument?
3. What is Deford’s view of the NCAA? Do you agree or disagree with his assessment?
Explain your answer.

3. Serfs of the Turf
Michael Lewis
The following op-ed piece appeared in the New York Times in November 2007.

The three most lucrative college football teams in 2005 — Notre Dame, Ohio
State and the University of Texas — each generated more than $60 million for
their institutions. That number, which comes from the Department of Education, fails to account for the millions of dollars alumni donated to their alma
maters because they were so proud of their football teams. But it still helps to
explain why so many strangers to football success have reinvented themselves as
football powerhouses (Rutgers?), and also why universities are spending huge
sums on new football practice facilities, new football stadium skyboxes and new
football coaches.
Back in 1958 the University of Alabama lured Bear Bryant with a promise of
$18,000 a year, or the rough equivalent of $130,000 today; last year the university
handed Nick Saban an eight-year deal worth roughly $32 million. Several dozen
college football coaches now earn more than $1 million a year — and that’s before
the books, speeches, endorsement deals and who knows what else. Earlier this
season the head coach at Texas A&M, Dennis Franchione, was caught topping up
his $2.09 million salary by selling to Aggie alums, for $1,200 a pop, his private
football-gossip newsletter.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 674

6/18/12 3:12 PM

CONVeRSATION

675

The sports media treated that particular scheme as scandalous. Texas A&M
made its coach apologize and promise to stop writing for a living. But really
Dennis Franchione’s foray into high-priced journalism was just an ingenious
extension of the entrepreneurial spirit that’s turned college football into a gold
mine. The scandal wasn’t what he did but how it was made to seem — unusually
greedy.
College football’s best trick play is its pretense that it has nothing to do with
money, that it’s simply an extension of the university’s mission to educate its students. Were the public to view college football as mainly a business, it might start
asking questions. For instance: why are these enterprises that have nothing to do
with education and everything to do with profits exempt from paying taxes? Or
why don’t they pay their employees?
This is maybe the oddest aspect of the college football business. Everyone
associated with it is getting rich except the people whose labor creates the value.
At this moment there are thousands of big-time college football players, many of
whom are black and poor. They perform for the intense pleasure of millions of
rabid college football fans, many of whom are rich and white. The world’s most
enthusiastic racially integrated marketplace is waiting to happen.
But between buyer and seller sits the National Collegiate Athletic Association, to ensure that the universities it polices keep all the money for themselves — to make sure that the rich white folk do not slip so much as a free chicken
sandwich under the table to the poor black kids. The poor black kids put up with
it because they find it all but impossible to pursue N.F.L. careers unless they play
at least three years in college. Less than one percent actually sign professional
football contracts and, of those, an infinitesimal fraction ever make serious money.
But their hope is eternal, and their ignorance exploitable.
Put that way the arrangement sounds like simple theft; but up close, inside
the university, it apparently feels like high principle. That principle, as stated by
the N.C.A.A., is that college sports should never be commercialized. But it’s too
late for that. College football already is commercialized, for everyone except the
people who play it. Were they businesses, several dozen of America’s best-known
universities would be snapped up by private equity tycoons, who would spin
off just about everything but the football team. (The fraternities they might
keep.)
If the N.C.A.A. genuinely wanted to take the money out of college football
it’d make the tickets free and broadcast the games on public television and set
limits on how much universities could pay head coaches. But the N.C.A.A. confines its anti-market strictures to the players — and God help the interior lineman
who is caught breaking them. Each year some player who grew up with nothing
is tempted by a booster’s offer of a car, or some cash, and is never heard from
again.
The lie at the bottom of the fantasy goes something like this: serious college
football players go to college for some reason other than to play football. These

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 675

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

676

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

marvelous athletes who take the field on Saturdays and generate millions for their
colleges are students first, and football players second. They are like Franciscan
monks set down in the gold mine. Yes, they play football, but they have no interest
in the money. What they’re really living for is that degree in criminology.
Of course, no honest person who has glimpsed the inside of a big-time college
football program could actually believe this. Even from the outside the college end
of things seems suspiciously secondary. If serious college football players are students first, why — even after a huge N.C.A.A. push to raise their graduation rates —
do they so alarmingly fail to graduate? Why must the N.C.A.A. create incentives
for football coaches to encourage their players even to attend classes? Why do we
never hear of a great high school football player choosing a college for the quality
of its professors? Why, when college football coaches sell their programs to high
school studs, do they stress the smoothness of the path they offer to the N.F.L.?
It’s not that football players are too stupid to learn. It’s that they’re too busy.
Unlike the other students on campus, they have full-time jobs: playing football
for nothing. Neglect the task at hand, and they may never get a chance to play
football for money.
Last year the average N.F.L. team had revenue of about $200 million and ran
payrolls of roughly $130 million: 60 percent to 70 percent of a team’s revenues,
therefore, go directly to the players. There’s no reason those numbers would be
any lower on a college football team — and there’s some reason to think they’d be
higher. It’s easy to imagine the Universities of Alabama ($44 million in revenue),
Michigan ($50 million), Georgia ($59 million) and many others paying the players even more than they take in directly from their football operations, just to
keep school spirit flowing. (Go Dawgs!)
But let’s keep it conservative. In 2005, the 121 Division 1-A football teams
generated $1.8 billion for their colleges. If the colleges paid out 65 percent of
their revenues to the players, the annual college football payroll would come to
$1.17 billion. A college football team has 85 scholarship players while an N.F.L.
roster has only 53, and so the money might be distributed a bit differently.
“You’d pay up for the most critical positions,” one N.F.L. front office executive
told me on the condition that I not use his name. “You’d pay more for quarterbacks and left tackles and pass rushing defensive ends. You’d pay less for linebackers because you’d have so many of them. You could just rotate them in and out.”
A star quarterback, he thought, might command as much as 8 percent of his
college team’s revenues. For instance, in 2005 the Texas Longhorns would have paid
Vince Young roughly $5 million for the season. In quarterbacking the Longhorns
free of charge, Young, in effect, was making a donation to the university of $5 million a year — and also, by putting his health on the line, taking a huge career risk.
Perhaps he would have made this great gift on his own. The point is that
Vince Young, as the creator of the economic value, should have had the power to
choose what to do with it. Once the market is up and running players who want
to go to enjoy the pure amateur experience can continue to play for free.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 676

10

15

6/18/12 3:12 PM

CONVeRSATION

677

And you never know. The N.C.A.A. might one day be able to run an honest
advertisement for the football-playing student-athlete: a young man who valued
so highly what the University of Florida had to teach him about hospitality management that he ignored the money being thrown at him by Florida State.

Questions
1. How does Michael Lewis explain the growing number of college football “powerhouses”?
2. How does Lewis establish credibility? In what ways does he appeal to logos and
pathos?
3. Explain what Lewis means when he says that the “world’s most enthusiastic racially
integrated marketplace is waiting to happen” (para. 5).
3. According to Lewis, what is the “lie at the bottom of the fantasy” (para. 9)?
4. How does Lewis explain the low graduation rate of college football players?
5. What is Lewis’s solution? Do you think his idea is possible? Explain your response.

4. My Priceless Opportunity
Bill Walton
The following selection, by Basketball Hall of famer and sports commentator
Bill Walton, was posted on the New York Times “Room for Debate” blog in
March 2009.

College basketball players getting paid? What is this — the N.B.A.?
In a world that has changed beyond belief in the 39 years since I started playing N.C.A.A. basketball, we seem to have lost the sense of what is really valuable
and built to last in our society. While the exponential growth in the business of
sports across all spectrums, including collegiate athletics, is undeniable — for the
student athlete it can’t be all about the money, all the time. Getting paid to play
ball is what professional sports are all about, and the N.C.A.A. and N.B.A. are two
completely different sports, each glorious in their own way.
The young players entering the college game know the rules going in. They
are being given a chance to make something of their lives in exchange for the
privilege of being an N.C.A.A. student athlete. Most people would salivate at the
opportunity to attend one of our nation’s prestigious universities, and then to get
in and have it cost you nothing. They house you, feed you, clothe you, educate
you, give you a living stipend, and you get to travel the world. These opportunities are priceless.
What’s most important is that these scholarships give students the opportunity
to learn how to learn, think, analyze, and to gain some great life lessons — including
humility and how to rebound from failure.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 677

6/18/12 3:12 PM

678

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

Paying the players more than what they are already receiving for their scholarship is a bad idea — how would it be managed? Would every student athlete
negotiate a separate deal?
When I left home in the fall of 1970 as a 17-year-old on my way to U.C.L.A.
on an N.C.A.A. basketball scholarship, I thought I was getting the greatest deal in
the world. And I did. I got an education, I got to meet and learn from the most
interesting people (including Coach Wooden), and I got to be a part of a most
remarkable team — the U.C.L.A. family. Outside of my health and family, they are
the most valuable possessions that I’ve ever had. While at U.C.L.A., I had summer
jobs and I was most fortunate that for the rest of my life I never had to go back to
my working-class parents for another dime.
Every one of our games was sold out; every one was on TV. I felt then, as I do
today, that I got the better end of the deal. (Considering our late career collapse
at U.C.L.A., they’re probably still debating whether it was even worth it to offer
me the scholarship that I so desperately needed.)
If I hadn’t gone to U.C.L.A., I shudder to think where and who I would be
today. I always counsel young dreamers who are searching for their own path to
happiness and success in sports, to use basketball to make a better life for yourself; don’t let basketball use you.
I will be watching the N.C.A.A. tournament with great interest, as I do every
year. I love the passion, the excitement, the pride, the beaming alumni, the song
girls, the pageantry, and maybe mostly — the bands. I’m really hoping that this
year’s playlist will include “Where Have All the Flowers Gone” and “Teach Your
Children.”

5

Questions
1. In what ways does Bill Walton think college athletes are compensated?
2. How does Walton establish his credibility?
3. Walton says, “Paying the players more than what they are already receiving for
their scholarship is a bad idea” (para. 5). What are his reasons? Are you convinced?
Explain your response.

5. As Colleges’ Greed Grows, So Does the Hypocrisy
Michael Wilbon
The following column by Michael Wilbon appeared in the Washington Post in
September 2010.

If you log on to the official online store of the University of Georgia Bulldogs
you’ll be bombarded by images of a No. 8 football jersey. A wide receiver named
A.J. Green wears that particular jersey now. Mel Kiper rates him as the No. 4 pros-

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 678

6/18/12 3:12 PM

CONVeRSATION

679

pect in all of college football, which means he’s a big deal in Georgia and so is his
jersey.
There’s a black replica that goes for $59.95; a red, a black and a white replica
youth jersey, each of which goes for $43.95. Scroll down a bit and you’ll see a red
“twilled” jersey that sells for $74.95 and then there are preschool jerseys (black or
white, take your pick) that sell for $41.95 apiece. And don’t let me forget the
“authentic” No. 8 jerseys, in black or red, that go for $150 each.
In all, counting the pink jerseys presumably for women, there are 17 options
for sale.
Green is the biggest star in a state where the college football team matters
more than anything except, possibly, one’s place of worship. Thousands of those
No. 8 jerseys, which Green wears on Saturdays, have been sold. And all proceeds,
according to the official Web site, benefit Georgia athletics.
This has become enormously important the last couple of days, of course,
because the NCAA has suspended Green for the first four games for selling one of
his game-worn jerseys. Probably got $500, $600 for it . . . we’re told it was less
than $1,000. But while the kid is sitting out the next three games the university
can keep right on selling his jersey and reaping the financial rewards.
As a head coach of a major Division I program so accurately said to me
recently on the subject of the behavior of big-time athletic leagues and their bigtime programs, “They’re now fully engaged in robbing the poor to give to the rich.”
The person who most needs the money, Green, is prohibited from reaping a
dime, even though he’s the one who spends more than 40 hours a week working
at being a college football player, even though he’s the one who risks head injuries
that could shorten his life. Not a dime for him, and all of it, 100 percent, for the
school’s athletic department.
The suspension of Green doesn’t just point to the greed that permeates college athletics; it’s shameful that the rules are set up to punish a kid this severely
because he sees he’s the only person not making any money off his labor and
wants to sneak a few hundred bucks for himself.
We seem to have reached a point where kids who play revenue-producing
college sports — and that means Division I men’s basketball and football — are
more determined than ever to get what’s coming to them, whether that means
associating with agents or taking some money to live better right now. Damn the
consequences.
And they can better justify it because everywhere they look people are making money off of them. I’d argue that university presidents and the people who
run the biggest conferences have never been more openly greedy. Since the end of
the last college football season, the dominant story in college sports has been to
find a better conference deal and get more money. Your school gets $15 million
for being on television? Try for $25 million.
Right now, the Pac-10 is trying to figure out how to realign its 12-team conference, and the whole affair is made more complex by television revenue sharing,

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 679

5

10

6/18/12 3:12 PM

680

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

which is how Colorado and Utah got into the Pac-10 in the first place. They
wanted exposure to the Los Angeles area to recruit and take advantage of L.A.’s
great capacity for television revenue.
The Big Ten’s addition of Nebraska was done solely so that Nebraska and the
Big Ten will make more money, largely through the Big Ten Network. But be certain that if a kid playing for Nebraska accepts $100 to fill his jalopy with gas and
take his girlfriend to dinner after the game, the NCAA will take him down.
The hypocrisy is stunning, and nowhere more than Southern California,
where the school wants to keep its 2004 national championship that Reggie Bush
helped win, while the Heisman Trophy he earned on the field that season is being
pried away.
Bush, as you know by now, reportedly might be stripped of the Heisman for
accepting improper benefits . . . as if he’s the first Heisman Trophy winner to take
anything improper in 75 years. As my friend Bryan Burwell pointed out in the
St. Louis Post-Dispatch, many Heisman winners have been tainted by scandal —
and not just O.J. Simpson.
Paul Hornung, the 1956 winner, was later suspended by the NFL for gambling. Charles White, the 1979 winner, admitted being a cocaine abuser while
playing in the NFL. Johnny Rodgers, the 1972 winner, was convicted of robbing a
gas station while at Nebraska. Billy Cannon went to federal prison for counterfeiting. None has been asked to give back his prize.
The thread here that seems to connect Bush with Georgia’s A.J. Green is that
more and more often, at least anecdotally, talented athletes are willing to risk
whatever the punishment to get something now, something more than tuition,
room, board and books. For decades I went along with the folks who reasoned
that was compensation enough, that the price of an education isn’t “nothing.”
But the constant pursuit of more money by the schools and conferences
themselves is making me change my tune.
Sorry if the kids who play women’s basketball or lacrosse or water polo don’t
stand to gain from any compensation plan; the kids whose jerseys produce tens of
thousands of dollars for athletic departments need to see at least a fraction of that
money themselves. (CNBC’s Darren Rovell tweeted this week, “In 2005, Myles
Brand told me the NCAA would look at compensating star players for sales of
their jerseys. Guess they’re still looking.”)
If Green can’t sell his jersey directly, then the NCAA or the University of
Georgia ought to cut him a check. Please, don’t cite me the NCAA rules. Change
the damn rules to stop taking advantage of the poorest people in the equation.
If I’d been standing in front of A.J. Green when he whipped off his gameworn jersey and tried to sell it, I’d have paid him myself, and told the kid to keep
his mouth shut.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 680

15

20

6/18/12 3:12 PM

CONVeRSATION

681

Questions
1. What examples of hypocrisy does Michael Wilbon supply? What is your response
to the examples?
2. Why does Wilbon differentiate between men’s basketball and football and sports
such as women’s basketball, lacrosse, and water polo?
3. Explain what made Wilbon change his mind about compensation for college football players.

6. Despite Criticism, NCAA Takes a
Firm Stance on Professionalism
Steve Weiberg
The following article appeared in uSA Today in January 2011.

From the stiff penalties assessed Southern California in the Reggie Bush case to
the pay-for-play soap opera surrounding Cam Newton to the pending suspensions of Ohio State football players for selling jerseys, rings and other trinkets, the
last six months have underscored a key NCAA commandment:
College athletes are not to be paid, not to cash in on their prominence, never
to cross any kind of line of professionalism.
The NCAA has largely stood firm on Bylaw 12 — in which it spells out the
dos and don’ts — as television, marketing and other revenue run ever deeper,
spending on coaches and other personnel continues to climb and calls mount for
those on the field to get something beyond a scholarship. The mother of one of
the Ohio State offenders, receiver DeVier Posey, complained to the Columbus
(Ohio) Dispatch last week that the association’s strict, scholarships-only stand
leaves many players and their families in unnecessary financial straits and invites
violations.
“The NCAA has everybody’s hands tied,” Julie Posey said, “but they roll in
dough.”
USA TODAY briefly examines the issue:

5

Q. Why is the NCAA so hard-line?
Keep in mind that its 1,000-plus member schools and conferences draw up the
regulations that fill a 419-page, almost inch-thick rules manual. They ostensibly
agree with Bylaw 12’s stipulation that “member institutions’ athletics programs
are designed to be an integral part of the educational program” and that athletes
are “an integral part of the student body, thus maintaining a clear line of demarcation between college athletics and professional sports.”
NCAA President Mark Emmert is intent on staying that course. “I feel adamantly that we can never move to a place where we are paying players to play,” he

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 681

6/18/12 3:12 PM

682

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

said two weeks ago, echoing a sentiment he has expressed since taking office in
October.

Q. How can he or anyone else defend that position given, for
starters, the new 14-year, $10.8 billion contract the NCAA
just struck with CBS and Turner Sports for media rights to
the Division I men’s basketball tournament?
College football’s top-tier Bowl Championship Series pockets $125 million annually from ESPN. The games, and those who play them, are essential properties.
Players, or at least the vast majority of them, receive scholarships covering
room, board, books and tuition. With that, Emmert says, they “benefit from the
best coaching staff, the best facilities, the best trainers, the best educational environment that anybody can get in the world.”
He adds, “OK, so the university generates some revenue to help support that
effort. I don’t have a problem with that.”
Most major-college athletics programs aren’t piling up money. Only 14 were
operating in the black last year.

10

Q. Still . . .
Critics rail that keeping players amateur — i.e., unpaid — in an otherwise highly
commercial enterprise is an injustice. Sales of replica jerseys are an oft-used
example. Schools and marketers can profit; the performers who give them their
cachet can’t. Multiply that by millions when it comes to game revenue.
“The NCAA amateurism rules are a fictional, oppressive harness designed to
protect a plantation-like economic model,” sports attorney David Cornwell wrote
recently in SportsBusiness Journal.

Q. Is change possible? Impossible?
Strip away all pretense and simply hand college players a paycheck? That not only
won’t fly philosophically in the NCAA, but it’s also financially implausible, given
the scores of programs that can’t keep up with existing expenses.
Any proposal to limit salaries or bumped-up benefits to athletes in the revenuegenerating sports of football and men’s basketball almost certainly would meet
legal resistance (and would scarcely be more affordable).
Emmert’s predecessor, Myles Brand, briefly promoted the idea of adding
$2,000–$3,000 to the value of scholarships to cover travel, laundry and other incidentals, which factor into the full cost of college attendance. But he was talked
down by administrators and others in the trenches. A group of former athletes
sought the same thing in a class-action suit that was settled in 2008, in part by
widening access to supplemental funds.
The NCAA has moved on a few fronts, beefing up those supplemental
funds — which athletes can tap for individual needs — and allowing them to bor-

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 682

15

6/18/12 3:12 PM

CONVeRSATION

683

row against future earnings for insurance against career-ending injury. In perhaps its most startling departure from tradition, athletes are allowed to compete
as pros in one sport and maintain college eligibility in another. For example,
North Carolina State quarterback Russell Wilson can be a minor league baseball
player for the Colorado Rockies but still play for the Wolfpack football team.

Q. That’s it, then?
Eyes are on another class-action suit, filed by former Arizona State and Nebraska
quarterback Sam Keller and others claiming the NCAA and its video-game partner, EA Sports, have gone too far in using the likenesses of college players who are
barred from sharing in the games’ profits.
A court could award multimillion-dollar damages or, more likely, the sides
could reach a settlement. The NCAA could be compelled to tighten the use of
athletes’ likenesses. But it’s a good bet it won’t move toward annually compensating them.
Interestingly, Emmert muses on change in another area. At a time when players’ brushes with agents are drawing sanctions and attention, he questions the
extent to which they’re restricted from exploring pro careers.
“You want to be an accountant? Fine, we’re going to introduce you to every
accounting firm we can. We’re going to bring in accountants to talk to you. You’re
going to get a summer internship,” he said. “Say you want to be a Major League
Baseball player, and you’re toast. We don’t let you talk to anybody.
“I think there’s some part of that we’ve got to fix.”

20

Questions
1. Does Steve Weiberg have a bias? If so, how can you tell? What do you think his view
on compensation for college athletes is?
2. Why do you think Weiberg used a Q&A format? Do you think it’s effective even
though this isn’t really an interview? Explain your response.
3. What is your opinion about the NCAA reforms, such as making funds available for
players to buy insurance against a career-ending injury or allowing them to be
professional in one sport and amateur in another?

7. Why Students Aren’t Paid to Play
National Collegiate Athletic Association
The following is from the NCAA’s Web site, found under the heading “Key
Issues.”

Student-athletes are students first and athletes second. They are not university
employees who are paid for their labor.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 683

6/18/12 3:12 PM

684

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

The benefits of the student-athlete experience are many. Student-athletes
graduate at a higher rate than the general student body. Most do so while playing
the sport they love and preparing for a future as a professional in something other
than sports. Many receive athletics grants-in-aid that can be worth more than
$100,000. NCAA studies show that student-athletes enjoy high levels of engagement in academics, athletics and community; have positive feelings about their
overall athletics and academic experiences; attribute learning invaluable life skills
to being a student-athlete; and are more likely to earn similar or higher wages
after college than non-student-athletes.
Critics argue that student-athletes generate large amounts of money for the
institution and therefore should be compensated. That argument ignores the fact
that intercollegiate athletics programs are necessarily composed of many sports,
many of which generate significant expenses over revenues. Only about two
dozen programs nationally, all of them large Division I programs, actually yield
revenues over expenses after the bills are paid. The remainder rely to varying
degrees on institutional financial support.
Some pay-for-play advocates suggest eliminating nonrevenue sports and
paying football and men’s basketball players because of the perceived profitability of those sports. In fact, however, only 30 percent of Division I football
and 26 percent of Division I men’s basketball programs post revenues over
expenses.
Likewise, almost all NCAA championships “lose money.” However, overall
NCAA revenue, primarily derived from the Association’s media agreements and
the popularity of the Division I Men’s Basketball Championship, helps 400,000
student-athletes at more than 1,000 member institutions learn and compete in
23 sports and 88 national championships.

5

Questions
1. What is the gist of the NCAA’s policy?
2. What is the tone of this statement?
3. Are you convinced by the examples the statement provides? Explain your answer.

Making Connections
1. According to Steve Weiberg, the NCAA has begun to allow college athletes to
compete in one sport as professionals and maintain college eligibility in
another. What do you think Frank Deford, Michael Lewis, or Michael Wilbon
would think of that reform?
2. Besides the basic issue of pay for college athletes, what underlying issues separate Wilbon and Bill Walton?

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 684

6/18/12 3:12 PM

CONVeRSATION

685

3. Do you think Lewis is one of the “pay-for-play advocates [who] suggest[s]
eliminating nonrevenue sports and paying football and men’s basketball players because of the perceived profitability of those sports” that the NCAA
refers to in its statement? Explain your answer, citing evidence from Lewis’s
essay.
4. Wilbon reports that a head coach at a Division I school told him that “bigtime athletic leagues and their big-time programs are ‘. . . fully engaged in robbing the poor to give to the rich’ ” (para. 6). How would Walton or the NCAA
respond to that allegation?
5. Wilbon also reports on several Heisman Trophy winners who behaved badly
after their careers ended, noting that none of them forfeited their titles as Reggie Bush was required to do after an NCAA investigation revealed that he had
received improper benefits while playing football for the University of Southern California. How does that square with the NCAA’s assertion about the
benefits of sports for student athletes?
6. Jay Bilas, a lawyer and sports analyst for ESPN.com, says, “I don’t believe college athletes should be paid as employees. Rather, I believe barriers should be
removed that limit an athlete from receiving fair compensation for his or her
image and likeness. There is no legitimate reason why a college athlete should
be denied the opportunity to enter into legitimate, legally binding contracts
to, among other things, hire an agent, do paid appearances, appear in advertisements, endorse shoes and apparel or otherwise profit from their [sic]
names and likenesses. It would not sink college sports, substantially limit the
NCAA’s massive television profits or negatively affect the education of the athletes or any other student. It would simply be fair.” How would the NCAA
respond to Bilas? What might Walton say?

Entering the Conversation
As you respond to each of the following prompts, support your argument with references to at least three of the sources in this Conversation on paying college athletes.
For help using sources, see Chapter 4.

1. Write an essay explaining why college athletes should or should not be paid.
Be sure to consider athletes who participate in sports that are not revenue
producing.
2. What is your solution? Write an essay in which you propose a system in which
college athletes would be fairly compensated for the commitment they make
to the athletic programs at their colleges and universities.
3. Dr. Boyce Watkins, a blogger on Huffington Post, wrote:

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 685

6/18/12 3:12 PM

686

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

With March Madness upon us, perhaps it’s time to think about what it means to be
an American. We should also reconsider what it means to be a college student. As it
stands, the 700-plus men and women signed on to play in the largest post-season
extravaganza in professional sports (wait, did I say “professional”?) are treated neither as Americans nor as college students. Instead, they are expected to exist in a
peculiar socio-economic purgatory created by March Madness that we might call
pseudo-amateurism.
In pseudo-amateurism, you get to live the lifestyle of a professional: your
schedule is rigorously controlled like an animal at the zoo. You are given massive
amounts of media training so you can protect your brand in the public eye. You are
expected to practice several times per day, and even on weekends. Oh, and that
academic thing? You can do that too, as long as it doesn’t interfere with your fulltime job.

Write an essay in which you support, challenge, or qualify Watkins’s definition
of “pseudo-amateurism.”
4. In a scene from the cartoon South Park, called “Stu-dent ATH-O-LEETS,”
Eric T. Cartman is a representative of a “prestigious institution.” He asks a
university president how he gets away with not paying his “slaves.” Watch the
clip online, and write an essay in which you imagine a roundtable discussion
of it with the authors of the texts in this Conversation.

Student Writing
Rhetorical Analysis: Comparing Strategies
Following is a prompt that asks the writer to compare two passages describing
similar events:
Read William Faulkner’s “An Innocent at Rinkside” (p. 619) and Lars Anderson’s
“The Sound and the Glory” from Sports Illustrated. Both recount the writers’ first
experiences at particular sporting events. Then write an essay in which you compare
and contrast how each writer describes the event and conveys its effect on the writer
as an observer.

Daniela Suarez, an eleventh-grade AP student, has written a response to this
prompt. As you read her essay, consider the approach she takes in her comparison. Then answer the questions that follow about how she organized and developed it.
The following article appeared in Sports Illustrated on April 14, 2011.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 686

6/18/12 3:12 PM

STUDeNT WRITING

687

The Sound and the Glory
Lars Anderson

You never forget your first time. Mine was in 2003, but it could have been
five minutes ago, the way it still lives and rises in my memory. On that last
Sunday in May eight years ago in Indianapolis, I drove my rental car
through the predawn darkness to the corner of 16th and Georgetown,
which, to the true race fan, is the nexus of the universe. By 7 a.m. a crush of
humanity had already gathered in the shadow of the grandstands of the
Brickyard, the sense of anticipation crackling in the cool morning air like
an electrical current.
A few hours later I rolled through the tunnel between Turns 1 and 2,
parked in the speedway’s infield and made my way to pit road to cover the
race for SI. Once the command to start your engines was issued, I immediately felt the roar of horsepower thump, thump, thump in my chest. This
was a far different feeling than one experiences when the stock cars of
NASCAR fire their engines. This was more penetrating, more powerful,
more soul-rattling, like standing on an aircraft carrier next to a fighter jet
that is about to blast off.
After three warmup laps the green flag waved. With 300,000 fans yelling in full throat — the Indy 500 is still the largest single-day sporting event
every year in America — the field of open-wheel cars flew along the frontstretch at 225 mph, barreling through the canyon of fans, over the red
bricks at the start-finish line, past the 153-foot-tall Pagoda tower. I always
take a mental snapshot of this first-lap moment because it’s the most picturesque scene in motor sports, the equivalent of a Van Gogh still life for
those addicted to speed.
Just then, your senses are overwhelmed. There’s the high pitch of the
engines, the raw speed of the cars, the smell of burning rubber and — never
forget — the specter of danger. The assault on your senses is all-encompassing,
unmatched in motor sports, and it’s precisely why the Indianapolis 500 is
my favorite race of the year. Actually, it’s more than that: Indy is my favorite
sporting event of the year. “You have to come to the track and feel the power
of the cars and smell the fuel to really appreciate what makes Indy so
special,” says Danica Patrick, who ran in her first Indy 500 in 2005. “I tell
people, ‘If you come, you’ll be hooked for life.’ And I’ve never been proven
wrong.”
Even NASCAR drivers such as Robby Gordon, Juan Pablo Montoya
and Tony Stewart who have raced in the Indy 500 will say that it’s
the world’s greatest race. Stewart is from Columbus, Ind., and he first

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 687

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

688

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

journeyed to the Brickyard at age five. Riding 45 minutes on a bus with his
father, Nelson, before the sun had risen over the cornfields, Stewart slept in
the luggage rack. When the bus got to the track, he was dazzled. “The speed
and power . . . ,” Stewart recalls. “It took me about a minute to realize I
wanted to race there one day.”
Stewart, like so many Indiana kids, can tell you the history of Indy by
rote. The track was built in 1909 to serve as a testing facility for the automobile industry and given long straightaways and gradual turns to allow
the vehicles to achieve and sustain top speeds. The surface was rough — too
rough. In the first week of automobile races one driver, two riding mechanics and two spectators were killed; jagged rocks could puncture tires and
cause drivers to lose control. The track was resurfaced with bricks, which
were carried onto the grounds by horse and cart and would remain part of
the speedway’s surface until 1961, when it was repaved with asphalt over all
but a three-foot strip at the start-finish line.
“It’s the history that makes Indy so special,” says Sam Hornish Jr., a
native of Defiance, Ohio. “So many great stories.”
The story of Indy, in a lot of ways, mirrors the story of America. For
100 years it has been a bastion of innovation, a place where the best and
brightest in motor sports have tested new theories, new concepts. What has
been developed at Indianapolis Motor Speedway? Turbo engines, energydeflecting cockpits, aerodynamic downforce and, perhaps most significant,
the SAFER barrier wall, which debuted at the speedway in 2002 and is now
a fixture at every major racetrack. In short, the innovation that Indy has
fostered has been the driving force behind the evolution of motor sports
around the globe.
The Indy 500 has also become a cultural touchstone. To generations of
fans it has been America’s Roman Colosseum — with an infield so vast that
Vatican City, Yankee Stadium, Churchill Downs, the Rose Bowl, the grounds
at Wimbledon and the Colosseum could all fit inside at the same time. Indy
is a track where danger and death lurk around every turn; a race where, if
he or she has enough guts and guile, even the most unlikely underdog can
walk away with the big trophy. Just ask Graham Hill, who in 1966 narrowly
avoided a 16-car pileup on the first lap to win. Or ask Hornish Jr., who in
2006 made a dramatic late charge and on the last lap passed Marco Andretti
to take the second-closest 500 ever (.0635 of a second). It’s also where the
greats have flourished, where A.J. Foyt, Al Unser and Rick Mears built and
burnished their legacies. All of this is why after 100 years our eyes are still
drawn to the Indy 500, truly the Greatest Spectacle in Racing.
Rituals have developed at Indy, from Jim Nabors singing Back Home
Again in Indiana before each race, which he first did in 1972, to the winner

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 688

10

6/18/12 3:12 PM

STUDeNT WRITING

689

swigging milk in Victory Lane (thanks to Louis Meyer in the ’30s). Indy’s
timelessness can make race weekend feel like a county fair. “It’s not just the
traditions that make the 500 the best race,” Foyt told me a few years ago.
“It’s also that once the race starts, you have the best drivers in the planet
going at it for 500 miles driving the best cars. As opposed to NASCAR, we
can actually pass. On the last Sunday in May there’s nowhere else in the
world I’d rather be.”
Me neither. Because once you head through the tunnel to the infield,
you’re overcome with one feeling, a feeling that sums up the allure of Indy:
Anything is possible.

Rhetorical Analysis of Paired Texts
Daniela Suarez
In “An Innocent at Rinkside” and “The Sound and the Glory,” William Faulkner
and Lars Anderson recall their first time at a big sporting event as if it were a wondrous
tale of mystic glory. They turn back the dial to the earlier days of their lives and take
the reader on a voyage across a hockey rink and the Indy 500 race track so that we can
almost feel the shrill of the wind and the excitement vibrating through every spectator’s
bones. These articles convey the significance of the two sporting events through the
authors’ creation of vivid images, their peculiar writing structure, and their ability to
involve larger ideas.
Indeed, throughout both of these passages, Faulkner and Anderson manage to
create a completely different universe in the mind of the reader. They both begin by
using strong adjectives to describe seemingly pointless details. For instance, Faulkner
refers to motion and speed as being “discorded and inconsequent, bizarre and
paradoxical.” Such terms are not what would usually come to mind when watching a
hockey match and thus they contribute to the originality of the setting. Furthermore, he
refers to the movements of players as “fluid [. . .] fast [. . .] effortless” and then even
compares them to the “passionate glittering fatal alien quality of snakes.” Such intense
metaphors incite a feeling of fear or anxiety; therefore Faulkner seems to have
accomplished his first initiative, which was to arouse emotions inside us readers as
well. In the same way, Anderson characterizes the sound of the racecar’s engine as
“penetrating [. . .] powerful [. . .] soul-rattling,” which may seem dramatic at first but
ultimately succeeds in transferring his own feelings to the reader. Both authors also rely
extensively on similes: for example, when Faulkner says that the player Geoffrion was
“like an agile ruthless precocious boy” or when Anderson says that he could feel the
horsepower of the cars’ engines “like standing on an aircraft carrier next to a fighter jet
that is about to blast off.” By creating these comparisons the authors create a link

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 689

6/18/12 3:12 PM

690

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

between concrete elements, such as the ice or the cars, to something more abstract and
more personal. Nonetheless, their language is also very precise and even scientific.
For instance, Faulkner refers to the hockey puck as a “catalyst” and violence as a
“byproduct,” while Anderson states that his anticipation was “crackling in the cool
morning air like an electrical current.” Such descriptions are very concise and leave little
room for interpretation, which leads us to believe that while Faulkner and Anderson
wanted readers to feel emotions for themselves, they also wanted to establish their own
very clear impressions.
On the other hand, Faulkner and Anderson also organize their pieces in a very
unique manner. In fact, both of them begin by telling a story, and the narrative voice
not only attracts the audience, but also creates a sense of proximity and trust. Both
authors are also very precise in terms of timing. Faulkner, for instance, gives indications
such as “a few minutes ago,” “but not for long,” and “then.” Anderson also uses
temporal cues such as “five minutes ago” and “a few hours later.” In this way, the
sequence of events appears almost like a movie before our eyes, with one event following
the other chronologically with smooth transitions in between. In terms of syntax, these
authors also have a similar style; they both begin their paragraphs with short declarative
sentences. Indeed, every new idea is thrown directly at us and the authors waste no time
perfecting their thoughts. On the contrary, their emotions are raw yet perfect, just like
the simple beauty of a hockey match or a car race. Unlike Anderson, Faulkner also seems
to ensure his sense of authority when he begins his fourth paragraph with “Excitement,”
thus putting himself in a position where he can define the term himself. In either case,
these elements help create the authors’ strong voices, which are proof not only of their
utter passion for the subject, but also of their desire to utterly express their feelings.
Finally, Faulkner and Anderson both find a way to relate their personal
experiences to the bigger picture of the whole world. Indeed, throughout these articles
we witness a transition from personal and more intimate thoughts and feelings to a
larger scope of importance. Faulkner begins by relating the ice to the “Christmas store
window” or the “kaleidoscopic whirl like a child’s toy,” or even “the frantic darting of
the weightless bugs,” simple things we have all witnessed. Anderson deepens this
personal side of the story, as he remembers driving his rental car “[o]n that last Sunday
in May [. . .] through the predawn darkness to the corner of 16th and Georgetown.” In
Anderson’s case, he mostly restates tiny details which show his relation to the events,
but also uses terms such as “that last Sunday,” just like Faulkner says “the innocent” in
order to evoke a sense of mystery and vagueness; these imply that the author doesn’t
need to add more specifics since the facts remain purely alive in his mind. Nevertheless,
both authors slowly begin to separate themselves from their own memories and enter the
realm of the whole world. Indeed, Faulkner begins his appeal to a wider audience by
stating, “We—Americans.” He is no longer referring to his relatives or even people at the
game but to any American like himself. In the same way, Anderson enlarges his scope by
claiming, “The story of Indy, in a lot of ways, mirrors the story of America.” Furthermore,

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 690

6/18/12 3:12 PM

GRAMMAR AS RHeTORIC AND STYle

691

both provide a light critique of society in the greater meaning of their own story.
Faulkner criticizes this “new era” of sports, where they are no longer for fun, but have
instead become like an artificial way for people to gain that “adrenalic discharge of
vicarious excitement” in places “beneath lights” and with “spectator tobacco” trapped
above their heads. On the contrary, Anderson highlights the more positive aspects of his
sport by reminding us that the Indy race track has been a “bastion of innovation.”
Indeed, innovations such as “turbo engines, energy-deflecting cockpits, aerodynamic
downforce and [. . .] the SAFER barrier wall” were born here. Therefore the track, just
like the hockey ring, slowly switches from the authors’ hearts to the screen of the world,
available to us all.
William Faulkner and Lars Anderson both paint a canvas with their words as they
look back into their memories and remember their first experiences at these different
sporting events. Whether alongside an ice rink or in the midst of engine smoke, these
authors manage to convince us of the importance of these seemingly simple events. They
paint full landscapes, complete with sounds and smells, and pull us into their minds so
we can feel what they felt on that one, special day.

Questions
1. What is your evaluation of Daniela Suarez’s thesis statement? How might it be
improved?
2. Would Daniela’s essay have benefited from more examples? What other examples
could she have used to highlight the differences between the two accounts? What
examples would have highlighted the similarities?
3. Write a new conclusion to Daniela’s essay that comments on the two pieces as
examples of sportswriting.
4. What could Daniela have done by noting that the title of Anderson’s piece — “The
Sound and the Glory”—is an allusion to the title of one of Faulkner’s novels, The
Sound and the Fury?

Grammar as Rhetoric and Style
Direct, Precise, and Active Verbs
Direct, precise, active verbs energize writing. Consider this sentence with verbs in
bold from “The Four Horsemen” by Grantland Rice (p. 610):
Yesterday the cyclone struck again as Notre Dame beat the Army, 13 to 7,
with a set of backfield stars that ripped and crashed though a strong Army
defense with more speed and power than the warring cadets could meet.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 691

6/18/12 3:12 PM

692

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

The verbs in Rice’s sentence re-create the high energy of the game. The rhetorical
effect of the first three verbs is to move the sentence forward with such vigor and
clarity that they vividly convey the force that overcame the strong Army defense.
In addition, the verbs contribute to the highly energetic tone of the piece; in fact,
they are a hallmark of Rice’s extravagant, even hyperbolic, style.
Now consider another passage, this one from “The Silent Season of a Hero”
by Gay Talese (p. 592), with its verbs, verb phrases, and verbals (adjectives made
from verbs) in bold type:
He watched until she left, lost in the crowd of the newly arrived tourists that had just
come down the hill by cable car. Then he sat down again at the table in the restaurant, finishing his tea and lighting another cigarette, his fifth in the last half hour. It
was 11:30 in the morning. None of the other tables was occupied, and the only
sounds came from the bar, where a liquor salesman was laughing at something the
headwaiter had said. But then the salesman, his briefcase under his arm, headed for
the door, stopping briefly to peek into the dining room and call out, “See you later,
Joe.” Joe DiMaggio turned and waved at the salesman. Then the room was quiet
again.

Talese uses the action verbs, verb phrases, and verbals to give you a sense of the
scene’s movement and drama. Yet the two shortest sentences — both emphasizing
silence and stasis rather than movement — rely on the linking verb was.
Once you’ve learned to recognize effective verbs in your reading, you’ll
become more aware of them in your own writing. You may find yourself working
on the verbs in revisions rather than first drafts, but here are some suggestions for
making even your first draft active and precise.

Direct Verbs
Use forms of to be and other linking verbs sparingly and with a specific reason. Often you can change a form of to be followed by a predicate adjective or a
predicate noun (also called nominalization, see p. 781) into an action verb. Consider how the second sentence in each pair below sports a stronger verb than the
first:
In England itself, whose shining empire seemed to be a testament to the
imperial destiny of the Anglo-Saxon race, the fears for the inferiority of the
nation’s fighting men had some empirical basis.
In England itself, whose shining empire seemed to testify to the imperial
destiny of the Anglo-Saxon race, the fears for the inferiority of the nation’s
fighting men had some empirical basis.
— Caroline Alexander

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 692

6/18/12 3:12 PM

GRAMMAR AS RHeTORIC AND STYle

693

If you’re Henry Fonda’s son and you want to be an actor, you get to be an
actor.
If you’re Henry Fonda’s son and you want to act, you get to act.
— Rick Reilly

If you’re Chelsea Clinton and want to be in government, you get to be in
government.
If you’re Chelsea Clinton and want to govern, you get to govern.
— Rick Reilly

Precise Verbs
While there is nothing wrong with the verbs walks and looks in the first sentence
that follows, consider the precision of the verbs in the second sentence.
As Emily walks onto the floor in her green-and-gold uniform, she looks
for me.
As Emily bounces onto the floor in her green-and-gold uniform, her eyes
scan the crowd to meet mine.
— Kris Vervaecke

Similarly, in the first sentence that follows, looking forward to is a perfectly serviceable verb — until you compare it with the more precise verb that the writer
selects.
There must have been little boys in that throng too, frantic with the slow
excruciating passage of time, looking forward to the hour when they would
be Richard or Geoffrion or Laparade. . . .
There must have been little boys in that throng too, frantic with the slow
excruciating passage of time, panting for the hour when they would be
Richard or Geoffrion or Laprade. . . .
— William Faulkner

Active Verbs
In addition to selecting a verb that is direct and creates a precise image, use verbs
in the active voice — with an easy-to-picture subject doing something — unless
you have a specific purpose for using the passive voice, where the subject is acted

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 693

6/18/12 3:12 PM

694

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

upon. Here, for example, in the final part of a sentence from “The Silent Season
of a Hero,” Gay Talese makes good use of the passive voice (p. 593, para. 10):
Zio Pepe was among those who cheered when Joe DiMaggio returned to
San Francisco after his first season with the New York Yankees and was
carried along the wharf on the shoulders of the fishermen.
In this sentence, DiMaggio is acted upon by the fishermen. Why? Perhaps because
Talese wanted DiMaggio to remain as the subject instead of switching away from
DiMaggio and making the fishermen the subject.
By and large, though, strong writers stick with the active voice, as Talese does
in the following passage (p. 598, para. 54):
In the forty-first game [of 1941] . . . DiMaggio tied an American League
record that George Sisler had set in 1922.
Talese could have cast that sentence in the passive voice, as follows:
In the forty-first game . . . an American League record that had been set by
George Sisler in 1922 was tied by DiMaggio.
As is often the case, the use of passive voice in this example makes for a wordy
sentence that is hard to follow.

• ExERCiSE 1 •
Improve the following sentences by replacing one or more verbs in each
with a more effective verb — that is, a more vivid, precise, and active verb.
1. My first college visit will always be remembered by me.
2. There are many technological advances available to make our lives
easier.
3. In the middle of the night, sirens could be heard.
4. It was not very long before she regretted buying the expensive
handbag.
5. The Graham technique is little esteemed by modern dancers today.
6. The college advisor said she could not make a suggestion about which
school to apply to because she didn’t know his SAT scores.
7. The team captain is responsible for scheduling practices and communicating with team members.
8. A decision was reached by the arbitration panel.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 694

6/18/12 3:12 PM

GRAMMAR AS RHeTORIC AND STYle

695

9. The local sheriff gave a warning to the college students about walking
around with open containers.
10. The chief of surgery took the opportunity to thank the volunteers.
11. Do your children have fears about going away to camp?
12. Antigone was very protective of Oedipus in Oedipus at Colonus.

• ExERCiSE 2 •
Identify the verbs and verbals in the following passages. Discuss how these
verbs affect the tone of the passages.
His vets warned us all along that the odds were against him, but we didn’t
really believe them. They had hope, too. How could a horse who appeared
so full of life break his leg and be so suddenly close to death? His head
was fine. His back was fine. His lungs and heart and chest were fine. In
fact, after a while, his broken leg was fairly fine. It was another leg
that was so worrisome, since the weight of his body constantly bearing
down on the delicate structures inside his foot eventually damaged and
destroyed them.
— Jane Smiley, “Barbaro, The Heart in the Winner’s Circle”

She maintains her composure until we get in the car, then crumples in
humiliation. Once we’re on the highway, forty miles to home, freezing rain
coats our windows, but I can’t see well enough to find a safe place to pull
off. I drive with trepidation over the slippery road, through the foggy
darkness, while Emily cries so hard it sounds as though she will break
apart. “Mommy, I’m such a failure!” she weeps. At first my attempts to
comfort her only increase her misery, so I shut up. I’m left to listen and
worry about the road and think my resentful thoughts. I remember all the
years in elementary school when she was “benched” in the classroom — left
to do bulletin boards for the teacher — because she’d already mastered
what was being taught. I think about the studies that suggest that girls
who compete in athletics are far less likely to drink or take drugs or
become pregnant.
— Kris Vervaecke, “A Spectator’s Notebook”

• ExERCiSE 3 •
Analyze the verbs in the opening paragraph of “The Cruelest Sport” (p. 622).
How would you describe the verbs Joyce Carol Oates uses? How do they
mirror the subject she is writing about? Do the verbs she uses tip you off

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 695

6/18/12 3:12 PM

696

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

that this is a piece that is more complex and academic than usual for sportswriting? Cite specific examples to support your view.
Professional boxing is the only major American sport whose primary, and
often murderous, energies are not coyly deflected by such artifacts as balls
and pucks. Though highly ritualized, and as rigidly bound by rules, traditions, and taboos as any religious ceremony, it survives as the most primitive and terrifying of contests: two men, near-naked, fight each other in a
brightly lit, elevated space roped in like an animal pen (though the ropes
were originally to keep rowdy spectators out); two men climb into the ring
from which only one, symbolically, will climb out. (Draws do occur in
boxing, but are rare, and unpopular.)

• ExERCiSE 4 •
Count the verbs in one of the passages in Exercise 2. Then categorize them
into linking verbs and more vivid action verbs, and calculate the ratio. Do
the same for several paragraphs of your own writing. Are you relying more
on linking verbs, or are most of your verbs direct and precise action verbs?

Suggestions for Writing
Sports
Now that you have examined a number of texts that focus on sports, explore this
topic yourself by synthesizing your own ideas and the readings. You might want
to do additional research or use readings from other classes as you write.
1. Sportswriter Bill Simmons has named his Web site Grantland.com, the logo of
which contains Grantland Rice’s famous line: “For when the One Great Scorer
comes to mark against your name, He writes — not that you won or lost — but
how you played the Game.” Do you agree with Rice’s philosophy? Do you
think Bill Simmons does? Write an essay in which you support, challenge, or
qualify this assertion.
2. “The Proper Place for Sports” by Theodore Roosevelt appears on page 617.
Kathleen Dalton, a historian and high-school history teacher, subtitled her 2002
biography of Theodore Roosevelt, The Strenuous Life. In an interview, she
explained that Roosevelt used that phrase to summarize his philosophy of life.
He urged Americans to turn their backs on the soft, easy indoor life they had been
leading and embrace the challenges of the twentieth century with a spirit of

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 696

6/18/12 3:12 PM

SUGGeSTIONS fOR WRITING

697

adventure and courage. He praised physical activity — sports, mountain climbing, exploring, and fighting if necessary — and strenuous endeavor of all kinds,
including building an empire and making America a major moral force in the
world. He criticized spectators and urged them to participate in sports rather than
merely watch them. He also argued that you could lead a strenuous life by working politically to make your country a better place or by writing a book or a poem
or by being a caring mother who raised good kids.

Dalton added that the subtitle has a direct connection to Roosevelt’s own life.
That is, Roosevelt
followed his own advice and lived his own kind of rugged strenuous life. He threw
himself completely into each new endeavor — wrestling, bronco busting, mountain climbing, chopping trees, or exploring a dangerous uncharted river. He also
led a strenuous life of struggle by making a new man of himself again and again:
he resisted illness and built a stronger body, he proved himself a true man by
holding his own among western ranch hands and cowboys, he made himself a
writer and reformer, and he made himself a leader and a political prophet without
losing his sense of ethics.

Write about your own philosophy of life. In your essay, explain your thoughts
on how to improve humankind, and examine the ways you have practiced
what you preach.
3. Write an essay in which you discuss the connection between sports and character. Do you think that athletes should be role models? Develop your response
with at least three examples — pro or con — of athletes mentioned in the readings in this chapter.
4. Working in groups, research the ways in which sports such as boxing, football,
car racing, and soccer have made reforms to preserve the health and safety of
their participants. Create a visual, such as a timeline or graph, that indicates
the timing of the changes as well as their effectiveness. Show for which sport
the change has been most effective and/or most radical.
5. Write an essay comparing the ways the media projects images of male and
female athletes. Which images create more pressure to conform — images of
male athletes or images of female athletes?
6. Write a personal narrative in which you describe the effect sports has had on
your connection to family, community, or school. Has the experience been
positive or negative?
7. Do some research on Title IX, the law that bans sex discrimination at schools
receiving federal funds. What effect has this legislation had on participation in
high school, college, and professional sports? Develop a thesis and then write

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 697

6/18/12 3:12 PM

698

CHAPTeR 9 • SPORTS

about it, supporting it with your research sources. Be sure to consider the law’s
effect on male and female role models.
8. The following excerpt is from George Orwell’s essay “The Sporting Spirit,”
published in 1945:
I am always amazed when I hear people saying that sport creates goodwill between
nations, and that if only the common peoples of the world could meet one
another at football or cricket, they would have no inclination to meet on the
battlefield. Even if one didn’t know from concrete examples (the 1936 Olympics,
for instance) that international sporting contests lead to orgies of hatred, one
could deduce it from general principles. . . . At the international level sport is
frankly mimic warfare.

In an essay, agree or disagree with Orwell’s view of sports.
9. Read The Old Man and the Sea by Ernest Hemingway. Write an essay discussing whether you think Joe DiMaggio would have been a good fishing companion for the old man.

09_SHE_67650_Ch09_591_698.indd 698

6/18/12 3:12 PM

10
Language
How does the language we use reveal who we are?

I

n many people’s opinion, to call the link between language and culture
sacred would not be exaggeration. The language of our birth, the language
of the first words we speak to our parents or those closest to us, creates a powerful
bond and shapes our perception of the world. Yet few of us are fully aware of the
way our language influences others or the extent to which language is used to
manipulate our emotions, our politics, and our decisions.
Although the United States is closely associated with English, its citizens
speak a myriad of other languages. In many American cities, Spanish is as common as English, and some urban school districts have students who, collectively,
speak more than a hundred languages. The writers we study these days, often the
children of immigrants, tell of parents who speak not standard written English
but rather “broken English,” a term author Amy Tan analyzes in her essay “Mother
Tongue.” The way a person speaks can lead to stereotyped judgments about him
or her and assumptions about economic class and even IQ. The selections in this
chapter examine these issues and more. Should English be the official language of
the United States, sanctioned and enforced by legislation? What is it like being an
immigrant and living and learning in a “foreign” language?
The power of language adds another dimension to our discussion. Language
has deep connections to our thoughts and beliefs. Whether it’s an advertising
campaign or an election campaign, whether people are telling you what to think
or what not to say, language is a potent and powerful tool. In this chapter’s Conversation, we explore how language can be used to manipulate, motivate, and
even stifle.
In his essay “If Black English Isn’t a Language, Then Tell Me What Is,” African
American writer James Baldwin writes: “It goes without saying, then, that language is also a political instrument, means, and proof of power. It is the most
vivid and crucial key to identity: it reveals the private identity, and connects one
with, or divorces one from, the larger, public, or communal identity.” In this
chapter, you will explore language as both “political instrument, means, and
proof of power” and “key to identity.”

699

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 699

6/18/12 3:12 PM

Mother Tongue
Amy Tan
Best-​selling​ author​ Amy​ Tan​ (b.​ 1952)​ has​ written​ several​ novels,​
including​The Joy Luck Club​(1989),​The Kitchen God’s Wife​(1991),​
The Bonesetter’s Daughter​(2001),​and​Saving Fish from Drowning​
(2005).​ Known​ for​ her​ portrayal​ of​ mother-​daughter​ relationships,​
Tan​draws​on​her​Chinese​heritage​to​depict​the​clash​of​traditional​
Chinese​culture​with​modern-​day​American​customs.​Tan​grew​up​in​
Cal​i​fornia,​has​an​MA​in​linguistics,​and​worked​as​a​business​writer​
before​ turning​ to​ fiction.​ She​ is​ a​ member​ of​ the​ Rock​ Bottom​ Remainders,​ a​
band​—​​including​Dave​Barry​and​Stephen​King​—​​that​plays​for​charity​events.​Tan​
collected​many​of​her​nonfiction​writings​in​The Opposite of Fate: A Book of Musings​(2003).​Among​these​is​“Mother​Tongue,”​an​essay​in​which​Tan​explores​“all​
the​En​glishes”​that​are​part​of​her​identity.

I

am not a scholar of English or literature. I cannot give you much more
than personal opinions on the English language and its variations in this
country or others.
I am a writer. And by that definition, I am someone who has always loved
language. I am fascinated by language in daily life. I spend a great deal of my time
thinking about the power of language — the way it can evoke an emotion, a visual
image, a complex idea, or a simple truth. Language is the tool of my trade. And I
use them all — all the Englishes I grew up with.
Recently, I was made keenly aware of the different Englishes I do use. I was
giving a talk to a large group of people, the same talk I had already given to half a
dozen other groups. The nature of the talk was about my writing, my life, and my
book, The Joy Luck Club. The talk was going along well enough, until I remembered one major difference that made the whole talk sound wrong. My mother
was in the room. And it was perhaps the first time she had heard me give a lengthy
speech, using the kind of English I have never used with her. I was saying things
like “The intersection of memory upon imagination” and “There is an aspect of
my fiction that relates to thus-and-thus” — a speech filled with carefully wrought
grammatical phrases, burdened, it suddenly seemed to me, with nominalized
forms, past perfect tenses, conditional phrases, all the forms of standard English
that I had learned in school and through books, the forms of English I did not use
at home with my mother.
Just last week, I was walking down the street with my mother, and I again
found myself conscious of the English I was using, the English I do use with her.
We were talking about the price of new and used furniture and I heard myself
saying this: “Not waste money that way.” My husband was with us as well, and he

700

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 700

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

TAn​ •​ MoThER​TonguE​

701

didn’t notice any switch in my English. And then I realized why. It’s because over the
twenty years we’ve been together I’ve often used that same kind of English with him,
and sometimes he even uses it with me. It has become our language of intimacy,
a different sort of English that relates to family talk, the language I grew up with.
So you’ll have some idea of what this family talk I heard sounds like, I’ll quote
what my mother said during a recent conversation which I videotaped and then
transcribed. During this conversation, my mother was talking about a political
gangster in Shanghai who had the same last name as her family’s, Du, and how
the gangster in his early years wanted to be adopted by her family, which was rich
by comparison. Later, the gangster became more powerful, far richer than my
mother’s family, and one day showed up at my mother’s wedding to pay his
respects. Here’s what she said in part:
“Du Yusong having business like fruit stand. Like off the street kind. He is Du
like Du Zong — but not Tsung-ming Island people. The local people call putong,
the river east side, he belong to that side local people. That man want to ask Du
Zong father take him in like become own family. Du Zong father wasn’t look
down on him, but didn’t take seriously, until that man big like become a mafia.
Now important person, very hard to inviting him. Chinese way, came only to
show respect, don’t stay for dinner. Respect for making big celebration, he shows
up. Mean gives lots of respect. Chinese custom. Chinese social life that way. If too
important won’t have to stay too long. He come to my wedding. I didn’t see, I
heard it. I gone to boy’s side, they have YMCA dinner. Chinese age I was nineteen.”
You should know that my mother’s expressive command of English belies
how much she actually understands. She reads the Forbes report, listens to Wall
Street Week, converses daily with her stockbroker, reads all of Shirley MacLaine’s
books with ease — all kinds of things I can’t begin to understand. Yet some of my
friends tell me they understand 50 percent of what my mother says. Some say
they understand 80 to 90 percent. Some say they understand none of it, as if she
were speaking pure Chinese. But to me, my mother’s English is perfectly clear,
perfectly natural. It’s my mother tongue. Her language, as I hear it, is vivid, direct,
full of observation and imagery. That was the language that helped shape the way
I saw things, expressed things, made sense of the world.

5

Y
Lately, I’ve been giving more thought to the kind of English my mother speaks.
Like others, I have described it to people as “broken” or “fractured” English. But I
wince when I say that. It has always bothered me that I can think of no other way
to describe it other than “broken,” as if it were damaged and needed to be fixed,
as if it lacked a certain wholeness and soundness. I’ve heard other terms used,
“limited English,” for example. But they seem just as bad, as if everything is limited, including people’s perceptions of the limited English speaker.
I know this for a fact, because when I was growing up, my mother’s “limited”
English limited my perception of her. I was ashamed of her English. I believed

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 701

6/18/12 3:12 PM

702​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

that her English reflected the quality of what she had to say. That is, because she
expressed them imperfectly her thoughts were imperfect. And I had plenty of
empirical evidence to support me: the fact that people in department stores, at
banks, and at restaurants did not take her seriously, did not give her good service,
pretended not to understand her, or even acted as if they did not hear her.
My mother has long realized the limitations of her English as well. When I
was fifteen, she used to have me call people on the phone to pretend I was she. In
this guise, I was forced to ask for information or even to complain and yell at
people who had been rude to her. One time it was a call to her stockbroker in New
York. She had cashed out her small portfolio and it just so happened we were
going to go to New York the next week, our very first trip outside California. I had
to get on the phone and say in an adolescent voice that was not very convincing,
“This is Mrs. Tan.”
And my mother was standing in the back whispering loudly, “Why he don’t
send me check, already two weeks late. So mad he lie to me, losing me money.”
And then I said in perfect English, “Yes, I’m getting rather concerned. You
had agreed to send the check two weeks ago, but it hasn’t arrived.”
Then she began to talk more loudly. “What he want, I come to New York tell
him front of his boss, you cheating me.” And I was trying to calm her down, make
her be quiet, while telling the stockbroker, “I can’t tolerate any more excuses. If I
don’t receive the check immediately, I am going to have to speak to your manager
when I’m in New York next week.” And sure enough, the following week there we
were in front of this astonished stockbroker, and I was sitting there red-faced and
quiet, and my mother, the real Mrs. Tan, was shouting at his boss in her impeccable broken English.
We used a similar routine just five days ago, for a situation that was far less
humorous. My mother had gone to the hospital for an appointment, to find out
about a benign brain tumor a CAT scan had revealed a month ago. She said she
had spoken very good English, her best English, no mistakes. Still, she said, the
hospital did not apologize when they said they had lost the CAT scan and she had
come for nothing. She said they did not seem to have any sympathy when she told
them she was anxious to know the exact diagnosis, since her husband and son
had both died of brain tumors. She said they would not give her any more information until the next time and she would have to make another appointment for
that. So she said she would not leave until the doctor called her daughter. She
wouldn’t budge. And when the doctor finally called her daughter, me, who spoke
in perfect English — lo and behold — we had assurances the CAT scan would be
found, promises that a conference call on Monday would be held, and apologies
for any suffering my mother had gone through for a most regrettable mistake.
I think my mother’s English almost had an effect on limiting my possibilities
in life as well. Sociologists and linguists probably will tell you that a person’s
developing language skills are more influenced by peers. But I do think that the
language spoken in the family, especially in immigrant families which are more

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 702

10

15

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

TAn​ •​ MoThER​TonguE​

703

insular, plays a large role in shaping the language of the child. And I believe that
it affected my results on achievement tests, IQ tests, and the SAT. While my
English skills were never judged as poor, compared to math, English could not be
considered my strong suit. In grade school I did moderately well, getting perhaps
B’s, sometimes B-pluses, in English and scoring perhaps in the sixtieth or seventieth percentile on achievement tests. But those scores were not good enough to
override the opinion that my true abilities lay in math and science, because in
those areas I achieved A’s and scored in the ninetieth percentile or higher.
This was understandable. Math is precise; there is only one correct answer.
Whereas, for me at least, the answers on English tests were always a judgment call,
a matter of opinion and personal experience. Those tests were constructed around
items like fill-in-the-blank sentence completion, such as “Even though Tom was
, Mary thought he was
.” And the correct answer always seemed to
be the most bland combinations of thoughts, for example, “Even though Tom
was shy, Mary thought he was charming,” with the grammatical structure “even
though” limiting the correct answer to some sort of semantic opposites, so you
wouldn’t get answers like, “Even though Tom was foolish, Mary thought he was
ridiculous.” Well, according to my mother, there were very few limitations as to
what Tom could have been and what Mary might have thought of him. So I never
did well on tests like that.
The same was true with word analogies, pairs of words in which you were
supposed to find some sort of logical, semantic relationship — for example, “Sunset is to nightfall as
is to
.” And here you would be presented with
a list of four possible pairs, one of which showed the same kind of relationship:
red is to stoplight, bus is to arrival, chills is to fever, yawn is to boring. Well, I could
never think that way. I knew what the tests were asking, but I could not block out
of my mind the images already created by the first pair, “sunset is to nightfall” —
and I would see a burst of colors against a darkening sky, the moon rising, the
lowering of a curtain of stars. And all the other pairs of words — red, bus, stoplight, boring — just threw up a mass of confusing images, making it impossible
for me to sort out something as logical as saying: “A sunset precedes nightfall” is
the same as “a chill precedes a fever.” The only way I would have gotten that
answer right would have been to imagine an associative situation, for example,
my being disobedient and staying out past sunset, catching a chill at night, which
turns into feverish pneumonia as punishment, which indeed did happen to me.

Y
I have been thinking about all this lately, about my mother’s English, about
achievement tests. Because lately I’ve been asked, as a writer, why there are not
more Asian Americans represented in American literature. Why are there few
Asian Americans enrolled in creative writing programs? Why do so many Chinese
students go into engineering? Well, these are broad sociological questions I can’t
begin to answer. But I have noticed in surveys — in fact, just last week — that

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 703

6/18/12 3:12 PM

704​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

Asian students, as a whole, always do significantly better on math achievement
tests than in English. And this makes me think that there are other AsianAmerican students whose English spoken in the home might also be described as
“broken” or “limited.” And perhaps they also have teachers who are steering them
away from writing and into math and science, which is what happened to me.
Fortunately, I happen to be rebellious in nature and enjoy the challenge of
disproving assumptions made about me. I became an English-major my first year
in college, after being enrolled as pre-med. I started writing nonfiction as a freelancer the week after I was told by my former boss that writing was my worst skill
and I should hone my talents toward account management.
But it wasn’t until 1985 that I finally began to write fiction. And at first I
wrote using what I thought to be wittily crafted sentences, sentences that would
finally prove I had mastery over the English language. Here’s an example from the
first draft of a story that later made its way into The Joy Luck Club, but without
this line: “That was my mental quandary in its nascent state.” A terrible line,
which I can barely pronounce.
Fortunately, for reasons I won’t get into today, I later decided I should envision a reader for the stories I would write. And the reader I decided upon was my
mother, because these were stories about mothers. So with this reader in mind —
and in fact she did read my early drafts — I began to write stories using all the
Englishes I grew up with: the English I spoke to my mother, which for lack of a
better term might be described as “simple”; the English she used with me, which
for lack of a better term might be described as “broken”; my translation of her
Chinese, which could certainly be described as “watered down”; and what I imagined to be her translation of her Chinese if she could speak in perfect English, her
internal language, and for that I sought to preserve the essence, but neither an
English nor a Chinese structure. I wanted to capture what language ability tests
can never reveal: her intent, her passion, her imagery, the rhythms of her speech,
and the nature of her thoughts.
Apart from what any critic had to say about my writing, I knew I had succeeded where it counted when my mother finished reading my book and gave me
her verdict: “So easy to read.”

20

Questions for Discussion
1. How is Amy Tan’s use of the phrase “mother tongue” ambiguous?
2. What does Tan mean by “the power of language” (para. 2)? What does that phrase
mean to you?
3. What are the “different Englishes” (para. 3) Tan describes in this essay? How does
each have its own type of power?
4. How would you describe Tan’s attitude toward her mother?
5. What does Tan mean when she says, “I think my mother’s English almost had an
effect on limiting my possibilities in life as well” (para. 15)? To what extent do you

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 704

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

TAn​ •​ MoThER​TonguE​

705

think that speaking a non-standardized English (through grammatical differences
or an accent) “limits . . . possibilities” for people in the United States today?
6. What is the “associative situation” (para. 17) that Tan claims accounts for her high
performance on math tests but not on English tests — specifically, analogies?
7. Why does Tan believe that envisioning a reader — specifically, her mother —
enabled her to write more authentically?
8. What are some of the class and cultural distinctions that people encounter because
of their inability to use standardized English, according to Tan?

Questions on Rhetoric and Style
1. Why does Tan open her essay by stating, “I am not a scholar of English or literature” but then state, in the next paragraph, “I am a writer”? What is the difference?
How does she establish ethos by this juxtaposition?
2. At several points in her essay, Tan relates anecdotes. How do they further her argument? Be sure to consider the anecdotes regarding Tan giving a speech, the stockbroker, the CAT scan, and Tan’s experience with the SATs. What would be the
impact of omitting one of them?
3. What is Tan’s strategy behind including a lengthy, direct quotation from her
mother (para. 6) rather than paraphrasing what she said?
4. Tan criticizes herself twice in this essay. In paragraph 3, she quotes a speech she
gave “filled with carefully wrought grammatical phrases, burdened, it suddenly
seemed to me, with nominalized forms, past perfect tenses, conditional phrases. . . .”
What are “nominalized forms, past perfect tenses, conditional phrases,” and why
are they burdensome? At another point, Tan recalls a draft of The Joy Luck Club in
which she wrote, “That was my mental quandary in its nascent state” (para. 20).
Why does she call this “[a] terrible line”?
5. Although Tan clearly appeals to pathos through personal narration and characterization, she makes some appeals to logos. Identify them and describe their effect.
6. Tan divides the essay into three sections. Why? How do these resemble chapters?
7. How does Tan avoid stereotyping Asian Americans in general and Chinese in
particular in this essay? If you believe she is guilty of some stereotyping, discuss
examples.
8. Discuss how Tan broadens the essay’s relevance by going beyond just her personal
experience and raising issues that would be germane to her audience.
9. This essay was first published in Threepenny Review, which the novelist Jonathan
Franzen has described as one of the “few magazines left in this country which seem
pitched at the general literary reader and which consistently publish such interesting, high-quality criticism, reflection, argument, fiction, and poetry.” How does
Tan appeal to this audience of “general literary reader[s]”?

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 705

6/18/12 3:12 PM

706​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

Suggestions for Writing
1. Tan focuses in this essay on the influence her mother’s “broken English” has had
on her formation as a writer. Yet the essay has enjoyed a long-lasting popularity
that suggests it holds meaning for readers beyond those interested in the life and
times of Amy Tan. Write an essay analyzing the rhetorical strategies Tan uses to
give this piece broad appeal.
2. At the end of the essay, Tan says that she “began to write stories using all the
Englishes I grew up with” (para. 21). Read Tan’s short story “Two Kinds” or her
novel The Joy Luck Club, and analyze where and how she uses different “Englishes.”
3. Tan argues that her novelist’s perception made it difficult for her to do well on
SAT-type questions because they were too limiting. Write an essay in which you
describe some skills or kinds of knowledge that you have that could not be assessed
by a standardized test.
4. In this essay, Tan makes the following assertion: “Sociologists and linguists probably will tell you that a person’s developing language skills are more influenced by
peers. But I do think that the language spoken in the family, especially in immigrant families which are more insular, plays a large role in shaping the language of
the child” (para. 15). Write an essay in which you argue whether you believe that a
person’s language is more influenced by peers than by family. Use evidence from
your reading, personal experience, or observations to support your position.
5. Keep an observational journal for several days, noting the judgments people make
on the basis of how a person speaks or writes. Consider your peers, a business
environment, or the media. Then write an essay explaining the relationship you
have observed between power and language. Does someone’s facility with a language (or, in some contexts, with bilingualism) confer power? Did you observe
situations where one’s position of authority makes his or her language acceptable?
Did you note anyone who “code-switched,” or shifted his or her way of speaking to
accommodate a different audience or community? Work your analysis of these
observations into your essay.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 706

6/18/12 3:12 PM

Politics and the English Language
George Orwell
george​orwell​(1903–1950)​is​the​pseudonym​of​Eric​Arthur​Blair,​
a​writer​who​was​the​son​of​an​En​glish​civil​servant​during​the​Raj,​
the​British​rule​of​India.​orwell​was​educated​in​En​gland,​but​when​
financial​ constraints​ prevented​ him​ from​ attending​ university,​ he​
joined​the​imperial​police​in​Burma,​an​experience​immortalized​in​
his​ famous​ essay​ “Shooting​ an​ Elephant.”​ he​ returned​ to​ En​gland​
five​years​later,​but​in​1928​he​moved​to​Paris.​There​he​took​on​a​
series​of​menial​jobs,​which​he​described​in​his​first​book,​Down and
Out in Paris and London​(1933).​Later​orwell​worked​as​a​schoolteacher,​fought​
on​ the​ side​ of​ the​ republicans​ in​ the​ Spanish​ civil​ war,​ and​ began​ writing​ for​
magazines,​often​speaking​out​against​economic​injustice.​he​finally​gained​recognition​and​considerable​financial​success​with​his​novels​Animal Farm​(1945)​
and​ Nineteen Eighty-four​ (1949).​ The​ term​ Orwellian​ came​ to​ describe​ mechanisms​ used​ by​ totalitarian​ governments​ to​ manipulate​ the​ populace​ in​ order​ to​
enforce​ conformity.​ In​ the​ following​ essay,​ which​ first​ appeared​ in​ Horizon in​
1946,​orwell​explores​the​impact​of​totalitarian​thinking​on​language.

M

ost people who bother with the matter at all would admit that the
English language is in a bad way, but it is generally assumed that we
cannot by conscious action do anything about it. Our civilization is decadent and
our language — so the argument runs — must inevitably share in the general collapse. It follows that any struggle against the abuse of language is a sentimental
archaism, like preferring candles to electric light or hansom cabs to aeroplanes.
Underneath this lies the half-conscious belief that language is a natural growth
and not an instrument which we shape for our own purposes.
Now, it is clear that the decline of a language must ultimately have political
and economic causes: it is not due simply to the bad influence of this or that
individual writer. But an effect can become a cause, reinforcing the original cause
and producing the same effect in an intensified form, and so on indefinitely. A
man may take to drink because he feels himself to be a failure, and then fail all the
more completely because he drinks. It is rather the same thing that is happening
to the English language. It becomes ugly and inaccurate because our thoughts are
foolish, but the slovenliness of our language makes it easier for us to have foolish
thoughts. The point is that the process is reversible. Modern English, especially
written English, is full of bad habits which spread by imitation and which can be
avoided if one is willing to take the necessary trouble. If one gets rid of these habits one can think more clearly, and to think clearly is a necessary first step towards
political regeneration: so that the fight against bad English is not frivolous and is

707

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 707

6/18/12 3:12 PM

708​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

not the exclusive concern of professional writers. I will come back to this presently, and I hope that by that time the meaning of what I have said here will have
become clearer. Meanwhile, here are five specimens of the English language as it
is now habitually written.
These five passages have not been picked out because they are especially
bad — I could have quoted far worse if I had chosen — but because they illustrate
various of the mental vices from which we now suffer. They are a little below the
average, but are fairly representative samples. I number them so that I can refer
back to them when necessary:
(1) I am not, indeed, sure whether it is not true to say that the Milton who once
seemed not unlike a seventeenth-century Shelley had not become, out of an experience ever more bitter in each year, more alien [sic] to the founder of that Jesuit sect
which nothing could induce him to tolerate.
— Professor Harold Laski (Essay in Freedom of Expression)
(2) Above all, we cannot play ducks and drakes with a native battery of idioms which
prescribes such egregious collocations of vocables as the Basic put up with for tolerate
or put at a loss for bewilder.
— Professor Lancelot Hogben (Interglossa)
(3) On the one side we have the free personality: by definition it is not neurotic, for
it has neither conflict nor dream. Its desires, such as they are, are transparent, for they
are just what institutional approval keeps in the forefront of consciousness; another
institutional pattern would alter their number and intensity; there is little in them
that is natural, irreducible, or culturally dangerous. But on the other side, the social
bond itself is nothing but the mutual reflection of these self-secure integrities. Recall
the definition of love. Is not this the very picture of a small academic? Where is there
a place in this hall of mirrors for either personality or fraternity?
— Essay on psychology in Politics (New York)
(4) All the “best people” from the gentlemen’s clubs, and all the frantic fascist captains, united in common hatred of Socialism and bestial horror of the rising tide of
the mass revolutionary movement, have turned to acts of provocation, to foul incendiarism, to medieval legends of poisoned wells, to legalize their own destruction of
proletarian organizations, and rouse the agitated petty-bourgeoisie to chauvinistic
fervor on behalf of the fight against the revolutionary way out of the crisis.
— Communist pamphlet
(5) If a new spirit is to be infused into this old country, there is one thorny and contentious reform which must be tackled, and that is the humanization and galvanization of the B.B.C. Timidity here will bespeak canker and atrophy of the soul. The
heart of Britain may be sound and of strong beat, for instance, but the British lion’s
roar at present is like that of Bottom in Shakespeare’s Midsummer Night’s Dream —
as gentle as any sucking dove. A virile new Britain cannot continue indefinitely to be
traduced in the eyes, or rather ears, of the world by the effete languors of Langham
Place, brazenly masquerading as “standard English.” When the Voice of Britain is

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 708

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

oRwELL​ •​ PoLITICS​AnD​ThE​En​gLISh​LAnguAgE​

709

heard at nine o’clock, better far and infinitely less ludicrous to hear aitches honestly
dropped than the present priggish, inflated, inhibited, school-ma’amish arch braying
of blameless bashful mewing maidens!
— Letter in Tribune

Each of these passages has faults of its own, but, quite apart from avoidable
ugliness, two qualities are common to all of them. The first is staleness of imagery; the other is lack of precision. The writer either had a meaning and cannot
express it, or he inadvertently says something else, or he is almost indifferent as to
whether his words mean anything or not. This mixture of vagueness and sheer
incompetence is the most marked characteristic of modern English prose, and
especially of any kind of political writing. As soon as certain topics are raised, the
concrete melts into the abstract and no one seems able to think of terms of speech
that are not hackneyed: prose consists less and less of words chosen for the sake of
their meaning, and more and more of phrases tacked together like the sections of
a prefabricated henhouse. I list below, with notes and examples, various of the
tricks by means of which the work of prose-construction is habitually dodged:

Dying Metaphors
A newly invented metaphor assists thought by evoking a visual image, while on
the other hand a metaphor which is technically “dead” (e.g., iron resolution) has
in effect reverted to being an ordinary word and can generally be used without
loss of vividness. But in between these two classes there is a huge dump of wornout metaphors which have lost all evocative power and are merely used because
they save people the trouble of inventing phrases for themselves. Examples are:
Ring the changes on, take up the cudgels for, toe the line, ride roughshod over, stand
shoulder to shoulder with, play into the hands of, no axe to grind, grist to the mill,
fishing in troubled waters, rift within the lute, on the order of the day, Achilles’ heel,
swan song, hotbed. Many of these are used without knowledge of their meaning
(what is a “rift,” for instance?), and incompatible metaphors are frequently mixed,
a sure sign that the writer is not interested in what he is saying. Some metaphors
now current have been twisted out of their original meaning without those who
use them even being aware of the fact. For example, toe the line is sometimes written tow the line. Another example is the hammer and the anvil, now always used
with the implication that the anvil gets the worst of it. In real life it is always the
anvil that breaks the hammer, never the other way about: a writer who stopped to
think what he was saying would be aware of this, and would avoid perverting the
original phrase.

5

Operators or Verbal False Limbs
These save the trouble of picking out appropriate verbs and nouns, and at the
same time pad each sentence with extra syllables which give it an appearance of

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 709

6/18/12 3:12 PM

710​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

symmetry. Characteristic phrases are render inoperative, militate against, make
contact with, be subjected to, give rise to, give grounds for, have the effect of, play a
leading part (role) in, make itself felt, take effect, exhibit a tendency to, serve the
purpose of, etc., etc. The keynote is, the elimination of simple verbs. Instead of
being a single word, such as break, stop, spoil, mend, kill, a verb becomes a phrase,
made up of a noun or adjective tacked on to some general-purposes verb such as
prove, serve, form, play, render. In addition, the passive voice is wherever possible
used in preference to the active, and noun constructions are used instead of gerunds (by examination of instead of by examining). The range of verbs is further
cut down by means of the -ize and de- formations, and the banal statements are
given an appearance of profundity by means of the not un- formation. Simple
conjunctions and prepositions are replaced by such phrases as with respect to,
having regard to, the fact that, by dint of, in view of, in the interests of, on the hypothesis that; and the ends of sentences are saved from anticlimax by such resounding
commonplaces as greatly to be desired, cannot be left out of account, a development
to be expected in the near future, deserving of serious consideration, brought to a
satisfactory conclusion, and so on and so forth.

Pretentious Diction
Words like phenomenon, element, individual (as noun), objective, categorical, effective, virtual, basic, primary, promote, constitute, exhibit, exploit, utilize, eliminate,
liquidate are used to dress up simple statements and give an air of scientific
impartiality to biased judgments. Adjectives like epoch-making, epic, historic,
unforgettable, triumphant, age-old, inevitable, inexorable, veritable are used to dignify the sordid processes of international politics, while writing that aims at glorifying war usually takes on an archaic color, its characteristic words being: realm,
throne, chariot, mailed fist, trident, sword, shield, buckler, banner, jackboot, clarion.
Foreign words and expressions such as cul de sac, ancien régime, deus ex machina,
mutatis mutandis, status quo, Gleichschaltung, Weltanschauung are used to give an
air of culture and elegance. Except for the useful abbreviations i.e., e.g., and etc.,
there is no real need for any of the hundreds of foreign phrases now current in
English. Bad writers, and especially scientific, political and sociological writers,
are nearly always haunted by the notion that Latin or Greek words are grander
than Saxon ones, and unnecessary words like expedite, ameliorate, predict, extraneous, deracinated, clandestine, subaqueous and hundreds of others constantly
gain ground from their Anglo-Saxon opposite numbers.1 The jargon peculiar to
1

An interesting illustration of this is the way in which the English flower names which were in
use till very recently are being ousted by Greek ones, snapdragon becoming antirrhinum, forgetme-not becoming myosotis, etc. It is hard to see any practical reason for this change of fashion:
it is probably due to an instinctive turning-away from the more homely word and a vague feeling that the Greek word is scientific.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 710

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

oRwELL​ •​ PoLITICS​AnD​ThE​En​gLISh​LAnguAgE​

711

Marxist writing (hyena, hangman, cannibal, petty bourgeois, these gentry, lacquey,
flunkey, mad dog, White Guard, etc.) consists largely of words and phrases translated from Russian, German or French; but the normal way of coining a new
word is to use a Latin or Greek root with the appropriate affix and, where necessary, the -ize formation. It is often easier to make up words of this kind (deregionalize, impermissible, extramarital, non-fragmentary and so forth) than to think up
the English words that will cover one’s meaning. The result, in general, is an
increase in slovenliness and vagueness.

Meaningless Words
In certain kinds of writing, particularly in art criticism and literary criticism, it is
normal to come across long passages which are almost completely lacking in
meaning.2 Words like romantic, plastic, values, human, dead, sentimental, natural,
vitality, as used in art criticism, are strictly meaningless, in the sense that they not
only do not point to any discoverable object, but are hardly ever expected to do
so by the reader. When one critic writes, “The outstanding feature of Mr. X’s work
is its living quality,” while another writes, “The immediately striking thing about
Mr. X’s work is its peculiar deadness,” the reader accepts this as a simple difference of opinion. If words like black and white were involved, instead of the jargon
words dead and living, he would see at once that language was being used in an
improper way. Many political words are similarly abused. The word Fascism has
now no meaning except in so far as it signifies “something not desirable.” The
words democracy, socialism, freedom, patriotic, realistic, justice have each of them
several different meanings which cannot be reconciled with one another. In the
case of a word like democracy, not only is there no agreed definition, but the
attempt to make one is resisted from all sides. It is almost universally felt that
when we call a country democratic we are praising it: consequently the defenders
of every kind of régime claim that it is a democracy, and fear that they might have
to stop using the word if it were tied down to any one meaning. Words of this
kind are often used in a consciously dishonest way. That is, the person who uses
them has his own private definition, but allows his hearer to think he means
something quite different. Statements like Marshal Pétain3 was a true patriot, The
Soviet Press is the freest in the world, The Catholic Church is opposed to persecution
are almost always made with intent to deceive. Other words used in variable
2
Example: “Comfort’s catholicity of perception and image, strangely Whitmanesque in range,
almost the exact opposite in aesthetic compulsion, continues to evoke that trembling atmospheric accumulative hinting at a cruel, an inexorably serene timelessness. . . . Wrey Gardiner
scores by aiming at simple bull’s-eyes with precision. Only they are not so simple, and through
this contented sadness runs more than the surface bitter-sweet of resignation.”
3Henri Phillipe Pétain (1856–1951), head of the French government during the German occupation from 1940 to 1945, was convicted of treason in 1945. — Eds.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 711

6/18/12 3:12 PM

712​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

meanings, in most cases more or less dishonestly, are: class, totalitarian, science,
progressive, reactionary, bourgeois, equality.
Now that I have made this catalogue of swindles and perversions, let me give
another example of the kind of writing that they lead to. This time it must of its
nature be an imaginary one. I am going to translate a passage of good English
into modern English of the worst sort. Here is a well-known verse from Ecclesiastes:
I returned and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle
to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding,
nor yet favour to men of skill; but time and chance happeneth to them all.

Here it is in modern English:

10

Objective consideration of contemporary phenomena compels the conclusion
that success or failure in competitive activities exhibits no tendency to be commensurate with innate capacity, but that a considerable element of the unpredictable
must invariably be taken into account.

This is a parody, but not a very gross one. Exhibit (3), above, for instance,
contains several patches of the same kind of English. It will be seen that I have not
made a full translation. The beginning and ending of the sentence follow the
original meaning fairly closely, but in the middle the concrete illustrations —
race, battle, bread — dissolve into the vague phrase “success or failure in competitive activities.” This had to be so, because no modern writer of the kind I am
discussing — no one capable of using phrases like “objective consideration of
contemporary phenomena” — would ever tabulate his thoughts in that precise
and detailed way. The whole tendency of modern prose is away from concreteness. Now analyse these two sentences a little more closely. The first contains
forty-nine words but only sixty syllables, and all its words are those of everyday
life. The second contains thirty-eight words of ninety syllables: eighteen of its
words are from Latin roots, and one from Greek. The first sentence contains six
vivid images, and only one phrase (“time and chance”) that could be called vague.
The second contains not a single fresh, arresting phrase, and in spite of its ninety
syllables it gives only a shortened version of the meaning contained in the first.
Yet without a doubt it is the second kind of sentence that is gaining ground in
modern English. I do not want to exaggerate. This kind of writing is not yet universal, and outcrops of simplicity will occur here and there in the worst-written
page. Still, if you or I were to write a few lines on the uncertainty of human fortunes, we should probably come much nearer to my imaginary sentence than to
the one from Ecclesiastes.
As I have tried to show, modern writing at its worst does not consist in picking out words for the sake of their meaning and inventing images in order to
make the meaning clearer. It consists in gumming together long strips of words
which have already been set in order by someone else, and making the results
presentable by sheer humbug. The attraction of this way of writing is that it is

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 712

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

oRwELL​ •​ PoLITICS​AnD​ThE​En​gLISh​LAnguAgE​

713

easy. It is easier — even quicker, once you have the habit — to say In my opinion it
is not an unjustifiable assumption that than to say I think. If you use ready-made
phrases, you not only don’t have to hunt about for words; you also don’t have to
bother with the rhythms of your sentences, since these phrases are generally so
arranged as to be more or less euphonious. When you are composing in a hurry —
when you are dictating to a stenographer, for instance, or making a public
speech — it is natural to fall into a pretentious, Latinized style. Tags like a consideration which we should do well to bear in mind or a conclusion to which all of us
would readily assent will save many a sentence from coming down with a bump.
By using stale metaphors, similes and idioms, you save much mental effort, at the
cost of leaving your meaning vague, not only for your reader but for yourself.
This is the significance of mixed metaphors. The sole aim of a metaphor is to call
up a visual image. When these images clash — as in The Fascist octopus has sung
its swan song, the jackboot is thrown into the melting pot — it can be taken as certain that the writer is not seeing a mental image of the objects he is naming; in
other words he is not really thinking. Look again at the examples I gave at the
beginning of this essay. Professor Laski (1) uses five negatives in fifty-three words.
One of these is superfluous, making nonsense of the whole passage, and in addition there is the slip alien for akin, making further nonsense, and several avoidable pieces of clumsiness which increase the general vagueness. Professor Hogben
(2) plays ducks and drakes with a battery which is able to write prescriptions, and,
while disapproving of the everyday phrase put up with, is unwilling to look egregious up in the dictionary and see what it means; (3), if one takes an uncharitable
attitude towards it, is simply meaningless: probably one could work out its
intended meaning by reading the whole of the article in which it occurs. In (4),
the writer knows more or less what he wants to say, but an accumulation of stale
phrases chokes him like tea leaves blocking a sink. In (5), words and meaning
have almost parted company. People who write in this manner usually have a
general emotional meaning — they dislike one thing and want to express solidarity with another — but they are not interested in the detail of what they are saying. A scrupulous writer, in every sentence that he writes, will ask himself at least
four questions, thus: What am I trying to say? What words will express it? What
image or idiom will make it clearer? Is this image fresh enough to have an effect?
And he will probably ask himself two more: Could I put it more shortly? Have I
said anything that is avoidably ugly? But you are not obliged to go to all this
trouble. You can shirk it by simply throwing your mind open and letting the
ready-made phrases come crowding in. They will construct your sentences for
you — even think your thoughts for you, to a certain extent — and at need they
will perform the important service of partially concealing your meaning even
from yourself. It is at this point that the special connection between politics and
the debasement of language becomes clear.
In our time it is broadly true that political writing is bad writing. Where it is
not true, it will generally be found that the writer is some kind of rebel, expressing

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 713

6/18/12 3:12 PM

714​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

his private opinions and not a “party line.” Orthodoxy, of whatever color, seems to
demand a lifeless, imitative style. The political dialects to be found in pamphlets,
leading articles, manifestos, White Papers and the speeches of undersecretaries
do, of course, vary from party to party, but they are all alike in that one almost
never finds in them a fresh, vivid, homemade turn of speech. When one watches
some tired hack on the platform mechanically repeating the familiar phrases —
bestial atrocities, iron heel, bloodstained tyranny, free peoples of the world, stand
shoulder to shoulder — one often has a curious feeling that one is not watching a
live human being but some kind of dummy: a feeling which suddenly becomes
stronger at moments when the light catches the speaker’s spectacles and turns
them into blank discs which seem to have no eyes behind them. And this is not
altogether fanciful. A speaker who uses that kind of phraseology has gone some
distance towards turning himself into a machine. The appropriate noises are
coming out of his larynx, but his brain is not involved as it would be if he were
choosing his words for himself. If the speech he is making is one that he is accustomed to make over and over again, he may be almost unconscious of what he is
saying, as one is when one utters the responses in church. And this reduced state of
consciousness, if not indispensable, is at any rate favorable to political conformity.
In our time, political speech and writing are largely the defence of the indefensible. Things like the continuance of British rule in India, the Russian purges
and deportations, the dropping of the atom bombs on Japan, can indeed be
defended, but only by arguments which are too brutal for most people to face,
and which do not square with the professed aims of political parties. Thus political language has to consist largely of euphemism, question-begging and sheer
cloudy vagueness. Defenceless villages are bombarded from the air, the inhabitants driven out into the countryside, the cattle machine-gunned, the huts set on
fire with incendiary bullets: this is called pacification. Millions of peasants are
robbed of their farms and sent trudging along the roads with no more than they
can carry: this is called transfer of population or rectification of frontiers. People are
imprisoned for years without trial, or shot in the back of the neck or sent to die
of scurvy in Arctic lumber camps: this is called elimination of unreliable elements.
Such phraseology is needed if one wants to name things without calling up mental pictures of them. Consider for instance some comfortable English professor
defending Russian totalitarianism. He cannot say outright, “I believe in killing off
your opponents when you can get good results by doing so.” Probably, therefore,
he will say something like this:
While freely conceding that the Soviet régime exhibits certain features which the
humanitarian may be inclined to deplore, we must, I think, agree that a certain curtailment of the right to political opposition is an unavoidable concomitant of transitional periods, and that the rigors which the Russian people have been called upon to
undergo have been amply justified in the sphere of concrete achievement.

The inflated style is itself a kind of euphemism. A mass of Latin words falls
upon the facts like soft snow, blurring the outlines and covering up all the details.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 714

15

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

oRwELL​ •​ PoLITICS​AnD​ThE​En​gLISh​LAnguAgE​

715

The great enemy of clear language is insincerity. When there is a gap between
one’s real and one’s declared aims, one turns as it were instinctively to long words
and exhausted idioms, like a cuttlefish squirting out ink. In our age there is no
such thing as “keeping out of politics.” All issues are political issues, and politics
itself is a mass of lies, evasions, folly, hatred and schizophrenia. When the general
atmosphere is bad, language must suffer. I should expect to find — this is a guess
which I have not sufficient knowledge to verify — that the German, Russian and
Italian languages have all deteriorated in the last ten or fifteen years, as a result of
dictatorship.
But if thought corrupts language, language can also corrupt thought. A bad
usage can spread by tradition and imitation, even among people who should and
do know better. The debased language that I have been discussing is in some ways
very convenient. Phrases like a not unjustifiable assumption, leaves much to be
desired, would serve no good purpose, a consideration which we should do well to
bear in mind, are a continuous temptation, a packet of aspirins always at one’s
elbow. Look back through this essay, and for certain you will find that I have again
and again committed the very faults I am protesting against. By this morning’s
post I have received a pamphlet dealing with conditions in Germany. The author
tells me that he “felt impelled” to write it. I open it at random, and here is almost
the first sentence that I see: “[The Allies] have an opportunity not only of achieving a radical transformation of Germany’s social and political structure in such a
way as to avoid a nationalistic reaction in Germany itself, but at the same time of
laying the foundation of a cooperative and unified Europe.” You see, he “feels
impelled” to write — feels, presumably, that he has something new to say — and
yet his words, like cavalry horses answering the bugle, group themselves automatically into the familiar dreary pattern. This invasion of one’s mind by readymade phrases (lay the foundations, achieve a radical transformation) can only be
prevented if one is constantly on guard against them, and every such phrase
anaesthetizes a portion of one’s brain.
I said earlier that the decadence of our language is probably curable. Those who
deny this would argue, if they produced an argument at all, that language merely
reflects existing social conditions, and that we cannot influence its development
by any direct tinkering with words and constructions. So far as the general tone
or spirit of a language goes, this may be true, but it is not true in detail. Silly words
and expressions have often disappeared, not through any evolutionary process
but owing to the conscious action of a minority. Two recent examples were explore
every avenue and leave no stone unturned, which were killed by the jeers of a few
journalists. There is a long list of flyblown metaphors which could similarly be
got rid of if enough people would interest themselves in the job; and it should
also be possible to laugh the not un- formation out of existence,4 to reduce the
amount of Latin and Greek in the average sentence, to drive out foreign phrases
4One can cure oneself of the not un- formation by memorizing this sentence: A not unblack dog

was chasing a not unsmall rabbit across a not ungreen field.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 715

6/18/12 3:12 PM

716​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

and strayed scientific words, and, in general, to make pretentiousness unfashionable. But all these are minor points. The defence of the English language implies
more than this, and perhaps it is best to start by saying what it does not imply.
To begin with it has nothing to do with archaism, with the salvaging of obsolete words and turns of speech, or with the setting up of a “standard English”
which must never be departed from. On the contrary, it is especially concerned
with the scrapping of every word or idiom which has outworn its usefulness. It
has nothing to do with correct grammar and syntax, which are of no importance
so long as one makes one’s meaning clear, or with the avoidance of Americanisms, or with having what is called a “good prose style.” On the other hand it is not
concerned with fake simplicity and the attempt to make written English colloquial. Nor does it even imply in every case preferring the Saxon word to the Latin
one, though it does imply using the fewest and shortest words that will cover
one’s meaning. What is above all needed is to let the meaning choose the word,
and not the other way about. In prose, the worst thing one can do with words is
to surrender to them. When you think of a concrete object, you think wordlessly,
and then, if you want to describe the thing you have been visualizing you probably hunt about till you find the exact words that seem to fit it. When you think
of something abstract you are more inclined to use words from the start, and
unless you make a conscious effort to prevent it, the existing dialect will come
rushing in and do the job for you, at the expense of blurring or even changing
your meaning. Probably it is better to put off using words as long as possible and
get one’s meaning as clear as one can through pictures or sensations. Afterwards
one can choose — not simply accept — the phrases that will best cover the meaning, and then switch round and decide what impression one’s words are likely to
make on another person. This last effort of the mind cuts out all stale or mixed
images, all prefabricated phrases, needless repetitions, and humbug and vagueness generally. But one can often be in doubt about the effect of a word or a
phrase, and one needs rules that one can rely on when instinct fails. I think the
following rules will cover most cases:
(i) Never use a metaphor, simile or other figure of speech which you are used
to seeing in print.
(ii) Never use a long word where a short one will do.
(iii) If it is possible to cut a word out, always cut it out.
(iv) Never use the passive where you can use the active.
(v) Never use a foreign phrase, a scientific word or a jargon word if you can
think of an everyday English equivalent.
(vi) Break any of these rules sooner than say anything outright barbarous.
These rules sound elementary, and so they are, but they demand a deep change of
attitude in anyone who has grown used to writing in the style now fashionable.
One could keep all of them and still write bad English, but one could not write

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 716

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

oRwELL​ •​ PoLITICS​AnD​ThE​En​gLISh​LAnguAgE​

717

the kind of stuff that I quoted in those five specimens at the beginning of this
article.
I have not here been considering the literary use of language, but merely
language as an instrument for expressing and not for concealing or preventing
thought. Stuart Chase5 and others have come near to claiming that all abstract
words are meaningless, and have used this as a pretext for advocating a kind of
political quietism. Since you don’t know what Fascism is, how can you struggle
against Fascism? One need not swallow such absurdities as this, but one ought to
recognize that the present political chaos is connected with the decay of language, and that one can probably bring about some improvement by starting at
the verbal end. If you simplify your English, you are freed from the worst follies of orthodoxy. You cannot speak any of the necessary dialects, and when you
make a stupid remark its stupidity will be obvious, even to yourself. Political
language — and with variations this is true of all political parties, from Conservatives to Anarchists — is designed to make lies sound truthful and murder
respectable, and to give an appearance of solidity to pure wind. One cannot
change this all in a moment, but one can at least change one’s own habits, and
from time to time one can even, if one jeers loudly enough, send some worn-out
and useless phrase — some jackboot, Achilles’ heel, hotbed, melting pot, acid test,
veritable inferno or other lump of verbal refuse — into the dustbin where it
belongs.

Questions for Discussion
1. George Orwell argues against the “belief that language is a natural growth and not
an instrument which we shape for our own purposes” (para. 1). Explain why you
do or do not agree with Orwell’s position.
2. In speeches by contemporary politicians, find examples of each type of writing
problem that Orwell discusses: dying metaphors, operators or verbal false limbs,
pretentious diction, and meaningless words. Explain why the examples you’ve
cited are “swindles and perversions,” as Orwell calls them (para. 9).
3. Why does Orwell object to “ready-made phrases” and “mixed metaphors” (para. 12)?
4. In paragraph 12, Orwell says that every writer “ask[s] himself at least four questions, thus: What am I trying to say? What words will express it? What image or
idiom will make it clearer? Is this image fresh enough to have an effect?” What do
you think of these questions? Do you agree or disagree that they are the most
essential questions for writers to ask themselves? Explain why.
5

Stuart Chase (1888–1985) popularized the field of general semantics in his book The Tyranny
of Words (1958). General semantics argued that words could never capture the entire essence of
a thing; for instance, you can describe a smell, but you cannot directly share the experience
with someone else. — Eds.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 717

6/18/12 3:12 PM

718​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

5. What does Orwell mean when he asserts, “But if thought corrupts language, language can also corrupt thought” (para. 16)?
6. Do you agree with Orwell that “correct grammar and syntax . . . are of no importance so long as one makes one’s meaning clear” (para. 18)? Explain. If you do agree,
cite examples from your own experience or reading that support your position.

Questions on Rhetoric and Style
1. What is Orwell’s thesis? Does he actually state it, or is it implied?
2. How effective is Orwell’s analogy of the cause and effect of alcohol abuse to the
demise of language (para. 2)?
3. In each of the following paragraphs — paragraphs 4, 5, 12, 15, and 16 — Orwell
uses at least one metaphor or simile. Identify each figure of speech. Then explain
how it works and whether you find it rhetorically effective.
4. Orwell develops his ideas through extensive use of examples. Try rewriting paragraph 5, 6, 7, or 8 without examples. How does the effect of the paragraph change?
5. What is the purpose of the additional information provided in Orwell’s footnotes
for paragraphs 7 and 8? Why do you think Orwell chose to put the information
in footnotes rather than in the main text?
6. Orwell wrote this essay before he was well known for his novels. He uses the first
person, yet he does not directly state his qualifications to speak on language. How
does he establish ethos? Should he have been more direct?
7. How would you describe the overall organization of this essay? Examine its
movement, from the examples in the opening to the rules near the ending.
8. What is Orwell’s purpose in writing this essay? How might the historical context
of post–World War II affect that purpose? Cite specific passages to support your
response.
9. How would you describe the tone of Orwell’s essay? Can you sum it up in one
word, or does the essay range from one tone to another? Cite specific passages to
support your response.
10. Find examples in the essay where Orwell is guilty of the four faults that characterize the writing he is criticizing.

Suggestions for Writing
1. Using examples from your own writing, observation of popular culture, or reading of contemporary texts, explain why you do or do not agree with Orwell’s
opening statement that “the English language is in a bad way.”
2. Write an essay agreeing or disagreeing with the following assertion by Orwell in
paragraph 13: “In our time it is broadly true that political writing is bad writing.
Where it is not true, it will generally be found that the writer is some kind of rebel,
expressing his private opinions and not a ‘party line.’ Orthodoxy, of whatever
color, seems to demand a lifeless, imitative style.” Support your position with

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 718

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

oRwELL​ •​ PoLITICS​AnD​ThE​En​gLISh​LAnguAgE​

719

examples from political speeches, newspaper columns and articles, advertisements, and Web sites.
3. Compare and contrast paragraph 14 in Orwell’s essay with the following paragraph from Toni Morrison’s 1993 Nobel Prize speech.
The systematic looting of language can be recognized by the tendency of its users to
forgo its nuanced, complex, mid-wifery properties for menace and subjugation.
Oppressive language does more than represent violence; it is violence; does more
than represent the limits of knowledge; it limits knowledge. Whether it is obscuring
state language or the faux-language of mindless media; whether it is the proud but
calcified language of the academy or the commodity driven language of science;
whether it is the malign language of law-without-ethics, or language designed for
the estrangement of minorities, hiding its racist plunder in its literary cheek — it
must be rejected, altered and exposed. It is the language that drinks blood, laps vulnerabilities, tucks its fascist boots under crinolines of respectability and patriotism
as it moves relentlessly toward the bottom line and the bottomed-out mind. Sexist
language, racist language, theistic language — all are typical of the policing languages of mastery, and cannot, do not permit new knowledge or encourage the
mutual exchange of ideas.

4. Working in groups, find examples of writing in current newspapers or magazines
or a political speech that illustrate what Orwell calls “staleness of imagery” and
“lack of precision” (para. 11). Then revise the writing by applying one or more of
the six rules Orwell prescribes in the penultimate paragraph of his essay.
5. Orwell uses many terms that refer to language. Develop a glossary that has the following components: (1) the term as Orwell uses it, (2) a definition of the term, and
(3) an example from your own reading (including advertisements). Include the
following terms, along with any others you note: mixed metaphor, pretentious diction, euphemism, parody, idiom, archaic language (“archaism”), dialect.
6. Suppose “Politics and the English Language” were being reprinted in a specific
contemporary magazine. Redesign the essay by adding visual images and graphic
displays that will appeal to the magazine’s audience. Do not change Orwell’s language; simply download the essay from the Internet, and then redesign it by including graphs, charts, cartoon characters, icons, color, or different fonts. Explain the
rhetorical effect that you intend these changes to have.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 719

6/18/12 3:12 PM

Slang in America
Walt Whitman
walt​whitman​(1819–1892)​was​born​on​Long​Island​in​new​York.​he​worked​
as​a​teacher,​a​printer,​and​a​journalist​before​making​his​name​as​a​poet.​Known​
widely​for​his​free​verse​as​well​as​his​dem​o​cratic​spirit,​whitman​is​one​of​the​
most​influential​poets​in​the​En​glish​language.​his​major​work​is​Leaves of Grass​
(1855).​Among​the​famous​poems​from​that​collection​are​“Facing​west​from​Cali​fornia’s​Shores,”​“Crossing​Brooklyn​Ferry,”​and​“when​Lilacs​Last​in​the​Dooryard​Bloom’d,”​about​Abraham​Lincoln.​whitman’s​essay​“Slang​in​America”​was​
first​published​in​1885​in​the​North American Review​and​later​collected​in​November Boughs​(1888),​a​volume​of​whitman’s​prose​and​poetry.

V

iew’d freely, the English language is the accretion and growth of every
dialect, race, and range of time, and is both the free and compacted
composition of all. From this point of view, it stands for Language in the largest
sense, and is really the greatest of studies. It involves so much; is indeed a sort of
universal absorber, combiner, and conqueror. The scope of its etymologies is the
scope not only of man and civilization, but the history of Nature in all departments, and of the organic Universe, brought up to date; for all are comprehended
in words, and their backgrounds. This is when words become vitaliz’d, and stand
for things, as they unerringly and soon come to do, in the mind that enters on
their study with fitting spirit, grasp, and appreciation.
Slang, profoundly consider’d, is the lawless germinal element, below all
words and sentences, and behind all poetry, and proves a certain perennial rankness and protestantism in speech. As the United States inherit by far their most
precious possession — the language they talk and write — from the Old World,
under and out of its feudal institutes, I will allow myself to borrow a simile even
of those forms farthest removed from American Democracy. Considering Language then as some mighty potentate, into the majestic audience-hall of the monarch ever enters a personage like one of Shakespere’s clowns, and takes position
there, and plays a part even in the stateliest ceremonies. Such is Slang, or indirection, an attempt of common humanity to escape from bald literalism, and express
itself illimitably, which in highest walks produces poets and poems, and doubtless
in pre-historic times gave the start to, and perfected, the whole immense tangle of
the old mythologies. For, curious as it may appear, it is strictly the same impulsesource, the same thing. Slang, too, is the wholesome fermentation or eructation1
of those processes eternally active in language, by which froth and specks are
1The act of belching. — Eds.

720

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 720

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

whITMAn​ •​ SLAng​In​AMERICA​

721

thrown up, mostly to pass away; though occasionally to settle and permanently
chrystallize.
To make it plainer, it is certain that many of the oldest and solidest words we
use, were originally generated from the daring and license of slang. In the processes of word-formation, myriads die, but here and there the attempt attracts
superior meanings, becomes valuable and indispensable, and lives forever. Thus
the term right means literally only straight. Wrong primarily meant twisted, distorted. Integrity meant oneness. Spirit meant breath, or flame. A supercilious person was one who rais’d his eyebrows. To insult was to leap against. If you influenc’d
a man, you but flow’d into him. The Hebrew word which is translated prophesy
meant to bubble up and pour forth as a fountain. The enthusiast bubbles up with
the Spirit of God within him, and it pours forth from him like a fountain. The
word prophecy is misunderstood. Many suppose that it is limited to mere prediction; that is but the lesser portion of prophecy. The greater work is to reveal God.
Every true religious enthusiast is a prophet.
Language, be it remember’d, is not an abstract construction of the learn’d, or
of dictionary-makers, but is something arising out of the work, needs, ties, joys,
affections, tastes, of long generations of humanity, and has its bases broad and
low, close to the ground. Its final decisions are made by the masses, people nearest
the concrete, having most to do with actual land and sea. It impermeates all, the
Past as well as the Present, and is the grandest triumph of the human intellect.
“Those mighty works of art,” says Addington Symonds, “which we call languages,
in the construction of which whole peoples unconsciously co-operated, the forms
of which were determin’d not by individual genius, but by the instincts of successive generations, acting to one end, inherent in the nature of the race — Those
poems of pure thought and fancy, cadenced not in words, but in living imagery,
fountainheads of inspiration, mirrors of the mind of nascent nations, which we
call Mythologies — these surely are more marvellous in their infantine spontaneity than any more mature production of the races which evolv’d them. Yet we are
utterly ignorant of their embryology; the true science of Origins is yet in its cradle.”
Daring as it is to say so, in the growth of Language it is certain that the retrospect of slang from the start would be the recalling from their nebulous conditions of all that is poetical in the stores of human utterance. Moreover, the honest
delving, as of late years, by the German and British workers in comparative philology, has pierc’d and dispers’d many of the falsest bubbles of centuries; and will
disperse many more. It was long recorded that in Scandinavian mythology the
heroes in the Norse Paradise drank out of the skulls of their slain enemies. Later
investigation proves the word taken for skulls to mean horns of beasts slain in the
hunt. And what reader had not been exercis’d over the traces of that feudal custom, by which seigneurs warm’d their feet in the bowels of serfs, the abdomen
being open’d for the purpose? It now is made to appear that the serf was only
required to submit his unharm’d abdomen as a foot cushion while his lord supp’d,
and was required to chafe the legs of the seigneur with his hands.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 721

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

722​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

It is curiously in embryons and childhood, and among the illiterate, we always
find the groundwork and start, of this great science, and its noblest products.
What a relief most people have in speaking of a man not by his true and formal
name, with a “Mister” to it, but by some odd or homely appellative. The propensity to approach a meaning not directly and squarely, but by circuitous styles of
expression, seems indeed a born quality of the common people everywhere, evidenced by nick-names, and the inveterate determination of the masses to bestow
sub-titles, sometimes ridiculous, sometimes very apt. Always among the soldiers during the Secession War, one heard of “Little Mac” (Gen. McClellan), or
of “Uncle Billy” (Gen. Sherman). “The old man” was, of course, very common.
Among the rank and file, both armies, it was very general to speak of the different
States they came from by their slang names. Those from Maine were call’d Foxes;
New Hampshire, Granite Boys; Massachusetts, Bay Staters; Vermont, Green Mountain Boys; Rhode Island, Gun Flints; Connecticut, Wooden Nutmegs; New York,
Knickerbockers; New Jersey, Clam Catchers; Pennsylvania, Logher Heads; Delaware, Muskrats; Maryland, Claw Thumpers; Virginia, Beagles; North Carolina,
Tar Boilers; South Carolina, Weasels; Georgia, Buzzards; Louisiana, Creoles; Alabama, Lizzards; Kentucky, Corn Crackers; Ohio, Buckeyes; Michigan, Wolverines;
Indiana, Hoosiers; Illinois, Suckers; Missouri, Pukes; Mississippi, Tad Poles; Florida, Fly up the Creeks; Wisconsin, Badgers; Iowa, Hawkeyes; Oregon, Hard Cases.
Indeed I am not sure but slang names have more than once made Presidents. “Old
Hickory” (Gen. Jackson) is one case in point. “Tippecanoe, and Tyler, too,” another.
I find the same rule in the people’s conversations everywhere. I heard this
among the men of the city horse-cars, where the conductor is often call’d a
“snatcher” (i.e., because his characteristic duty is to constantly pull or snatch the
bell-strap, to stop or go on). Two young fellows are having a friendly talk, amid
which, says 1st conductor, “What did you do before you was a snatcher?” Answer
of 2d conductor, “Nail’d.” (Translation of answer: “I work’d as carpenter.”) What
is a “boom”? says one editor to another. “Esteem’d contemporary,” says the other,
“a boom is a bulge.” “Barefoot whiskey” is the Tennessee name for the undiluted
stimulant. In the slang of the New York common restaurant waiters a plate of
ham and beans is known as “stars and stripes,” codfish balls as “sleeve-buttons,”
and hash as “mystery.”
The Western States of the Union are, however, as may be supposed, the special
areas of slang, not only in conversation, but in names of localities, towns, rivers,
etc. A late Oregon traveller says:
On your way to Olympia by rail, you cross a river called the Shookum-Chuck; your
train stops at places named Newaukum, Tumwater, and Toutle; and if you seek further you will hear of whole counties labell’d Wahkiakum, or Snohomish, or Kitsar, or
Klikatat; and Cowlitz, Hookium, and Nenolelops greet and offend you. They complain in Olympia that Washington Territory gets but little immigration; but what
wonder? What man, having the whole American continent to choose from, would
willingly date his letters from the county of Snohomish or bring up his children in

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 722

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

whITMAn​ •​ SLAng​In​AMERICA​

723

the city of Nenolelops? The village of Tumwater is, as I am ready to bear witness, very
pretty indeed; but surely an emigrant would think twice before he establish’d himself
either there or at Toutle. Seattle is sufficiently barbarous; Stelicoom is no better; and
I suspect that the Northern Pacific Railroad terminus has been fixed at Tacoma
because it is one of the few places on Puget Sound whose name does not inspire
horror.

Then a Nevada paper chronicles the departure of a mining party from Reno:
“The toughest set of roosters that ever shook the dust off any town left Reno yesterday for the new mining district of Cornucopia. They came here from Virginia.
Among the crowd were four New York cock-fighters, two Chicago murderers,
three Baltimore bruisers, one Philadelphia prize-fighter, four San Francisco hoodlums, three Virginia beats, two Union Pacific roughs, and two check guerrillas.”
Among the far-west newspapers, have been, or are, The Fairplay (Colorado) Flume,
The Solid Muldoon, of Ouray, The Tombstone Epitaph, of Nevada, The Jimplecute,
of Texas, and The Bazoo, of Missouri. Shirttail Bend, Whiskey Flat, Puppytown,
Wild Yankee Ranch, Squaw Flat, Rawhide Ranch, Loafer’s Ravine, Squitch Gulch,
Toenail Lake, are a few of the names of places in Butte county, Cal.
Perhaps indeed no place or term gives more luxuriant illustrations of the fermentation processes I have mention’d, and their froth and specks, than those Mississippi and Pacific coast regions, at the present day. Hasty and grotesque as are
some of the names, others are of an appropriateness and originality unsurpassable.
This applies to the Indian words, which are often perfect. Oklahoma is proposed in
Congress for the name of one of our new Territories. Hog-eye, Lick-skillet, Rakepocket and Steal-easy are the names of some Texan towns. Miss Bremer found
among the aborigines the following names: Men’s, Horn-point; Round-Wind;
Stand-and-look-out; The-Cloud-that-goes-aside; Iron-toe; Seek-the-sun; Ironflash; Red-bottle; White-spindle; Black-dog; Two-feathers-of-honor; Gray-grass;
Bushy-tail; Thunder-face; Go-on-the-burning-sod; Spirits-of-the-dead. Women’s,
Keep-the-fire; Spiritual-woman; Second-daughter-of-the-house; Blue-bird.
Certainly philologists have not given enough attention to this element and its
results, which, I repeat, can probably be found working every where to-day, amid
modern conditions, with as much life and activity as in far-back Greece or India,
under prehistoric ones. Then the wit — the rich flashes of humor and genius and
poetry — darting out often from a gang of laborers, railroad-men, miners, drivers
or boatmen! How often have I hover’d at the edge of a crowd of them, to hear
their repartees and impromptus! You get more real fun from half an hour with
them than from the books of all “the American humorists.”
The science of language has large and close analogies in geological science,
with its ceaseless evolution, its fossils, and its numberless submerged layers and
hidden strata, the infinite go-before of the present. Or, perhaps Language is more
like some vast living body, or perennial body of bodies. And slang not only brings
the first feeders of it, but is afterward the start of fancy, imagination and humor,
breathing into its nostrils the breath of life.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 723

10

6/18/12 3:12 PM

724​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

Exploring the Text
1. Why is slang particularly American, according to Walt Whitman? Do you think
this is still the case in twenty-first-century America?
2. Whitman opens his essay with a discussion of the English language. In what ways
does this paragraph lay the foundation for the ideas that follow?
3. In paragraph 2, Whitman defines slang as “the lawless germinal element, below
all words and sentences, and behind all poetry, and proves a certain perennial
rankness and protestantism in speech.” Divide that definition into specific parts,
and analyze the meaning of each one. Thus, for instance, why is slang “lawless”?
Use examples from today’s slang to illustrate Whitman’s definition.
4. In paragraph 2, Whitman uses two metaphors. What are they? Why is each one a
fitting way to explore the meaning of slang? Is one more effective than the other?
Explain.
5. Whitman opens paragraph 3 with the transitional phrase, “To make it plainer.”
What does he do in that paragraph to make his perspective on slang “plainer”?
6. What is the relationship between slang and mythology, according to Whitman?
7. In paragraphs 6–10, Whitman presents numerous examples as evidence. Do
these illustrate a single point or several points? Explain what point(s) you believe
they support.
8. What opinion of American humorists does Whitman imply in paragraph 11? Do
you think that expressing this view undercuts his essay or strengthens it? Explain
your response.
9. How would you describe the overall tone of this essay? How does the final paragraph, including the metaphors, contribute to the tone?
10. How does this essay reflect Whitman’s poetry in terms of style and/or content? If
you are familiar with his work, select your own examples; if you are not, you
might consider “Song of Myself ” or even the short poem “Mannahatta.”
11. Apply the following definition of slang from Whitman’s essay to examples that
you know from your own experience or study: “an attempt of common humanity
to escape from bald literalism, and express itself illimitably, which in highest
walks produces poets and poems . . .” (para. 2).
12. A more current essay by Tom Dalzell, an expert on American slang, examines the
impact of young people on its development:
Whatever its source, youth slang is a core element of youth culture, as a defiant gesture of resistance and an emblem of tribe identity. Fashion and hair styles are other
key manifestations of a generation’s identity, but they can be easily regulated by
adult authorities. With music and language, regulation and restriction are much
more difficult. Even the most vigilant and repressive attempts by adult authority
cannot completely eradicate slang and music with its slang lyrics.

Support, challenge, or qualify this view with evidence from your own generation
or another with which you are familiar.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 724

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

AnzALDúA​ •​ how​To​TAME​A​wILD​TonguE​

725

How to Tame a Wild Tongue
Gloria Anzaldúa
A​poet,​teacher,​scholar,​and​political​activist,​gloria​Evangelina​Anzaldúa​(1942–
2004)​is​known​for​her​writings​about​the​social​and​cultural​marginalization​of​disenfranchised​​people.​She​grew​up​in​the​Rio​grande​Valley​of​southern​Texas,​where​
her​parents​were​sharecroppers.​She​received​her​BA​from​Pan​American​university​and​her​MA​from​the​university​of​Texas​at​Austin.​Anzaldúa​was​completing​her​
doctoral​degree​from​the​university​of​Cal​i​fornia–Santa​Cruz​at​the​time​of​her​death;​
it​was​awarded​posthumously​in​2005.​She​coauthored​with​Cherrie​Moraga​This
Bridge Called My Back: Writings by Radical Women of Color​(1981).​her​most​
well-​known​publication​is​Borderlands/La Frontera​(1987),​which​is​a​combination​
of​ narrative,​ historical​ and​ linguistic​ analysis,​ and​ poetry​ about​ the​ concept​ of​
borders​ among​ classes,​ cultures,​ genders,​ and​ languages.​ The​ following​ essay​
from​Borderlands/La Frontera explores​the​relationship​of​identity​and​language.

“W

e’re going to have to control your tongue,” the dentist says, pulling
out all the metal from my mouth. Silver bits plop and tinkle into
the basin. My mouth is a motherlode.
The dentist is cleaning out my roots. I get a whiff of the stench when I gasp.
“I can’t cap that tooth yet, you’re still draining,” he says.
“We’re going to have to do something about your tongue,” I hear the anger
rising in his voice. My tongue keeps pushing out the wads of cotton, pushing back
the drills, the long thin needles. “I’ve never seen anything as strong or as stubborn,” he says. And I think, how do you tame a wild tongue, train it to be quiet,
how do you bridle and saddle it? How do you make it lie down?
“Who is to say that robbing a people of its language is less violent than war?”
— Ray Gwyn Smith1

I remember being caught speaking Spanish at recess — that was good for
three licks on the knuckles with a sharp ruler. I remember being sent to the corner
of the classroom for “talking back” to the Anglo teacher when all I was trying to
do was tell her how to pronounce my name. “If you want to be American, speak
‘American.’ If you don’t like it, go back to Mexico where you belong.”
“I want you to speak English. Pa’ hallar buen trabajo tienes que saber hablar el
inglés bien. Qué vale toda tu educación si todavía hablas inglés con un ‘accent,’ ” my
mother would say, mortified that I spoke English like a Mexican. At Pan American University, I and all Chicano students were required to take two speech
classes. Their purpose: to get rid of our accents.
Attacks on one’s form of expression with the intent to censor are a violation
of the First Amendment. El Anglo con cara de inocente nos arrancó la lengua. Wild
tongues can’t be tamed, they can only be cut out.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 725

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

726​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

Overcoming the Tradition of Silence
Ahogadas, escupimos el oscuro.
Peleando con nuestra propia sombra
el silencio nos sepulta.

En boca cerrada no entran moscas. “Flies don’t enter a closed mouth” is a saying I
kept hearing when I was a child. Ser habladora was to be a gossip and a liar, to talk
too much. Muchachitas bien criadas, well-bred girls don’t answer back. Es una
falta de respeto to talk back to one’s mother or father. I remember one of the sins
I’d recite to the priest in the confession box the few times I went to confession:
talking back to my mother, hablar pa’ ’tras, repelar. Hocicona, repelona, chismosa,
having a big mouth, questioning, carrying tales are all signs of being mal criada.
In my culture they are all words that are derogatory if applied to women — I’ve
never heard them applied to men.
The first time I heard two women, a Puerto Rican and a Cuban, say the word
“nosotras,” I was shocked. I had not known the word existed. Chicanas use nosotros
whether we’re male or female. We are robbed of our female being by the masculine plural. Language is a male discourse.
And our tongues have become
dry
the wilderness has
dried out our tongues
and
we have forgotten speech.
— Irena Klepfisz2

Even our own people, other Spanish speakers nos quieren poner candados en
la boca. They would hold us back with their bag of reglas de academia.
Oyé como ladra: el lenguaje de la frontera
Quien tiene boca se equivoca.
— Mexican saying

“Pocho, cultural traitor, you’re speaking the oppressor’s language by speaking
English, you’re ruining the Spanish language,” I have been accused by various
Latinos and Latinas. Chicano Spanish is considered by the purist and by most
Latinos deficient, a mutilation of Spanish.
But Chicano Spanish is a border tongue which developed naturally. Change,
evolución, enriquecimiento de palabras nuevas por invención o adopción have created variants of Chicano Spanish, un nuevo lenguaje. Un lenguaje que corresponde
a un modo de vivir. Chicano Spanish is not incorrect, it is a living language.
For a people who are neither Spanish nor live in a country in which Spanish
is the first language; for a people who live in a country in which English is the
reigning tongue but who are not Anglo; for a people who cannot entirely identify

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 726

10

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

AnzALDúA​ •​ how​To​TAME​A​wILD​TonguE​

727

with either standard (formal, Castillian) Spanish nor standard English, what
recourse is left to them but to create their own language? A language which they
can connect their identity to, one capable of communicating the realities and
values true to themselves — a language with terms that are neither español ni
inglés, but both. We speak a patois, a forked tongue, a variation of two languages.
Chicano Spanish sprang out of the Chicanos’ need to identify ourselves as a
distinct people. We needed a language with which we could communicate with
ourselves, a secret language. For some of us, language is a homeland closer than
the Southwest — for many Chicanos today live in the Midwest and the East. And
because we are a complex, heterogeneous people, we speak many languages. Some
of the languages we speak are:
1. Standard English
2. Working class and slang English
3. Standard Spanish
4. Standard Mexican Spanish
5. North Mexican Spanish dialect
6. Chicano Spanish (Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and California have regional
variations)
7. Tex-Mex
8. Pachuco (called caló)
My “home” tongues are the languages I speak with my sister and brothers,
with my friends. They are the last five listed, with 6 and 7 being closest to my
heart. From school, the media, and job situations, I’ve picked up standard and
working class English. From Mamagrande Locha and from reading Spanish and
Mexican literature, I’ve picked up Standard Spanish and Standard Mexican Spanish. From los recién llegados, Mexican immigrants, and braceros, I learned the
North Mexican dialect. With Mexicans I’ll try to speak either Standard Mexican
Spanish or the North Mexican dialect. From my parents and Chicanos living in
the Valley, I picked up Chicano Texas Spanish, and I speak it with my mom,
younger brother (who married a Mexican and who rarely mixes Spanish with
English), aunts, and older relatives.
With Chicanas from Nuevo México or Arizona I will speak Chicano Spanish
a little, but often they don’t understand what I’m saying. With most California
Chicanas I speak entirely in English (unless I forget). When I first moved to San
Franciso, I’d rattle off something in Spanish, unintentionally embarrassing them.
Often it is only with another Chicana tejana that I can talk freely.
Words distorted by English are known as anglicisms or pochismos. The pocho
is an anglicized Mexican or American of Mexican origin who speaks Spanish with
an accent characteristic of North Americans and who distorts and reconstructs
the language according to the influence of English.3 Tex-Mex, or Spanglish, comes

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 727

15

6/18/12 3:12 PM

728​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

most naturally to me. I may switch back and forth from English to Spanish in the
same sentence or in the same word. With my sister and my brother Nune and
with Chicano tejano contemporaries I speak in Tex-Mex.
From kids and people my own age I picked up Pachuco. Pachuco (the language of the zoot suiters) is a language of rebellion, both against Standard Spanish and Standard English. It is a secret language. Adults of the culture and
outsiders cannot understand it. It is made up of slang words from both English
and Spanish. Ruca means girl or woman, vato means guy or dude, chale means no,
simón means yes, churro is sure, talk is periquiar, pigionear means petting, que
gacho means how nerdy, ponte águila means watch out, death is called la pelona.
Through lack of practice and not having others who can speak it, I’ve lost most of
the Pachuco tongue.

Chicano Spanish
Chicanos, after 250 years of Spanish/Anglo colonization, have developed significant differences in the Spanish we speak. We collapse two adjacent vowels into a
single syllable and sometimes shift the stress in certain words such as maíz/maiz,
cohete/cuete. We leave out certain consonants when they appear between vowels:
lado/lao, mojado/mojao. Chicanos from South Texas pronounce f as j as in jue
(fue). Chicanos use “archaisms,” words that are no longer in the Spanish language,
words that have been evolved out. We say semos, truje, haiga, ansina, and naiden.
We retain the “archaic” j, as in jalar, that derives from an earlier h (the French
halar or the Germanic halon which was lost to standard Spanish in the 16th century), but which is still found in several regional dialects such as the one spoken
in South Texas. (Due to geography, Chicanos from the Valley of South Texas were
cut off linguistically from other Spanish speakers. We tend to use words that the
Spaniards brought over from Medieval Spain. The majority of the Spanish colonizers in Mexico and the Southwest came from Extremadura — Hernán Cortés
was one of them — and Andalucía. Andalucians pronounce ll like a y, and their d’s
tend to be absorbed by adjacent vowels: tirado becomes tirao. They brought el
lenguaje popular, dialectors y regionalismos.4)
Chicanos and other Spanish speakers also shift ll to y and z to s.5 We leave out
initial syllables, saying tar for estar, toy for estoy, hora for ahora (cubanos and
puertorriqueños also leave out initial letters of some words). We also leave out the
final syllable such as pa for para. The intervocalic y, the ll as in tortilla, ella, botella,
gets replaced by tortia or tortiya, ea, botea. We add an additional syllable at the
beginning of certain words: atocar for tocar, agastar for gastar. Sometimes we’ll
say lavaste las vacijas, other times lavates (substituting the ates verb endings for
the aste).
We use anglicisms, words borrowed from English: bola from ball, carpeta
from carpet, máchina de lavar (instead of lavadora) from washing machine. TexMex argot, created by adding a Spanish sound at the beginning or end of an

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 728

20

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

AnzALDúA​ •​ how​To​TAME​A​wILD​TonguE​

729

English word such as cookiar for cook, watchar for watch, parkiar for park, and
rapiar for rape, is the result of the pressures on Spanish speakers to adapt to
English.
We don’t use the word vosotros/as or its accompanying verb form. We don’t
say claro (to mean yes), imagínate, or me emociona, unless we picked up Spanish
from Latinas, out of a book, or in a classroom. Other Spanish-speaking groups
are going through the same, or similar, development in their Spanish.

Linguistic Terrorism
Deslenguadas. Somos los del español deficiente. We are your linguistic nightmare, your
linguistic aberration, your linguistic mestisaje, the subject of your burla. Because we
speak with tongues of fire we are culturally crucified. Racially, culturally, and linguistically somos huérfanos — we speak an orphan tongue.

Chicanas who grew up speaking Chicano Spanish have internalized the belief
that we speak poor Spanish. It is illegitimate, a bastard language. And because we
internalize how our language has been used against us by the dominant culture,
we use our language differences against each other.
Chicana feminists often skirt around each other with suspicion and hesitation. For the longest time I couldn’t figure it out. Then it dawned on me. To be
close to another Chicana is like looking into the mirror. We are afraid of what
we’ll see there. Pena. Shame. Low estimation of self. In childhood we are told that
our language is wrong. Repeated attacks on our native tongue diminish our sense
of self. The attacks continue throughout our lives.
Chicanas feel uncomfortable talking in Spanish to Latinas, afraid of their
censure. Their language was not outlawed in their countries. They had a whole
lifetime of being immersed in their native tongue; generations, centuries in which
Spanish was a first language, taught in school, heard on radio and TV, and read in
the newspaper.
If a person, Chicana or Latina, has a low estimation of my native tongue, she
also has a low estimation of me. Often with mexicanas y latinas we’ll speak English
as a neutral language. Even among Chicanas we tend to speak English at parties
or conferences. Yet, at the same time, we’re afraid the other will think we’re agringadas because we don’t speak Chicano Spanish. We oppress each other trying to
out-Chicano each other, vying to be the “real” Chicanas, to speak like Chicanos.
There is no one Chicano language just as there is no one Chicano experience. A
monolingual Chicana whose first language is English or Spanish is just as much a
Chicana as one who speaks several variants of Spanish. A Chicana from Michigan
or Chicago or Detroit is just as much a Chicana as one from the Southwest. Chicano Spanish is as diverse linguistically as it is regionally.
By the end of this century, Spanish speakers will comprise the biggest minority group in the U.S., a country where students in high schools and colleges are
encouraged to take French classes because French is considered more “cultured.”

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 729

25

6/18/12 3:12 PM

730​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

But for a language to remain alive it must be used.6 By the end of this century
English, and not Spanish, will be the mother tongue of most Chicanos and
Latinos.
So, if you want to really hurt me, talk badly about my language. Ethnic identity is
twin skin to linguistic identity — I am my language. Until I can take pride in my
language, I cannot take pride in myself. Until I can accept as legitimate Chicano
Texas Spanish, Tex-Mex, and all the other languages I speak, I cannot accept the
legitimacy of myself. Until I am free to write bilingually and to switch codes without having always to translate, while I still have to speak English or Spanish when
I would rather speak Spanglish, and as long as I have to accommodate the English
speakers rather than having them accommodate me, my tongue will be illegitimate.
I will no longer be made to feel ashamed of existing. I will have my voice:
Indian, Spanish, white. I will have my serpent’s tongue — my woman’s voice, my
sexual voice, my poet’s voice. I will overcome the tradition of silence.
My fingers
move sly against your palm
Like women everywhere, we speak in code. . . .
— Melanie Kaye/Kantrowitz7

“Vistas,” corridos, y comida: My Native Tongue In the 1960s, I read my first
Chicano novel. It was City of Night by John Rechy, a gay Texan, son of a Scottish
father and a Mexican mother. For days I walked around in stunned amazement
that a Chicano could write and get published. When I read I Am Joaquín8 I was
surprised to see a bilingual book by a Chicano in print. When I saw poetry written in Tex-Mex for the first time, a feeling of pure joy flashed through me. I felt
like we really existed as a people. In 1971, when I started teaching High School
English to Chicano students, I tried to supplement the required texts with works
by Chicanos, only to be reprimanded and forbidden to do so by the principal. He
claimed that I was supposed to teach “American” and English literature. At the
risk of being fired, I swore my students to secrecy and slipped in Chicano short
stories, poems, a play. In graduate school, while working toward a Ph.D., I had to
“argue” with one advisor after the other, semester after semester, before I was
allowed to make Chicano literature an area of focus.
Even before I read books by Chicanos or Mexicans, it was the Mexican movies I saw at the drive-in — the Thursday night special of $1.00 a carload — that
gave me a sense of belonging. “Vámonos a las vistas,” my mother would call out
and we’d all — grandmother, brothers, sister, and cousins — squeeze into the car.
We’d wolf down cheese and bologna white bread sandwiches while watching
Pedro Infante in melodramatic tearjerkers like Nosotros los pobres, the first “real”
Mexican movie (that was not an imitation of European movies). I remember seeing Cuando los hijos se van and surmising that all Mexican movies played up the

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 730

30

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

AnzALDúA​ •​ how​To​TAME​A​wILD​TonguE​

731

love a mother has for her children and what ungrateful sons and daughters suffer
when they are not devoted to their mothers. I remember the singing-type “westerns” of Jorge Negrete and Miquel Aceves Mejía. When watching Mexican movies, I felt a sense of homecoming as well as alienation. People who were to amount
to something didn’t go to Mexican movies, or bailes, or tune their radios to bolero,
rancherita, and corrido music.
The whole time I was growing up, there was norteño music sometimes called
North Mexican border music, or Tex-Mex music, or Chicano music, or cantina
(bar) music. I grew up listening to conjuntos, three- or four-piece bands made up
of folk musicians playing guitar, bajo sexto, drums, and button accordion, which
Chicanos had borrowed from the German immigrants who had come to Central
Texas and Mexico to farm and build breweries. In the Rio Grande Valley, Steve
Jordan and Little Joe Hernández were popular, and Flaco Jiménez was the accordion king. The rhythms of Tex-Mex music are those of the polka, also adapted
from the Germans, who in turn had borrowed the polka from the Czechs and
Bohemians.
I remember the hot, sultry evenings when corridos — songs of love and death
on the Texas-Mexican borderlands — reverberated out of cheap amplifiers from
the local cantinas and wafted in through my bedroom window.
Corridos first became widely used along the South Texas/Mexican border
during the early conflict between Chicanos and Anglos. The corridos are usually
about Mexican heroes who do valiant deeds against the Anglo oppressors. Pancho
Villa’s song, “La cucaracha,” is the most famous one. Corridos of John F. Kennedy
and his death are still very popular in the Valley. Older Chicanos remember Lydia
Mendoza, one of the great border corrido singers who was called la Gloria de
Tejas. Her “El tango negro,” sung during the Great Depression, made her a singer
of the people. The everpresent corridos narrated one hundred years of border history, bringing news of events as well as entertaining. These folk musicians and
folk songs are our chief cultural myth-makers, and they make our hard lives seem
bearable.
I grew up feeling ambivalent about our music. Country-western and rockand-roll had more status. In the 50s and 60s, for the slightly educated and
agringado Chicanos, there existed a sense of shame at being caught listening to
our music. Yet I couldn’t stop my feet from thumping to the music, could not stop
humming the words, nor hide from myself the exhilaration I felt when I heard it.
There are more subtle ways that we internalize identification, especially in the
forms of images and emotions. For me food and certain smells are tied to my
identity, to my homeland. Woodsmoke curling up to an immense blue sky;
woodsmoke perfuming my grandmother’s clothes, her skin. The stench of cow
manure and the yellow patches on the ground; the crack of a .22 rifle and the reek
of cordite. Homemade white cheese sizzling in a pan, melting inside a folded

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 731

35

6/18/12 3:12 PM

732​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

tortilla. My sister Hilda’s hot, spicy menudo, chile colorado making it a deep red,
pieces of panza and hominy floating on top. My brother Carito barbequing fajitas
in the backyard. Even now and 3,000 miles away, I can see my mother spicing the
ground beef, pork, and venison with chile. My mouth salivates at the thought of
the hot steaming tamales I would be eating if I were home.
Si le preguntas a mi mamá, “¿Qué eres?”
“Identity is the essential core of who we are as individuals, the conscious experience
of the self inside.”
— Gershen Kaufman9

Nosotros los Chicanos straddle the borderlands. On one side of us, we are constantly exposed to the Spanish of the Mexicans, on the other side we hear the
Anglos’ incessant clamoring so that we forget our language. Among ourselves we
don’t say nosotros los americanos, o nosotros los españoles, o nosotros los hispanos.
We say nosotros los mexicanos (by mexicanos we do not mean citizens of Mexico;
we do not mean a national identity, but a racial one). We distinguish between
mexicanos del otro lado and mexicanos de este lado. Deep in our hearts we believe
that being Mexican has nothing to do with which country one lives in. Being
Mexican is a state of soul — not one of mind, not one of citizenship. Neither eagle
nor serpent, but both. And like the ocean, neither animal respects borders.
Dime con quien andas y te diré quien eres. (Tell me who your friends are and I’ll tell
you who you are.)
— Mexican saying

Si le preguntas a mi mamá, “¿Qué eres?” te dirá, “Soy mexicana.” My brothers
and sister say the same. I sometimes will answer “soy mexicana” and at others will
say “soy Chicana” o “soy tejana.” But I identified as “Raza” before I ever identified
as “mexicana” or “Chicana.”
As a culture, we call ourselves Spanish when referring to ourselves as a linguistic group and when copping out. It is then that we forget our predominant
Indian genes. We are 70–80 percent Indian.10 We call ourselves Hispanic11 or
Spanish-American or Latin American or Latin when linking ourselves to other
Spanish-speaking peoples of the Western hemisphere and when copping out. We
call ourselves Mexican-American12 to signify we are neither Mexican nor American, but more the noun “American” than the adjective “Mexican” (and when
copping out).
Chicanos and other people of color suffer economically for not acculturating. This voluntary (yet forced) alienation makes for psychological conflict, a
kind of dual identity — we don’t identify with the Anglo-American cultural values and we don’t totally identify with the Mexican cultural values. We are a synergy of two cultures with various degrees of Mexicanness or Angloness. I have so
internalized the borderland conflict that sometimes I feel like one cancels out the

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 732

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

AnzALDúA​ •​ how​To​TAME​A​wILD​TonguE​

733

other and we are zero, nothing, no one. A veces no soy nada ni nadie. Pero hasta
cuando no lo soy, lo soy.
When not copping out, when we know we are more than nothing, we call
ourselves Mexican, referring to race and ancestry; mestizo when affirming both
our Indian and Spanish (but we hardly ever own our Black ancestry); Chicano
when referring to a politically aware people born and/or raised in the U.S.; Raza
when referring to Chicanos; tejanos when we are Chicanos from Texas.
Chicanos did not know we were a people until 1965 when Ceasar Chavez and
the farmworkers united and I Am Joaquín was published and la Raza Unida party
was formed in Texas. With that recognition, we became a distinct people. Something momentous happened to the Chicano soul — we became aware of our reality and acquired a name and a language (Chicano Spanish) that reflected that
reality. Now that we had a name, some of the fragmented pieces began to fall
together — who we were, what we were, how we had evolved. We began to get
glimpses of what we might eventually become.
Yet the struggle of identities continues, the struggle of borders is our reality
still. One day the inner struggle will cease and a true integration take place. In the
meantime, tenémos que hacer la lucha. ¿Quién está protegiendo los ranchos de mi
gente? ¿Quién está tratando de cerrar la fisura entre la india y el blanco en nuestra
sangre? El Chicano, si, el Chicano que anda como un ladrón en su propia casa.

40

Los Chicanos, how patient we seem, how very patient. There is the quiet of the
Indian about us.13 We know how to survive. When other races have given up their
tongue, we’ve kept ours. We know what it is to live under the hammer blow of the
dominant norte-americano culture. But more than we count the blows, we count
the days the weeks the years the centuries the eons until the white laws and commerce and customs will rot in the deserts they’ve created, lie bleached. Humildes yet proud, quietos yet wild, nosotros los mexicanos-Chicanos will walk by the
crumbling ashes as we go about our business. Stubborn, persevering, impenetrable as stone, yet possessing a malleability that renders us unbreakable, we, the
mestizas and mestizos, will remain.

Notes
1. Ray Gwyn Smith, Moorland Is Cold Country, unpublished book.
2. Irena Klepfisz, “Di rayze aheym/The Journey Home,” in The Tribe of Dina: A Jewish
Women’s Anthology, Melanie Kaye/Kantrowitz and Irena Klepfisz, eds. (Montpelier,
VT: Sinister Wisdom Books, 1986), 49.
3. R. C. Ortega, Dialectología Del Barrio, trans. Hortencia S. Alwan (Los Angeles, CA:
R. C. Ortega Publisher & Bookseller, 1977), 132.
4. Eduardo Hernandéz-Chávez, Andrew D. Cohen, and Anthony F. Beltramo, El Lenguaje de los Chicanos: Regional and Social Characteristics of Language Used by Mexican
Americans (Arlington, VA: Center for Applied Linguistics, 1975), 39.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 733

6/18/12 3:12 PM

734​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

5. Hernandéz-Chávez, xvii.
6. Irena Klepfisz, “Secular Jewish Identity: Yidishkayt in America,” in The Tribe Dina,
Kaye/Kantrowitz and Klepfisz, eds., 43.
7. Melanie Kaye/Kantrowitz, “Sign,” in We Speak in Code: Poems and Other Writings
(Pittsburgh, PA: Motheroot Publications, Inc., 1980), 85.
8. Rodolfo Gonzales, I Am Joaquín/Yo Soy Joaquín (New York, NY: Bantam Books, 1972).
It was first published in 1967.
9. Gershen Kaufman, Shame: The Power of Caring (Cambridge, MA: Schenkman Books,
Inc., 1980), 68.
10. John R. Chávez, The Lost Land: The Chicano Images of the Southwest (Albuquerque,
NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1984), 88–90.
11. “Hispanic” is derived from Hispanis (España, a name given to the Iberian Peninsula in
ancient times when it was a part of the Roman Empire) and is a term designated by
the U.S. government to make it easier to handle us on paper.
12. The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo created the Mexican-American in 1848.
13. Anglos, in order to alleviate their guilt for dispossessing the Chicano, stressed the
Spanish part of us and perpetrated the myth of the Spanish Southwest. We have
accepted the fiction that we are Hispanic, that is Spanish, in order to accommodate
ourselves to the dominant culture and its abhorrence of Indians. Chávez, 88–91.

Exploring the Text
1. Much of this essay is written in Spanish or a variant of it. In some instances, Gloria Anzaldúa translates into English, though not all the time. As a reader, how do
you react to the passages written in Spanish? How does your level of fluency with
that language affect your response?
2. What is the purpose of the opening anecdote about the dentist (paras. 1–3)?
What ethos is Anzaldúa establishing with her audience? When she writes, “My
mouth is a motherlode,” is she being facetious or aggressive? How can you
tell?
3. In several instances (such as paras. 7 and 15), Anzaldúa points out the sexism
inherent in the communities she is writing about. Explain whether you think this
discussion is part of her overall point about the consequences of language bias
and domination, or whether it is a separate point.
4. Examine the syntax of paragraph 12. What types of sentences does Anzaldúa use?
How does the syntax reinforce the message she is conveying? Consider form,
variety, and pacing in your response.
5. In paragraphs 14–17, Anzaldúa draws on her personal experiences to illustrate
the eight languages she enumerates. Explain why you think that this focus makes
readers feel excluded or included. Then discuss whether Anzaldúa’s personal
experience interwoven throughout the essay strengthens or weakens her argument. (See also paras. 31–34.)

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 734

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

AgoSín​ •​ ALwAYS​LIVIng​In​SPAnISh​

735

6. Why is English a “neutral language” (para. 25) for mexicanas y latinas, according
to Anzaldúa? In what situations that you have observed or read does English
become neutral ground for those who speak different languages?
7. What does Anzaldúa mean by her claim, “Ethnic identity is twin skin to linguistic
identity — I am my language” (para. 27)? Is this her thesis, or primary claim, in
the essay? Explain why you agree or disagree with her.
8. Anzaldúa claims, “I will overcome the tradition of silence” (para. 28). What does
she mean? Explain to what extent you believe writing this essay contributes to
her goal.
9. What strategies does Anzaldúa use to appeal to authority? Cite specific passages
where these occur.
10. Anzaldúa divides her essay into four main sections: an introduction, “Overcoming the Tradition of Silence,” “Chicano Spanish,” and “Linguistic Terrorism.”
What is the progression and/or connection among these divisions?
11. The third section, “Chicano Spanish,” is a fairly technical linguistic and historical
analysis. What does it contribute to the essay? What would be lost if it were omitted or repositioned?
12. Some critics and readers of Anzaldúa’s works have pointed out that while her
anger about the issues she examines may be justified, her writing suffers as a
result of overly strong emotions. Explain why you agree or disagree that her fiery
tone detracts from her argument. Pay special attention to the final paragraph.
13. What similarities do you see among the sources that Anzaldúa has cited? What is
the purpose of notes 11 and 13? Do you think it would have been more effective
if Anzaldúa had incorporated these points within the text of her argument?
Explain why or why not.
14. This essay was published in 1987, long before the day we now know as 9/11. Do
you think that the new historical reality argues for changing the section heading
entitled “Linguistic Terrorism,” or does this reality make the heading even more
powerful? Explain your viewpoint.

Always Living in Spanish
Marjorie Agosín
human​rights​activist,​author,​and​professor​at​wellesley​College,​Marjorie​Agosín​
(b.​1955)​is​a​descendant​of​Rus​sian​and​Austrian​Jews.​She​was​born​in​Maryland​and​raised​in​Chile,​but​she​left​for​the​united​States​with​her​parents​when​
the​ dictator​ Augusto​ Pinochet​ overthrew​ the​ government​ of​ Salvador​ Allende.​
Agosín’s​writings​reflect​her​heritage,​espe​cially​the​experience​of​Jewish​refugees,​
and​she​has​received​international​acclaim​for​her​work​on​behalf​of​poor​women​
in​developing​countries.​Agosín​has​written​many​books​of​fiction,​memoirs,​poetry,​
and​ essays.​ These​ include​ the​ collection​ of​ bilingual​ poems​ entitled​ Dear Anne

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 735

6/18/12 3:12 PM

736​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

Frank​(1994);​A Cross and a Star: Memoirs of a Jewish Girl in Chile​(1995),​about​
her​mother;​At the Threshold of Memory: New and Selected Poems​(2003);​and​
her​latest,​a​long​narrative​poem​called​The Light of Desire​(2010).​In​the​following​
essay,​written​in​1999,​Agosín​explores​the​passionate​connection​she​feels​with​
Spanish,​her​first​language.

I

n the evenings in the northern hemisphere, I repeat the ancient ritual that
I observed as a child in the southern hemisphere: going out while the night
is still warm and trying to recognize the stars as it begins to grow dark silently. In
the sky of my country, Chile, that long and wide stretch of land that the poets
blessed and dictators abused, I could easily name the stars: the three Marias, the
Southern Cross, and the three Lilies, names of beloved and courageous women.
But here in the United States, where I have lived since I was a young girl, the
solitude of exile makes me feel that so little is mine, that not even the sky has
the same constellations, the trees and the fauna the same names or sounds, or the
rubbish the same smell. How does one recover the familiar? How does one name
the unfamiliar? How can one be another or live in a foreign language? These are
the dilemmas of one who writes in Spanish and lives in translation.
Since my earliest childhood in Chile I lived with the tempos and the melodies
of a multiplicity of tongues: German, Yiddish, Russian, Turkish, and many Latin
songs. Because everyone was from somewhere else, my relatives laughed, sang,
and fought in a Babylon of languages. Spanish was reserved for matters of extreme
seriousness, for commercial transactions, or for illnesses, but everyone’s mother
tongue was always associated with the memory of spaces inhabited in the past:
the shtetl,1 the flowering and vast Vienna avenues, the minarets of Turkey, and the
Ladino whispers of Toledo. When my paternal grandmother sang old songs in
Turkish, her voice and body assumed the passion of one who was there in the city
of Istanbul, gazing by turns toward the west and the east.
Destiny and the always ambiguous nature of history continued my family’s
enforced migration, and because of it I, too, became one who had to live and
speak in translation. The disappearances, torture, and clandestine deaths in my
country in the early seventies drove us to the United States, that other America
that looked with suspicion at those who did not speak English and especially
those who came from the supposedly uncivilized regions of Latin America. I had
left a dangerous place that was my home, only to arrive in a dangerous place that
was not: a high school in the small town of Athens, Georgia, where my poor
English and my accent were the cause of ridicule and insult. The only way I could
recover my usurped country and my Chilean childhood was by continuing to
write in Spanish, the same way my grandparents had sung in their own tongues
in diasporic sites.
1

Yiddish: little town, specifically in Eastern Europe. — Eds.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 736

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

AgoSín​ •​ ALwAYS​LIVIng​In​SPAnISh​

737

The new and learned English language did not fit with the visceral emotions
and themes that my poetry contained, but by writing in Spanish I could recover
fragrances, spoken rhythms, and the passion of my own identity. Daily I felt the
need to translate myself for the strangers living all around me, to tell them why
we were in Georgia, why we ate differently, why we had fled, why my accent was so
thick, and why I did not look Hispanic. Only at night, writing poems in Spanish,
could I return to my senses, and soothe my own sorrow over what I had left behind.
This is how I became a Chilean poet who wrote in Spanish and lived in the
southern United States. And then, one day, a poem of mine was translated and
published in the English language. Finally, for the first time since I had left Chile,
I felt I didn’t have to explain myself. My poem, expressed in another language,
spoke for itself . . . and for me.
Sometimes the austere sounds of English help me bear the solitude of knowing that I am foreign and so far away from those about whom I write. I must
admit I would like more opportunities to read in Spanish to people whose language and culture is also mine, to join in our common heritage and in the feast of
our sounds. I would also like readers of English to understand the beauty of the
spoken word in Spanish, that constant flow of oxytonic and paraoxytonic2 syllables
(Verde que te quiero verdo), the joy of writing — of dancing — in another language.
I believe that many exiles share the unresolvable torment of not being able to live
in the language of their childhood.
I miss that undulating and sensuous language of mine, those baroque descriptions, the sense of being and feeling that Spanish gives me. It is perhaps for this
reason that I have chosen and will always choose to write in Spanish. Nothing else
from my childhood world remains. My country seems to be frozen in gestures of
silence and oblivion. My relatives have died, and I have grown up not knowing a
young generation of cousins and nieces and nephews. Many of my friends disappeared, others were tortured, and the most fortunate, like me, became guardians of
memory. For us, to write in Spanish is to always be in active pursuit of memory. I
seek to recapture a world lost to me on that sorrowful afternoon when the blue
electric sky and the Andean cordillera3 bade me farewell. On that, my last Chilean
day, I carried under my arm my innocence recorded in a little blue notebook I kept
even then. Gradually that diary filled with memoranda, poems written in free verse,
descriptions of dreams and of the thresholds of my house surrounded by cherry
trees and gardenias. To write in Spanish is for me a gesture of survival. And because
of translation, my memory has now become a part of the memory of many others.
Translators are not traitors, as the proverb says, but rather splendid friends in
this great human community of language.

5

2Oxytonic words stress the last syllable, while paraoxytonics stress the next-to-last syllable.
— Eds.
3Coastal mountains. — Eds.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 737

6/18/12 3:12 PM

738​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

Exploring the Text
1. How would you describe Marjorie Agosín’s opening strategy in the first two paragraphs? How effective are the two paragraphs in capturing the reader’s attention
and establishing the author’s ethos?
2. What does Agosín mean by the allusion to “a Babylon of languages” (para. 3)?
3. What is the effect of the following statement, an example of antithesis, by Agosín:
“I had left a dangerous place that was my home, only to arrive in a dangerous
place that was not” (para. 4)?
4. Why is the first translation of a poem of Agosín’s meaningful for her?
5. List the ways Agosín describes Spanish. How would you describe these descriptive terms? Contrast these descriptions with the way Agosín refers to English.
How do the differences contribute to the effectiveness of her essay?
6. What is Agosín’s thesis, or claim, in this essay? Find a sentence that seems closest
to a directly stated thesis.
7. What does Agosín mean when she says, “To write in Spanish is for me a gesture
of survival” (para. 8)?
8. How would you describe the tone of this essay? Cite specific passages to support
your response.
9. This essay was published in Poets & Writers, a magazine for writers. Discuss why
and how Agosín appeals to this audience.
10. Agosín alludes to the way her “grandparents had sung in their own tongues in
diasporic sites” (para. 4). What does she mean by “diasporic sites”? Are they literal geographical places? Discuss the concept of diaspora as it applies to a group
in the contemporary world (for example, the African diaspora, the Chinese
diaspora).

The “F Word”
Firoozeh Dumas
Firoozeh​Dumas​was​born​in​Iran​in​1965​and​moved​to​Cal​i​fornia​when​she​was​
seven,​returned​with​her​​family​to​Iran​two​years​later,​and​then​came​back​to​the​
united​States​two​years​after​that.​She​received​her​BA​from​the​university​of​Cali​fornia,​Berkeley.​In​2001​she​began​writing​her​​family’s​stories​as​a​gift​to​her​
own​children,​and​in​2003​they​were​published​as​Funny in Farsi: A Memoir of
Growing Up Iranian in America.​An​immensely​popular​book,​it​has​been​selected​
by​cities​and​campuses​throughout​the​country​as​their​community​read​and​was​
nominated​for​the​PEn/uSA​award​in​2004.​A​finalist​for​the​prestigious​Thurber​
Prize​for​American​humor,​Dumas​was​the​first​​Middle​​Eastern​woman​ever​nominated;​she​lost​to​Jon​Stewart.​She​often​writes​commentaries​for​national​Public​
Radio,​the​New York Times,​and​the​Los Angeles Times,​and​in​2008​she​published​

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 738

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

DuMAS​ •​ ThE​“F​woRD”​

739

Laughing without an Accent,​ a​ series​ of​ autobiographical​ essays.​ The​ following​
excerpt​from​Funny in Farsi​depicts​cultural​clashes​as​manifested​in​language.

M

y cousin’s name, Farbod, means “Greatness.” When he moved to
America, all the kids called him “Farthead.” My brother Farshid (“He
Who Enlightens”) became “Fartshit.” The name of my friend Neggar means
“Beloved,” although it can be more accurately translated as “She Whose Name
Almost Incites Riots.” Her brother Arash (“Giver”) initially couldn’t understand
why every time he’d say his name, people would laugh and ask him if it itched.
All of us immigrants knew that moving to America would be fraught with
challenges, but none of us thought that our names would be such an obstacle.
How could our parents have ever imagined that someday we would end up in a
country where monosyllabic names reign supreme, a land where “William” is
shortened to “Bill,” where “Susan” becomes “Sue,” and “Richard” somehow evolves
into “Dick”? America is a great country, but nobody without a mask and a cape
has a z in his name. And have Americans ever realized the great scope of the guttural sounds they’re missing? Okay, so it has to do with linguistic roots, but I do
believe this would be a richer country if all Americans could do a little tongue
aerobics and learn to pronounce “kh,” a sound more commonly associated in this
culture with phlegm, or “gh,” the sound usually made by actors in the final
moments of a choking scene. It’s like adding a few new spices to the kitchen pantry. Move over, cinnamon and nutmeg, make way for cardamom and sumac.
Exotic analogies aside, having a foreign name in this land of Joes and Marys
is a pain in the spice cabinet. When I was twelve, I decided to simplify my life by
adding an American middle name. This decision serves as proof that sometimes
simplifying one’s life in the short run only complicates it in the long run.
My name, Firoozeh, chosen by my mother, means “Turquoise” in Farsi. In
America, it means “Unpronounceable” or “I’m Not Going to Talk to You Because
I Cannot Possibly Learn Your Name and I Just Don’t Want to Have to Ask You
Again and Again Because You’ll Think I’m Dumb or You Might Get Upset or
Something.” My father, incidentally, had wanted to name me Sara. I do wish he
had won that argument.
To strengthen my decision to add an American name, I had just finished fifth
grade in Whittier, where all the kids incessantly called me “Ferocious.” That summer, my family moved to Newport Beach, where I looked forward to starting a
new life. I wanted to be a kid with a name that didn’t draw so much attention, a
name that didn’t come with a built-in inquisition as to when and why I had
moved to America and how was it that I spoke English without an accent and was
I planning on going back and what did I think of America?
My last name didn’t help any. I can’t mention my maiden name, because:
“Dad, I’m writing a memoir.”
“Great! Just don’t mention our name.”

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 739

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

740​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

Suffice it to say that, with eight letters, including a z, and four syllables, my
last name is as difficult and foreign as my first. My first and last name together
generally served the same purpose as a high brick wall. There was one exception
to this rule. In Berkeley, and only in Berkeley, my name drew people like flies to
baklava. These were usually people named Amaryllis or Chrysanthemum, types
who vacationed in Costa Rica and to whom lentils described a type of burger.
These folks were probably not the pride of Poughkeepsie, but they were refreshingly nonjudgmental.
When I announced to my family that I wanted to add an American name,
they reacted with their usual laughter. Never one to let mockery or good judgment stand in my way, I proceeded to ask for suggestions. My father suggested
“Fifi.” Had I a special affinity for French poodles or been considering a career in
prostitution, I would’ve gone with that one. My mom suggested “Farah,” a name
easier than “Firoozeh” yet still Iranian. Her reasoning made sense, except that
Farrah Fawcett was at the height of her popularity and I didn’t want to be associated with somebody whose poster hung in every postpubescent boy’s bedroom.
We couldn’t think of any American names beginning with F, so we moved on to
J, the first letter of our last name. I don’t know why we limited ourselves to names
beginning with my initials, but it made sense at that moment, perhaps by the
logic employed moments before bungee jumping. I finally chose the name “Julie”
mainly for its simplicity. My brothers, Farid and Farshid, thought that adding an
American name was totally stupid. They later became Fred and Sean.
That same afternoon, our doorbell rang. It was our new next-door neighbor,
a friendly girl my age named Julie. She asked me my name and after a moment of
hesitation, I introduced myself as Julie. “What a coincidence!” she said. I didn’t
mention that I had been Julie for only half an hour.
Thus I started sixth grade with my new, easy name and life became infinitely
simpler. People actually remembered my name, which was an entirely refreshing
new sensation. All was well until the Iranian Revolution, when I found myself
with a new set of problems. Because I spoke English without an accent and was
known as Julie, people assumed I was American. This meant that I was often privy
to their real feelings about those “damn I-raynians.” It was like having those X-ray
glasses that let you see people undressed, except that what I was seeing was far
uglier than people’s underwear. It dawned on me that these people would have
probably never invited me to their house had they known me as Firoozeh. I felt
like a fake.
When I went to college, I eventually went back to using my real name. All was
well until I graduated and started looking for a job. Even though I had graduated
with honors from UC–Berkeley, I couldn’t get a single interview. I was guilty of
being a humanities major, but I began to suspect that there was more to my problems. After three months of rejections, I added “Julie” to my résumé. Call it coincidence, but the job offers started coming in. Perhaps it’s the same kind of
coincidence that keeps African Americans from getting cabs in New York.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 740

10

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

DuMAS​ •​ ThE​“F​woRD”​

741

Once I got married, my name became Julie Dumas. I went from having an
identifiably “ethnic” name to having ancestors who wore clogs. My family and
non-American friends continued calling me Firoozeh, while my coworkers and
American friends called me Julie. My life became one big knot, especially when
friends who knew me as Julie met friends who knew me as Firoozeh. I felt like
those characters in soap operas who have an evil twin. The two, of course, can
never be in the same room, since they’re played by the same person, a struggling
actress who wears a wig to play one of the twins and dreams of moving on to bigger and better roles. I couldn’t blame my mess on a screenwriter; it was my own
doing.
I decided to untangle the knot once and for all by going back to my real
name. By then, I was a stay-at-home mom, so I really didn’t care whether people
remembered my name or gave me job interviews. Besides, most of the people I
dealt with were in diapers and were in no position to judge. I was also living in
Silicon Valley, an area filled with people named Rajeev, Avishai, and Insook.
Every once in a while, though, somebody comes up with a new permutation
and I am once again reminded that I am an immigrant with a foreign name. I
recently went to have blood drawn for a physical exam. The waiting room for
blood work at our local medical clinic is in the basement of the building, and no
matter how early one arrives for an appointment, forty coughing, wheezing
people have gotten there first. Apart from reading Golf Digest and Popular
Mechanics, there isn’t much to do except guess the number of contagious diseases
represented in the windowless room. Every ten minutes, a name is called and
everyone looks to see which cough matches that name. As I waited patiently, the
receptionist called out, “Fritzy, Fritzy!” Everyone looked around, but no one stood
up. Usually, if I’m waiting to be called by someone who doesn’t know me, I will
respond to just about any name starting with an F. Having been called Froozy,
Frizzy, Fiorucci, and Frooz and just plain “Uhhhh . . . ,” I am highly accommodating. I did not, however, respond to “Fritzy” because there is, as far as I know, no t
in my name. The receptionist tried again, “Fritzy, Fritzy DumbAss.” As I stood up
to this most linguistically original version of my name, I could feel all eyes upon
me. The room was momentarily silent as all of these sick people sat united in a
moment of gratitude for their own names.
Despite a few exceptions, I have found that Americans are now far more willing to learn new names, just as they’re far more willing to try new ethnic foods.
Of course, some people just don’t like to learn. One mom at my children’s school
adamantly refused to learn my “impossible” name and instead settled on calling
me “F Word.” She was recently transferred to New York where, from what I’ve
heard, she might meet an immigrant or two and, who knows, she just might have
to make some room in her spice cabinet.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 741

15

6/18/12 3:12 PM

742​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

Exploring the Text
1. In the opening paragraph, Firoozeh Dumas gives several examples of names of
her family members and friends, contrasting the meaning of each name and the
version given by Americans. Is it funny? Is it inappropriate? What different perspectives is she asking her readers to see?
2. What rhetorical strategies does Dumas employ in paragraph 2 to establish a lively
conversational tone? Where do you detect sarcasm?
3. At the end of paragraph 2, Dumas introduces the metaphor of “new spices [in]
the kitchen pantry.” How does she develop this metaphor as the essay continues?
Do you find it an effective or ineffective way to talk about the issues she raises?
Explain your response.
4. How does Dumas characterize the people she met in Berkeley, California (para. 9)?
Do you think she is stereotyping them? Explain.
5. What points does the story of Dumas’s decision to change her name allow her to
make about both her own family and Americans? How does it prove the assertion
that “sometimes simplifying one’s life in the short run only complicates it in the
long run” (para. 3)?
6. In paragraph 12, Dumas describes how having her American name Julie and
speaking without an accent was like having “X-ray glasses that let you see people
undressed.” What other references to popular culture do you find, and why do
you think Dumas includes them?
7. How does Dumas characterize Americans? Do you agree with her characterization? Given the fact that her audience is likely to be primarily Americans, to what
extent do you think she risks antagonizing or offending them? Explain.
8. What is the argument Dumas is making? What is her claim? What evidence does
she provide as support?
9. How does Dumas use humor to develop her argument? Identify specific examples,
and discuss how each contributes to Dumas achieving her purpose(s). Are some
more effective than others? Why?
10. Overall, how would you characterize her tone? Consider the role of humor in
your response — that is, whether Dumas is amusing, sarcastic, playful, bitter, or a
combination.

In Plain English: Let’s Make It Official
Charles Krauthammer
Charles​Krauthammer​was​born​in​new​York​City​in​1950​and​raised​in​Montreal.​
he​studied​political​science​and​economics​at​Mcgill​university​and​oxford​university​ before​ going​ to​ harvard​ Medical​ School​ for​ his​ MD​ in​ psychiatry.​ After​
serving​as​a​speechwriter​for​former​vice​president​walter​Mondale,​Krauthammer​

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 742

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

KRAuThAMMER​ •​ In​PLAIn​En​gLISh:​LET’S​MAKE​IT​oFFICIAL​

743

began​his​career​in​journalism​with​the​New Republic.​he​went​on​to​write​regularly​for​Time magazine,​the​Weekly Standard,​and​the​Washington Post.​he​is​
also​a​political​analyst​for​Fox​news.​Krauthammer​won​the​1987​Pulitzer​Prize​
for​Commentary​and​has​been​called​the​most​influential​commentator​in​America​
by​the​Financial Times.​The​following​piece​appeared​in​Time magazine​in​2006,​
shortly​after​the​Senate​passed​two​contradictory​amendments​to​the​Comprehensive​ Immigration​ Reform​ Act.​ one​ declared​ En​glish​ the​ “common​ and​ unifying​
language​ of​ the​ united​ States,”​ thus​ permitting​ government​ documents​ to​ be​
printed​in​other​languages.​The​other​declared​En​glish​the​“national​language​of​
the​united​States,”​thus​ensuring​that​all​government​documents​would​be​printed​
only​in​En​glish.

G

rowing up (as I did) in the province of Québec, you learn not just the
joys but also the perils of bilingualism. A separate national identity,
revolving entirely around “Francophonie,” became a raging issue that led to social
unrest, terrorism, threats of separation and a referendum that came within a
hair’s breadth of breaking up Canada.
Canada, of course, had no choice about bilingualism. It is a country created
of two nations at its birth, and has ever since been trying to cope with that inherently divisive fact. The U.S., by contrast blessed with a single common language
for two centuries, seems blithely and gratuitously to be ready to import bilingualism with all its attendant divisiveness and antagonisms.
One of the major reasons for America’s great success as the world’s first “universal nation,” for its astonishing and unmatched capacity for assimilating immigrants, has been that an automatic part of acculturation was the acquisition of
English. And yet during the great immigration debate now raging in Congress,
the people’s representatives cannot make up their minds whether the current
dominance of English should be declared a national asset, worthy of enshrinement in law.
The Senate could not bring itself to declare English the country’s “official
language.” The best it could do was pass an amendment to the immigration bill
tepidly declaring English the “national language.” Yet even that was too much for
Senate Democratic leader Harry Reid, who called that resolution “racist.” Less
hyperbolic opponents point out that granting special official status to English is
simply unnecessary: America has been accepting foreign-language-speaking immigrants forever — Brooklyn is so polyglot it is a veritable Babel — and yet we’ve done
just fine. What’s the great worry about Spanish?
The worry is this. Polyglot is fine. When immigrants, like those in Brooklyn,
are members of a myriad of linguistic communities, each tiny and discrete, there
is no threat to the common culture. No immigrant presumes to make the demand
that the state grant special status to his language. He may speak it in the street and
proudly teach it to his children, but he knows that his future and certainly theirs
lie inevitably in learning English as the gateway to American life.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 743

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

744​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

But all of that changes when you have an enormous, linguistically monoclonal1 immigration as we do today from Latin America. Then you get not Brooklyn’s successful Babel but Canada’s restive Québec. Monoclonal immigration is
new for the U.S., and it changes things radically. If at the turn of the 20th century,
Ellis Island had greeted teeming masses speaking not 50 languages but just, say,
German, America might not have enjoyed the same success at assimilation and
national unity that it has.
Today’s monoclonal linguistic culture is far from hypothetical. Growing rapidly through immigration, it creates large communities — in some places already
majorities — so overwhelmingly Spanish speaking that, in time, they may quite
naturally demand the rights and official recognition for Spanish that French has
in French-speaking Québec.
That would not be the end of the world — Canada is a decent place — but the
beginning of a new one for the U.S., a world far more complicated and fraught
with division. History has blessed us with all the freedom and advantages of multiculturalism. But it has also blessed us, because of the accident of our origins, with
a linguistic unity that brings a critically needed cohesion to a nation as diverse,
multiracial and multiethnic as America. Why gratuitously throw away that priceless asset? How mindless to call the desire to retain it “racist.”
I speak three languages. My late father spoke nine. When he became a naturalized American in midcentury, it never occurred to him to demand of his new
and beneficent land that whenever its government had business with him — tax
forms, court proceedings, ballot boxes — that it should be required to communicate in French, his best language, rather than English, his last and relatively
weakest.
English is the U.S.’s national and common language. But that may change
over time unless we change our assimilation norms. Making English the official
language is the first step toward establishing those norms. “Official” means the
language of the government and its institutions. “Official” makes clear our expectations of acculturation. “Official” means that every citizen, upon entering America’s most sacred political space, the voting booth, should minimally be able to
identify the words President and Vice President and county commissioner and
judge. The immigrant, of course, has the right to speak whatever he wants. But he
must understand that when he comes to the U.S., swears allegiance and accepts its
bounty, he undertakes to join its civic culture. In English.

10

Exploring the Text
1. What is Charles Krauthammer’s overall argument? State his claim (or identify it in
the article), and cite the major points he makes to support it.
1Normally a biological term indicating a group of cells that can all trace their ancestry back to
a single cell. Here it is used to mean a group of people with a single linguistic heritage. — Eds.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 744

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

PInKER​ •​ woRDS​Don’T​MEAn​whAT​ThEY​MEAn​

745

2. How does the writer establish ethos? Identify at least two passages within the essay
that help him accomplish this.
3. What is the basis of the comparison Krauthammer makes between the United
States and Canada? To what extent do you find this comparison an effective rhetorical strategy?
4. Which counterarguments does Krauthammer address? Cite at least two, and discuss how he concedes and refutes each.
5. What does he mean by the description of “an enormous, linguistically monoclonal
immigration” (para. 7)? How does it connect to “Canada’s restive Québec” (para. 7)?
6. Throughout the essay, Krauthammer employs diction with strong emotional connotations, such as the repeated use of the word “blessed.” What other examples are
there? Do you think these choices enhance or distract from his central argument?
Explain why you hold this view.
7. What does Krauthammer suggest by putting the word “official” in quotation
marks? Why does he do that in some instances but not in others? In the final paragraph, Krauthammer refers to “national,” “common,” and “official” language. What
are the distinctions?
8. What does Krauthammer mean in the closing paragraph by “civic culture”? Do
you think that the civic culture of the United States is or is not the same today as
when he was writing in 2006? Explain your response.
9. Which part(s) of Krauthammer’s argument do you agree with? Disagree with?
Explain by citing examples drawn from your own observations or experience.

Words Don’t Mean What They Mean
Steven Pinker
Steven​Pinker​was​born​in​Montreal,​Canada,​in​1954.​he​received​a​BA​from​
Mcgill​university​and​a​PhD​from​harvard.​he​taught​for​twenty-​one​years​in​the​
Department​of​Brain​and​Cognitive​Sciences​at​the​Mas​sa​chu​setts​Institute​of​Technology​and​for​two​years​at​Stanford.​Later,​he​moved​to​harvard,​where​he​is​
now​a​professor​in​the​psychology​department.​Pinker​writes​about​the​nature​of​
language​ and​ cognitive​ science;​ among​ his​ books​ are​ The Language Instinct
(1994),​ How the Mind Works (1997),​ The Blank Slate (2002),​ and​ The Better
Angels of Our Nature (2011).​his​essays​have​appeared​in​a​variety​of​publications,​including​the​New York Times,​Time​magazine,​the​New Yorker,​Technology
Review,​ and​ Slate.​ Taken​ from​ his​ 2007​ book​ The Stuff of Thought,​ the​ essay​
included​here​appeared​in​Time​in​September​of​that​year.

I

n the movie Tootsie, the character played by Dustin Hoffman is disguised
as a woman and is speaking to a beautiful young actress played by Jessica
Lange. During a session of late-night girl talk, Lange’s character says, “You know

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 745

6/18/12 3:12 PM

746​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

what I wish? That a guy could be honest enough to walk up to me and say, ‘I could
lay a big line on you, but the simple truth is I find you very interesting, and I’d
really like to make love to you.’ Wouldn’t that be a relief ?”
Later in the movie, a twist of fate throws them together at a cocktail party,
this time with Hoffman’s character dressed as a man. The actress doesn’t recognize him, and he tries out the speech on her. Before he can even finish, she throws
a glass of wine in his face and storms away.
When people talk, they lay lines on each other, do a lot of role playing, sidestep, shilly-shally and engage in all manner of vagueness and innuendo. We do
this and expect others to do it, yet at the same time we profess to long for the plain
truth, for people to say what they mean, simple as that. Such hypocrisy is a human
universal.
Sexual come-ons are a classic example. “Would you like to come up and see
my etchings?” has been recognized as a double entendre for so long that by 1939,
James Thurber could draw a cartoon of a hapless man in an apartment lobby saying to his date, “You wait here, and I’ll bring the etchings down.”
The veiled threat also has a stereotype: the Mafia wiseguy offering protection
with the soft sell, “Nice store you got there. Would be a real shame if something
happened to it.” Traffic cops sometimes face not-so-innocent questions like, “Gee,
Officer, is there some way I could pay the fine right here?” And anyone who has
sat through a fund-raising dinner is familiar with euphemistic schnorring like,
“We’re counting on you to show leadership.”
Why don’t people just say what they mean? The reason is that conversational
partners are not modems downloading information into each other’s brains.
People are very, very touchy about their relationships. Whenever you speak to
someone, you are presuming the two of you have a certain degree of familiarity —
which your words might alter. So every sentence has to do two things at once:
convey a message and continue to negotiate that relationship.
The clearest example is ordinary politeness. When you are at a dinner party
and want the salt, you don’t blurt out, “Gimme the salt.” Rather, you use what
linguists call a whimperative, as in “Do you think you could pass the salt?” or “If
you could pass the salt, that would be awesome.”
Taken literally, these sentences are inane. The second is an overstatement, and
the answer to the first is obvious. Fortunately, the hearer assumes that the speaker
is rational and listens between the lines. Yes, your point is to request the salt, but
you’re doing it in such a way that first takes care to establish what linguists call
“felicity conditions,” or the prerequisites to making a sensible request. The underlying rationale is that the hearer not be given a command but simply be asked or
advised about one of the necessary conditions for passing the salt. Your goal is to
have your need satisfied without treating the listener as a flunky who can be
bossed around at will.
Warm acquaintances go out of their way not to look as if they are presuming
a dominant-subordinate relationship but rather one of equals. It works the other

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 746

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

PInKER​ •​ woRDS​Don’T​MEAn​whAT​ThEY​MEAn​

747

way too. When people are in a subordinate relationship (like a driver with police),
they can’t sound as if they are presuming anything more than that, so any bribe
must be veiled. Fund raisers, simulating an atmosphere of warm friendship with
their donors, also can’t break the spell with a bald businesslike proposition.
It is in the arena of sexual relationships, however, that the linguistic dance can
be its most elaborate. In an episode of Seinfeld, George is asked by his date if he
would like to come up for coffee. He declines, explaining that caffeine keeps him
up at night. Later he slaps his forehead: “‘Coffee’ doesn’t mean coffee! ‘Coffee’ means
sex!” The moment is funny, but it’s also a reminder of just how carefully romantic
partners must always tread. Make too blatant a request, as in Tootsie, and the
hearer is offended; too subtle, as in Seinfeld, and it can go over the hearer’s head.
In the political arena, miscalibrated speech can lead to more serious consequences than wine in the face or a slap on the forehead. In 1980, Wanda Brandstetter, a lobbyist for the National Organization for Women (NOW), tried to get
an Illinois state representative to vote for the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) by
handing him a business card on which she had written, “Mr. Swanstrom, the offer
for help in your election, plus $1,000 for your campaign for the pro-ERA vote.” A
prosecutor called the note a “contract for bribery,” and the jury agreed.
So how do lobbyists in Gucci Gulch bribe legislators today? They do it with
innuendo. If Brandstetter had said, “As you know, Mr. Swanstrom, NOW has a
history of contributing to political campaigns. And it has contributed more to
candidates with a voting record that is compatible with our goals. These days one
of our goals is the ratification of the ERA,” she would have avoided a fine, probation and community service.
Indirect speech has a long history in diplomacy too. In the wake of the SixDay War in 1967, the U.N. Security Council passed its famous Resolution 242,
which called for the “withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from territories occupied
in the recent conflict.” The wording is ambiguous. Does it mean “some of the territories” or “all of the territories”? In some ways it was best not to ask, since the
phrasing was palatable to Israel and its allies only under the former interpretation
and to concerned Arab states and their allies only under the latter. Unfortunately,
for 40 years partisans have been debating the semantics of Resolution 242, and
the Israeli-Arab conflict remains unresolved, to put it mildly.
That’s not to say such calculated ambiguity never works for diplomats. After
all, the language of an agreement has to be acceptable not just to leaders but to
their citizens. Reasonable leaders might thus come to an understanding between
themselves, while each exploits the ambiguities of the deal to sell it to their country’s more bellicose factions. What’s more, diplomats can gamble that times will
change and circumstances will bring the two sides together, at which point they
can resolve the vagueness amicably.
When all else fails, as it often does, nations can sort out their problems without any words at all — and often without fighting either. In these cases, they may
fall back on communicating through what’s known as authority ranking, also

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 747

10

15

6/18/12 3:12 PM

748​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

known as power, status, autonomy and dominance. The logic of authority ranking is “Don’t mess with me.” Its biological roots are in the dominance hierarchies
that are widespread in the animal kingdom. One animal claims the right to a
contested resource based on size, strength, seniority or allies, and the other animal cedes it when the outcome of the battle can be predicted and both sides have
a stake in not getting bloodied in a fight whose winner is a forgone conclusion.
Such sword-rattling gestures as a larger military power’s conducting “naval exercises” in the waters off the coast of a weaker foe are based on just this kind of
pre-emptive reminder of strength.
People often speak of indirect speech as a means of saving face. What we’re
referring to is not just a matter of hurt feelings but a social currency with real
value. The expressive power of words helps us guard this prized asset, but only as
long as we’re careful. Words let us say the things we want to say and also things we
would be better off not having said. They let us know the things we need to know,
and also things we wish we didn’t. Language is a window into human nature, but
it is also a fistula, an open wound through which we’re exposed to an infectious
world. It’s not surprising that we sheathe our words in politeness and innuendo
and other forms of doublespeak.

Exploring the Text
1. Steven Pinker opens by describing a scene out of the movie Tootsie, which was
made in 1982. Then, in paragraph 3, he explains how the scene illustrates the main
point of his argument. Do you think it would have been more effective simply to
begin with paragraph 3? Why or why not?
2. What does Pinker mean when he states, “Such hypocrisy is a human universal”
(para. 3)? Is he being critical? Explain whether you agree or disagree with him.
3. How does the example of asking someone to pass the salt illustrate Pinker’s claim
that when we speak we are both conveying a message and negotiating a relationship? What is an example from your own experience that demonstrates these two
functions of speech?
4. Pinker’s essay appeared in Time magazine, which has a large general readership.
How do the examples he has chosen explain specialized linguistic concepts to that
audience?
5. Pinker ends his essay with a claim of value: “Language is a window into human
nature, but it is also a fistula, an open wound through which we’re exposed to an
infectious world.” What does he mean? How does this statement sum up his explanation of the way indirect speech functions? Would it have been more effective if
he had stated it earlier in the essay? Why or why not?
6. Pinker describes a number of linguistic strategies, including double entendre,
veiled threat, “whimperative,” innuendo, calculated ambiguity, and authority ranking. Choose two of these and cite an example from your experience, observations,
or reading that illustrates each.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 748

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

nYE​ •​ FoR​MohAMMED​zEID​oF​gAzA,​AgE​15​

749

7. Compare and contrast the argument Pinker makes with the argument George
Orwell makes in “Politics and the English Language” (p. 707).

For Mohammed Zeid of Gaza, Age 15
and

Why I Could Not Accept Your Invitation
Naomi Shihab Nye
Poet,​ novelist,​ editor,​ and​ political​ activist​ naomi​ Shihab​ nye​ (b.​ 1952)​ is​ the​
daughter​of​a​Palestinian​father​and​American​mother.​nye​grew​up​in​St.​Louis,​
Missouri,​visited​​Jerusalem​for​the​first​time​when​she​was​fourteen,​and​currently​
lives​in​San​Antonio,​Texas.​her​works​for​children​include​the​picture​book​Sitti’s
Secret​(1994)​and​the​novel​Habibi​(1996).​her​poetry​collections​include​Different Ways to Pray​ (1980),​ 19 Varieties of Gazelle: Poems of the Middle East​
(2002),​and​Transfer​(2011).​She​has​won​many​awards​and​fellowships,​including​four​Pushcart​Prizes​(for​best​work​from​small​presses),​the​Jane​Addams​Children’s​Book​Award,​and​the​Isabella​gardner​Poetry​Award.​nye,​who​has​been​
a​visiting​writer​all​over​the​world,​describes​herself​as​“a​wandering​poet.”​An​
advocate​for​peaceful​solutions​to​conflict,​she​often​writes​about​miscommunications​caused​by​disregarding​or​misusing​language,​as​in​the​following​two​poems​
from​her​collection​You and Yours​(2005).

For Mohammed Zeid of Gaza, Age 15
There is no stray bullet, sirs.
No bullet like a worried cat
crouching under a bush,
no half-hairless puppy bullet
dodging midnight streets.
The bullet could not be a pecan
plunking the tin roof,
not hardly, no fluff of pollen
on October’s breath,
no humble pebble at our feet.

5

10

So don’t gentle it, please.
We live among stray thoughts,
tasks abandoned midstream.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 749

6/18/12 3:12 PM

750​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

Our fickle hearts are fat
with stray devotions, we feel at home
among bits and pieces,
all the wandering ways of words.

15

But this bullet had no innocence, did not
wish anyone well, you can’t tell us otherwise
by naming it mildly, this bullet was never the friend
of life, should not be granted immunity
by soft saying — friendly fire, straying death-eye,
why have we given the wrong weight to what we do?
Mohammed, Mohammed, deserves the truth.
This bullet had no secret happy hopes,
it was not singing to itself with eyes closed
under the bridge.

20

25

Exploring the Text
1. Who is the speaker in “For Mohammed Zeid of Gaza, Age 15”?
2. What is the setting of the poem? Why is it important?
3. Usually, what part of speech is the word gentle? What is the effect of using it in this
poem as a verb (l. 11)?
4. The speaker objects to a certain use of “stray” (l. 1) yet accepts another (ll. 12 and
15). What distinction is being made?
5. What metaphors for the bullet does the speaker reject? Why are they inappropriate?
6. Why does the speaker believe our hearts are “fickle” and “fat with stray devotions”
(ll. 14–15)?
7. What is the speaker’s purpose in this poem? What does he or she want the audience to understand or feel?

Why I Could Not Accept Your Invitation
Besides the fact that your event
is coming up in three weeks
on the other side of the world
and you just invited me now,
your fax contained the following phrases:
action-research oriented initiative;
regionally based evaluation vehicles;
culture should impregnate all different sectors;

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 750

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

u.S.​CEnSuS​BuREAu​ •​ LAnguAgE​uSE​In​ThE​unITED​STATES​

consumption of cultural products;
key flashpoints in thematic areas.
Don’t get me wrong, I love what you are doing,
believing in art and culture,
there, in the country next to the country
my country has recently been devastating
in the name of democracy,
but that is not the language I live in
and so I cannot come.
I live in teaspoon, bucket, river, pain,
turtle sunning on a brick.
Forgive me. Culture is everything
right about now. But I cannot pretend
a scrap of investment in the language
that allows human beings to kill one another
systematically, abstractly, distantly.
The language wrapped around 37,000,
or whatever the number today,
dead and beautiful bodies thrown into holes
without any tiny, reasonable goodbye.

751

10

15

20

25

Exploring the Text
1. In “Why I Could Not Accept Your Invitation,” what is wrong with the italicized
phrases (ll. 6–10), according to the speaker?
2. Is it significant that the invitation — possibly an invitation to attend a conference
or to give a poetry reading — arrived via fax? Why or why not?
3. What examples of irony do you see in “Why I Could Not Accept Your Invitation”?
4. What does the speaker mean by “I live in teaspoon, bucket, river, pain, / turtle sunning on a brick” (ll. 18–19)?
5. How would you describe the tone of this poem?
6. Discuss how these two poems by Naomi Shihab Nye might be interpreted as
updated examples of George Orwell’s points in “Politics and the English Language” (p. 707).

Language Use in the United States
U.S. Census Bureau
The​following​tables​and​figures​are​from​the​2007​American​Community​Survey​
Reports,​released​by​the​u.S.​Census​Bureau​in​2010.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 751

6/18/12 3:12 PM

752​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

Table​1.

Population 5 Years and Older Who Spoke a Language Other Than English at Home by
Language Group and English-Speaking Ability: 2007
Characteristic

English-speaking​ability
Total​People

Very​well

well

not​well

not​at​all

NUMBER
280,950,438
Population 5 years and older
225,505,953
Spoke​only​English​at​home
55,444,485
Spoke​a​language​other​than​English​at​home

(X)
(X)
30,975,474

(X)
(X)
10,962,722

(X)
(X)
9,011,298

(X)
(X)
4,494,991

Spoke a language other than English
at home
​ Spanish​or​Spanish​Creole
​ other​Indo-European​languages
​ Asian​and​Pacific​Island​languages
​ other​languages

55,444,485
34,547,077
10,320,730
8,316,426
2,260,252

30,975,474 10,962,722
18,179,530
6,322,170
6,936,808
2,018,148
4,274,794
2,176,180
1,584,342
446,224

9,011,298
6,344,110
1,072,025
1,412,264
182,899

4,494,991
3,701,267
293,749
453,188
46,787

PERCENT
Population 5 years and older
Spoke​only​English​at​home
Spoke​a​language​other​than​English​at​home

100.0
80.3
19.7

(X)
(X)
55.9

(X)
(X)
19.8

(X)
(X)
16.3

(X)
(X)
8.1

Spoke a language other than English
at home
​ Spanish​or​Spanish​Creole
​ other​Indo-European​languages
​ Asian​and​Pacific​Island​languages
​ other​languages

100.0
62.3
18.6
15.0
4.1

55.9
52.6
67.2
51.4
70.1

19.8
18.3
19.6
26.2
19.7

16.3
18.4
10.4
17.0
8.1

8.1
10.7
2.8
5.4
2.1

​ ​ (X)​not​applicable.
​ ​ Source:​u.S.​Census​Bureau,​2007​American​Community​Survey.

Table​2.

Languages Spoken at Home: 1980, 1990, 2000, and 2007
(For​information​on​confidentiality​protection,​sampling​error,​nonsampling​error,​and​definitions,​see​www.census.gov/acs/www/ )

2007

Percentage​
change​
1980–2007

Population 5 years and older
Spoke​only​English​at​home
Spoke​a​language​other​than​English​at​home

210,247,455 230,445,777 262,375,152 280,950,438
187,187,415 198,600,798 215,423,557 225,505,953
23,060,040
31,844,979
46,951,595
55,444,485

33.6
20.5
140.4

Spoke a language other than
English at home
​ Spanish​or​Spanish​Creole
​ French​(incl.​Patois,​Cajun,​Creole)
​ Italian
​ Portuguese​or​Portuguese​Creole
​ german
​ Yiddish
​ greek
​ Russian
​ Polish
​ Serbo-Croatian
​ Armenian
​ Persian
​ Chinese
​ Japanese
​ Korean
​ Vietnamese
​ Tagalog

23,060,040
11,116,194
1,550,751
1,618,344
351,875
1,586,593
315,953
401,443
173,226
820,647
150,255
100,634
106,992
630,806
336,318
266,280
197,588
474,150

140.4
210.8
28.0
–50.6
95.3
–30.4
–49.7
–17.8
391.4
–22.2
84.1
120.5
226.8
290.7
36.4
299.0
510.9
212.2

Characteristic

1980

1990

31,844,979
17,345,064
1,930,404
1,308,648
430,610
1,547,987
213,064
388,260
241,798
723,483
70,964
149,694
201,865
1,319,462
427,657
626,478
507,069
843,251

2000

46,951,595
28,101,052
2,097,206
1,008,370
564,630
1,383,442
178,945
365,436
706,242
667,414
233,865
202,708
312,085
2,022,143
477,997
894,063
1,009,627
1,224,241

55,444,485
34,547,077
1,984,824
798,801
687,126
1,104,354
158,991
329,825
851,174
638,059
276,550
221,865
349,686
2,464,572
458,717
1,062,337
1,207,004
1,408,429

​ ​ 1The​languages​highlighted​in​this​table​are​the​languages​for​which​data​were​available​for​the​four​time​periods:​1980,​
1990,​2000,​and​2007.
​ ​ 2The​total​does​not​match​the​sum​of​the​17​languages​listed​in​this​table​because​the​total​includes​all​the​other​languages​
that​are​not​highlighted​here.
​ ​ Source:​u.S.​Census​Bureau,​1980​and​1990​Census,​Census​2000,​and​2007​American​Community​Survey.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 752

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

u.S.​CEnSuS​BuREAu​ •​ LAnguAgE​uSE​In​ThE​unITED​STATES​

753

Figure​2a.

Major Language Groups and English-Speaking Ability by Age: 2007
(Population​5​years​and​older,​in​millions.)
English​only
“Very​​ Less​than​​
well” “very​well”

42.3
5.8 ​ 2.1​ 7.9
5​to​17
​ 1.2​ 0.3​ 1.5
years
​ 0.9​ 0.3​ 1.2
​ 0.3​ 0.1​ 0.4

Spanish
other​Indo-European​languages
Asian​and​Pacific​Island​languages
All​other​languages

72.4
7.7
7.7 ​ 15.3
18​to​40
​ 2.7​ 1.0​ 3.6
years
​ 2.0​ 1.3​ 3.2
​ 0.7​ 0.3​ 1.0
78.3
3.9 5.1 ​ 9.0
41​to​64
​ 2.1​ 1.3​ 3.4
years
​ 1.2​ 1.8​ 3.0
​ 0.5​ 0.2​ 0.7
32.6
​ 0.8​ 1.5​ 2.3
65​years
​ 1.0​ 0.8​ 1.8
and​older
​ 0.3​ 0.7​ 0.9
​ 0.1​ 0.1​ 0.2
Source:​u.S.​Census​Bureau,​2007​American​Community​Survey.

Figure​2b.

Major Language Groups and English-Speaking Ability by Nativity and Citizenship: 2007
(Population​5​years​and​older,​in​millions.)
“Very​​ Less​than​​
well” “very​well”
Spanish

13.4 3.6 ​ 17.0
​ 3.3​ 0.6​ 3.9
native​​
born ​ 1.4​ 0.3​ 1.7
​ 0.7​ 0.1​ 0.9

other​Indo-European​languages
Asian​and​Pacific​Island​languages
All​other​languages
Naturalized citizen

4.7 12.8 ​ 17.5
Foreign​ 3.6 ​ 2.8​ 6.4
born
​ 2.9​ 3.7​ 6.6
​ 0.8​ 0.5​ 1.4

​ 2.1​ 2.7​ 4.9
​ 2.0​ 1.4​ 3.4
​ 1.7​ 1.9​ 3.6
​ 0.5​ 0.2​ 0.7
Not a citizen
​ 2.6​ 10.0​ 12.6
​ 1.6​ 1.4​ 3.0
​ 1.1​ 1.8​ 2.9
​ 0.4​ 0.3​ 0.7

Source:​u.S.​Census​Bureau,​2007​American​Community​Survey.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 753

6/18/12 3:12 PM

754​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

Exploring the Texts
1. What do you see as three major findings reported in Table 1?
2. People speaking at a level below the “very well” category are thought to need
English assistance in some situations, such as bilingual election materials. According to Table 1, which group would be most likely to need such assistance?
3. According to Figure 2a, which age group has the largest number of English-only
speakers? Which group has the highest proportion of people who speak a language
other than English?
4. According to Figure 2b, which characteristic sets Spanish speakers apart from all
three other groups?
5. Which subgroup is least likely to be naturalized citizens?
6. According to Table 2, what is the most significant change between 1980 and 2007?
7. Which languages spoken at home have grown most dramatically in terms of raw
numbers? In terms of percentages?
8. Read Charles Krauthammer’s essay on page 742, and then use the data in these
tables and figures to defend, challenge, or qualify Krauthammer’s argument.

The Effects of Bilingualism
Jim Cummins
This​illustration​appeared​in​Negotiating Identities: Education for Empowerment in
a Diverse Society (1996)​by​Jim​Cummins,​a​professor​at​the​university​of​Toronto.​
The​book​focuses​on​the​social​and​educational​barriers​that​limit​aca​demic​success​for​culturally​diverse​students.

Exploring the Text
1. What is the argument being made here through the frame-by-frame illustrations? In
Toulmin terms (see Chapter 3), what function does the final frame serve? Explain.
2. This argument is essentially an analogy. What is it? How effective is the analogy?
What limitations do you find in the basic comparison?
3. Using the “yes, but” approach to counterargument, pose at least two questions that
challenge this cartoon.
4. Suppose that you are involved in a debate over funding a bilingual education program for the elementary school in your community. How might you use this visual
text to argue for the funding? To argue against the funding?

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 754

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 755

CuMMInS​ •​ ThE​EFFECTS​oF​BILInguALISM​

755

6/18/12 3:12 PM

Conversation
American Politics and the English Language
The following eight texts comment directly or indirectly on the role of language in
American politics.

Sources
1. Institute for Propaganda Analysis, How to Detect Propaganda
2. Michiko Kakutani, The Word Police
3. North York Women Teachers’ Association, Nonviolent Language (table)
4. Mike Lester, NCAA Native American Mascots (cartoon)
5. Geoffrey Nunberg, The -Ism Schism: How Much Wallop Can a Simple Word
Pack?
6. Daniel Okrent, The War of the Words: A Dispatch from the Front Lines
7. Letters to the Editor in Response to The War of the Words
8. Frank Luntz, from Words That Work
After you have read, studied and synthesized these pieces, enter the Conversation
by responding to one of the prompts on page 778.

1. How to Detect Propaganda
Institute for Propaganda Analysis
The​ following​ essay​ appeared​ in​ the​ monthly​ newsletter​ of​ the​ Institute​ for​
Propaganda​Analysis​in​1937.​The​Institute’s​aim,​as​stated​in​one​of​its​early​
publications,​ was​ “to​ conduct​ objective,​ non-​partisan​ studies​ in​ the​ field​ of​
propaganda​and​public​opinion​.​.​.​to​help​the​intelligent​citizen​to​detect​and​
to​analyze​propaganda.​.​.​.”

We are fooled by propaganda chiefly because we don’t recognize it when we see it.
It may be fun to be fooled but, as the cigarette ads used to say, it is more fun to
know. We can more easily recognize propaganda when we see it if we are familiar
with the seven common propaganda devices. These are:
1. The name-calling device.
2. The glittering-generalities device.
3. The transfer device.
4. The testimonial device.
5. The plain-folks device.

756

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 756

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

ConVERSATIon​

757

6. The card-stacking device.
7. The band-wagon device.
Why are we fooled by these devices? Because they appeal to our emotions rather
than to our reason. They make us believe and do something we would not believe
or do if we thought about it calmly, dispassionately. In examining these devices,
note that they work most effectively at those times when we are too lazy to think
for ourselves; also, they tie into emotions that sway us to be “for” or “against”
nations, races, religions, ideals, economic and political policies and practices, and
so on through automobiles, cigarettes, radios, toothpastes, presidents, and wars.
With our emotions stirred, it may be fun to be fooled by these propaganda
devices, but it is more fun and infinitely more in our own interests to know how
they work.

Name Calling
“Name calling” is a device to make us form a judgment without examining the
evidence upon which it should be based. Here the propagandist appeals to our
hate and fear. He does this by giving “bad names” to those individuals, groups,
nations, races, policies, practices, beliefs, and ideals that he would have us condemn and reject. For centuries the name “heretic” was bad. Thousands were
oppressed, tortured, or put to death as heretics. Anybody who dissented from
popular or group belief or practice was in danger of being called a heretic. In
the light of today’s knowledge, some heresies were bad and some were good.
Many of the pioneers of modern science were called heretics; witness the cases
of Copernicus, Galileo, Bruno. Today’s bad names include: fascist, demagogue,
dictator, red, financial oligarchy, communist, muck-raker, alien, outside agitator, economic royalist, utopian, rabble-rouser, trouble-maker, Tory, constitution
wrecker.
“Al” Smith called Roosevelt a communist by implication when he said in his
Liberty League speech, “There can be only one capital, Washington or Moscow.”
When Smith was running for the presidency many called him a tool of the pope,
saying in effect, “We must choose between Washington and Rome.” That implied
that Smith, if elected president, would take his orders from the pope. Recently
Justice Hugo Black has been associated with a bad name — Ku Klux Klan. In these
cases propagandists have tried to make us form judgments without examining
essential evidence and implications. “Al Smith is a Catholic. He must never be
president.” “Roosevelt is a red. Defeat his program.” “Hugo Black is or was a
Klansman. Take him out of the Supreme Court.”
Use of bad names without presentation of their essential meaning, without
all their pertinent implications, comprises perhaps the most common of all propaganda devices. Those who want to maintain the status quo apply bad names to
those who would change it. For example, the Hearst press applies bad names to

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 757

6/18/12 3:12 PM

758​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

communists and socialists. Those who want to change the status quo apply bad
names to those who would maintain it. For example, the Daily Worker and the
American Guardian apply bad names to conservative Republicans and Democrats.

Glittering Generalities
“Glittering generalities” is a device by which the propagandist identifies his program with virtue by use of “virtue words.” Here he appeals to our emotions of
love, generosity, and brotherhood. He uses words such as truth, freedom, honor,
liberty, social justice, public service, the right to work, loyalty, progress, democracy, the American way, constitution defender. These words suggest shining ideals.
All persons of good will believe in these ideals. Hence the propagandist, by identifying his individual group, nation, race, policy, practice, or belief with such
ideals, seeks to win us to his cause. As name-calling is a device to make us form a
judgment to reject and condemn, without examining the evidence, glittering generalities is a device to make us accept and approve, without examining the evidence.
For example, use of the phrases “the right to work” and “social justice” may
be a device to make us accept programs for meeting the labor–capital problem
which, if we examined them critically, we would not accept at all.
In the name-calling and glittering-generalities devices, words are used to stir
up our emotions and to befog our thinking. In one device “bad words” are used
to make us mad; in the other “good words” are used to make us glad.
The propagandist is most effective in the use of these devices when his words
make us create devils to fight or gods to adore. By his use of the bad words, we
personify as a “devil” some nation, race, group, individual, policy, practice, or
ideal; we are made fighting mad to destroy it. By use of good words, we personify
as a god-like idol some nation, race, group, and so on. Words that are bad to some
are good to others, or may be made so. Thus, to some the New Deal is “a prophecy
of social salvation” while to others it is “an omen of social disaster.”
From consideration of names, “bad” and “good,” we pass to institutions and
symbols, also “bad” and “good.” We see these in the next device.

5

Transfer
“Transfer” is a device by which the propagandist carries over the authority, sanction, and prestige of something we respect and revere to something he would
have us accept. For example, most of us respect and revere our church and our
nation. If the propagandist succeeds in getting church or nation to approve a
campaign on behalf of some program, he thereby transfers its authority, sanction,
and prestige to that program. Thus we may accept something that otherwise we
might reject.
In the transfer device symbols are constantly used. The cross represents the
Christian Church. The flag represents the nation. Cartoons such as Uncle Sam
represent a consensus of public opinion. Those symbols stir emotions. At their

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 758

10

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

ConVERSATIon​

759

very sight, with the speed of light, is aroused the whole complex of feelings we
have with respect to church or nation. A cartoonist, by having Uncle Sam disapprove a budget for unemployment relief, would have us feel that the whole
United States disapproves relief costs. By drawing an Uncle Sam who approves
the same budget, the cartoonist would have us feel that the American people
approve it. Thus, the transfer device is used both for and against causes and ideas.

Testimonial
The “testimonial” is a device to make us accept anything from a patent medicine
or a cigarette to a program of national policy. In this device the propagandist
makes use of testimonials. “When I feel tired, I smoke a Camel and get the grandest ‘lift.’” “We believe the John Lewis plan of labor organization is splendid; C. I. O.
should be supported.” This device works in reverse also; counter-testimonials
may be employed. Seldom are these used against commercial products such as
patent medicines and cigarettes, but they are constantly employed in social, economic, and political issues. “We believe that the John Lewis plan of labor organization is bad; C. I. O. should not be supported.”

Plain Folks
“Plain folks” is a device used by politicians, labor leaders, business men, and even
by ministers and educators to win our confidence by appearing to be people just
like ourselves — “just plain folks among the neighbors.” In election years especially candidates show their devotion to little children and the common, homey
things of life. They have front-porch campaigns. For the newspaper men they raid
the kitchen cupboard, finding there some of the good wife’s apple pie. They go to
country picnics; they attend service at the old frame church; they pitch hay and
go fishing; they show their belief in home and mother. In short, they would win
our votes by showing that they’re just as ordinary as the rest of us — “just plain
folks” — and, therefore, wise and good. Business men are often “plain folks” with
the factory hands. Even distillers use the device, “It’s our family’s whiskey, neighbor; and neighbor, it’s your price.”

Card-Stacking
“Card-stacking” is a device in which the propagandist employs all the arts of
deception to win our support for himself, his group, nation, race, policy, practice,
belief, or ideal. He stacks the cards against the truth. He uses under-emphasis and
over-emphasis to dodge issues and evade facts. He resorts to lies, censorship, and
distortion. He omits facts. He offers false testimony. He creates a smoke-screen of
clamor by raising a new issue when he wants an embarrassing matter forgotten.
He draws a red herring across the trail to confuse and divert those in quest of facts
he does not want revealed. He makes the unreal appear real and the real appear

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 759

6/18/12 3:12 PM

760​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

unreal. He lets half-truth masquerade as truth. By the card-stacking device, a
mediocre candidate, through the “build-up,” is made to appear an intellectual
titan; an ordinary prize fighter a probable world champion; a worthless patent
medicine a beneficent cure. By means of this device propagandists would convince
us that a ruthless war of aggression is a crusade for righteousness. Some member
nations of the Non-Intervention Committee send their troops to intervene in
Spain. Card-stacking employs sham, hypocrisy, effrontery.

The Band Wagon
The “band wagon” is a device to make us follow the crowd, to accept the propagandist’s program en masse. Here his theme is: “Everybody’s doing it.” His techniques range from those of medicine show to dramatic spectacle. He hires a hall,
fills a great stadium, marches a million men in parade. He employs symbols, colors, music, movement, all the dramatic arts. He appeals to the desire, common to
most of us, to “follow the crowd.” Because he wants us to follow the crowd in
masses, he directs his appeal to groups held together by common ties of nationality, religion, race, environment, sex, vocation. Thus propagandists campaigning
for or against a program will appeal to us as Catholics, Protestants, or Jews; as
members of the Nordic race or as Negroes; as farmers or as school teachers; as
housewives or as miners. All the artifices of flattery are used to harness the fears
and hatreds, prejudices and biases, convictions and ideals common to the group;
thus emotion is made to push and pull the group on to the band wagon. In newspaper articles and in the spoken word this device is also found. “Don’t throw your
vote away. Vote for our candidate. He’s sure to win.” Nearly every candidate wins
in every election — before the votes are in.

15

Propaganda and Emotion
Observe that in all these devices our emotion is the stuff with which propagandists work. Without it they are helpless; with it, harnessing it to their purposes,
they can make us glow with pride or burn with hatred, they can make us zealots
in behalf of the program they espouse. Propaganda as generally understood is
expression of opinion or action by individuals or groups with reference to predetermined ends. Without the appeal to our emotion — to our fears and to our
courage, to our selfishness and unselfishness, to our loves and to our hates —
propagandists would influence few opinions and few actions.
To say this is not to condemn emotion, an essential part of life, or to assert
that all predetermined ends of propagandists are “bad.” What we mean is that the
intelligent citizen does not want propagandists to utilize his emotions, even to the
attainment of “good” ends, without knowing what is going on. He does not want
to be “used” in the attainment of ends he may later consider “bad.” He does not
want to be gullible. He does not want to be fooled. He does not want to be duped,
even in a “good” cause. He wants to know the facts and among these is included
the fact of the utilization of his emotions.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 760

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

ConVERSATIon​

761

Keeping in mind the seven common propaganda devices, turn to today’s
newspapers and almost immediately you can spot examples of them all. At election time or during any campaign, “plain folks” and “band wagon” are common.
“Card-stacking” is hardest to detect because it is adroitly executed or because we
lack the information necessary to nail the lie. A little practice with the daily newspapers in detecting these propaganda devices soon enables us to detect them elsewhere — in radio, newsreel, books, magazines, and in expressions of labor unions,
business groups, churches, schools, political parties.

Questions
1. Considering the first and last sections of this piece, how would you express the
Institute for Propaganda Analysis’s attitude toward propaganda? Do you share its
attitude? Explain.
2. Summarize each of the seven propaganda devices, and provide a contemporary
example to illustrate each one.
3. In the final section of this essay, the authors define propaganda as “the expression
of opinion or action by individuals or groups with reference to predetermined
ends” (para. 16). Based on this definition, explain what propaganda is and what it
is not. Use examples to illustrate your point.
4. Toward the end of this essay, the authors assert that their intent is “not to condemn
emotion” (para. 17) but rather to help people understand how emotions are utilized in appeals made by advertisers, politicians, and others. Discuss a recent
speech, public service announcement, or advertisement that appeals to emotions
in a positive, not merely a manipulative, way.

2. The Word Police
Michiko Kakutani
Michiko​Kakutani​is​a​Pulitzer​Prize–winning​literary​critic​known​for​her​book​
reviews​in​the​New York Times.​“The​word​Police”​appeared​in​the​New York
Times in​January​1993.

This month’s inaugural festivities, with their celebration, in Maya Angelou’s
words, of “humankind” — “the Asian, the Hispanic, the Jew / The African, the
Native American, the Sioux, / The Catholic, the Muslim, the French, the Greek /
The Irish, the Rabbi, the Priest, the Sheik, / The Gay, the Straight, the Preacher, /
The privileged, the homeless, the Teacher” — constituted a kind of official
embrace of multiculturalism and a new politics of inclusion.
The mood of political correctness, however, has already made firm inroads
into popular culture. Washington boasts a store called Politically Correct that
sells pro-whale, anti-meat, ban-the-bomb T-shirts, bumper stickers, and buttons,
as well as a local cable television show called “Politically Correct Cooking” that

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 761

6/18/12 3:12 PM

762​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

features interviews in the kitchen with representatives from groups like People for
the Ethical Treatment of Animals.
The Coppertone suntan lotion people are planning to give their longtime
cover girl, Little Miss (Ms.?) Coppertone, a male equivalent, Little Mr. Coppertone.
And even Superman (Superperson?) is rumored to be returning this spring, reincarnated as four ethnically diverse clones: an African-American, an Asian, a
Caucasian and a Latino.
Nowhere is this P.C. mood more striking than in the increasingly noisy
debate over language that has moved from university campuses to the country
at large — a development that both underscores Americans’ puritanical zeal for
reform and their unwavering faith in the talismanic power of words.
Certainly no decent person can quarrel with the underlying impulse behind
political correctness: a vision of a more just, inclusive society in which racism,
sexism, and prejudice of all sorts have been erased. But the methods and fervor of
the self-appointed language police can lead to a rigid orthodoxy — and unintentional self-parody — opening the movement to the scorn of conservative opponents and the mockery of cartoonists and late-night television hosts.
It’s hard to imagine women earning points for political correctness by saying
“ovarimony” instead of “testimony” — as one participant at the recent Modern
Language Association convention was overheard to suggest. It’s equally hard to
imagine people wanting to flaunt their lack of prejudice by giving up such words
and phrases as “bull market,” “kaiser roll,” “Lazy Susan,” and “charley horse.”
Several books on bias-free language have already appeared, and the 1991 edition of the Random House Webster’s College Dictionary boasts an appendix titled
“Avoiding Sexist Language.” The dictionary also includes such linguistic mutations as “womyn” (women, “used as an alternative spelling to avoid the suggestion
of sexism perceived in the sequence m-e-n”) and “waitron” (a gender-blind term
for waiter or waitress).
Many of these dictionaries and guides not only warn the reader against
offensive racial and sexual slurs, but also try to establish and enforce a whole new
set of usage rules. Take, for instance, The Bias-Free Word Finder, a Dictionary of
Nondiscriminatory Language by Rosalie Maggio (Beacon Press) — a volume often
indistinguishable, in its meticulous solemnity, from the tongue-in-cheek Official
Politically Correct Dictionary and Handbook put out last year by Henry Beard and
Christopher Cerf (Villard Books). Ms. Maggio’s book supplies the reader intent
on using kinder, gentler language with writing guidelines as well as a detailed listing of more than 5,000 “biased words and phrases.”
Whom are these guidelines for? Somehow one has a tough time picturing
them replacing Fowler’s Modern English Usage in the classroom, or being adopted
by the average man (sorry, individual) in the street.
The “pseudogeneric ‘he,’ ” we learn from Ms. Maggio, is to be avoided like the
plague, as is the use of the word “man” to refer to humanity. “Fellow,” “king,” “lord”
and “master” are bad because they’re “male-oriented words,” and “king,” “lord”
and “master” are especially bad because they’re also “hierarchical, dominator

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 762

5

10

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

ConVERSATIon​

763

society terms.” The politically correct lion becomes the “monarch of the jungle,”
new-age children play “someone on the top of the heap,” and the “Mona Lisa”
goes down in history as Leonardo’s “acme of perfection.”
As for the word “black,” Ms. Maggio says it should be excised from terms with
a negative spin: she recommends substituting words like “mouse” for “black eye,”
“ostracize” for “blackball,” “payola” for “blackmail” and “outcast” for “black sheep.”
Clearly, some of these substitutions work better than others: somehow the “sinister humor” of Kurt Vonnegut or Saturday Night Live doesn’t quite make it; nor
does the “denouncing” of the Hollywood 10.1
For the dedicated user of politically correct language, all these rules can make
for some messy moral dilemmas. Whereas “battered wife” is a gender-biased term,
the gender-free term “battered spouse,” Ms. Maggio notes, incorrectly implies
“that men and women are equally battered.”
On one hand, say Francine Wattman Frank and Paula A. Treichler in their
book Language, Gender, and Professional Writing (Modern Language Association), “he or she” is an appropriate construction for talking about an individual
(like a jockey, say) who belongs to a profession that’s predominantly male — it’s a
way of emphasizing “that such occupations are not barred to women or that
women’s concerns need to be kept in mind.” On the other hand, they add, using
masculine pronouns rhetorically can underscore ongoing male dominance in
those fields, implying the need for change.
And what about the speech codes adopted by some universities in recent
years? Although they were designed to prohibit students from uttering sexist and
racist slurs, they would extend, by logic, to blacks who want to use the word “nigger” to strip the term of its racist connotations, or homosexuals who want to use
the word “queer” to reclaim it from bigots.
In her book, Ms. Maggio recommends applying bias-free usage retroactively:
she suggests paraphrasing politically incorrect quotations, or replacing “the sexist
words or phrases with ellpsis dots and/or bracketed substitutes,” or using “sic” to
show that the sexist words come from the original quotation and to call attention
to the fact that they are incorrect.”
Which leads the skeptical reader of The Bias-Free Word Finder to wonder
whether “All the King’s Men” should be retitled “All the Ruler’s People”; “Pet Semetary,” “Animal Companion Graves”; “Birdman of Alcatraz,” “Birdperson of Alcatraz”; and “The Iceman Cometh,” “The Ice Route Driver Cometh”?
Will making such changes remove the prejudice in people’s minds? Should
we really spend time trying to come up with non-male-based alternatives to
“Midas touch,” “Achilles’ heel” and “Montezuma’s revenge”? Will tossing out
Santa Claus — whom Ms. Maggio accuses of reinforcing “the cultural male-asnorm system” — in favor of Belfana, his Italian female alter ego, truly help banish
sexism? Can the avoidance of “violent expressions and metaphors” like “kill two

15

1Actors and filmmakers blacklisted from making movies in the 1940s because they were allegedly Communists. — Eds.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 763

6/18/12 3:12 PM

764​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

birds with one stone,” “sock it to ’em” or “kick an idea around” actually promote
a more harmonious world?
The point isn’t that the excesses of the word police are comical. The point is
that their intolerance (in the name of tolerance) has disturbing implications. In
the first place, getting upset by phrases like “bullish on America” or “the City of
Brotherly Love” tends to distract attention from the real problems of prejudice
and injustice that exist in society at large, turning them into mere questions of
semantics. Indeed, the emphasis currently put on politically correct usage has
uncanny parallels with the academic movement of deconstruction — a method
of textual analysis that focuses on language and linguistic pyrotechnics — which
has become firmly established on university campuses.
In both cases, attention is focused on surfaces, on words and metaphors; in
both cases, signs and symbols are accorded more importance than content. Hence,
the attempt by some radical advocates to remove The Adventures of Huckleberry
Finn from curriculums on the grounds that Twain’s use of the word “nigger”
makes the book a racist text — never mind the fact that this American classic
(written in 1884) depicts the spiritual kinship achieved between a white boy and
a runaway slave, never mind the fact that the “nigger” Jim emerges as the novel’s
most honorable, decent character.
Ironically enough, the P.C. movement’s obsession with language is accompanied by a strange Orwellian willingness to warp the meaning of words by placing
them under a high-powered ideological lens. For instance, the Dictionary of Cautionary Words and Phrases — a pamphlet issued by the University of Missouri’s
Multicultural Management Program to help turn “today’s journalists into tomorrow’s multicultural newsroom managers” — warns that using the word “articulate” to describe members of a minority group can suggest the opposite, “that
‘those people’ are not considered well educated, articulate and the like.”
The pamphlet patronizes minority groups, by cautioning the reader against
using the words “lazy” and “burly” to describe any member of such groups; and
it issues a similar warning against using words like “gorgeous” and “petite” to
describe women.
As euphemism proliferates with the rise of political correctness, there is a
spread of the sort of sloppy, abstract language that Orwell said is “designed to
make lies sound truthful and murder respectable, and to give an appearance of
solidity to pure wind.” “Fat” becomes “big boned” or “differently sized”; “stupid”
becomes “exceptional”; “stoned” becomes “chemically inconvenienced.”
Wait a minute here! Aren’t such phrases eerily reminiscent of the euphemisms coined by the government during Vietnam and Watergate? Remember
how the military used to speak of “pacification,” or how President Richard M.
Nixon’s press secretary, Ronald L. Ziegler, tried to get away with calling a lie an
“inoperative statement”?
Calling the homeless “the underhoused” doesn’t give them a place to live;
calling the poor “the economically marginalized” doesn’t help them pay the bills.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 764

20

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

ConVERSATIon​

765

Rather, by playing down their plight, such language might even make it easier to
shrug off the seriousness of their situation.
Instead of allowing free discussion and debate to occur, many gung-ho advocates of politically correct language seem to think that simple suppression of a
word or concept will magically make the problem disappear. In The Bias-Free
Word Finder, Ms. Maggio entreats the reader not to perpetuate the negative stereotype of Eve. “Be extremely cautious in referring to the biblical Eve,” she writes;
“this story has profoundly contributed to negative attitudes toward women
throughout history, largely because of misogynistic and patriarchal interpretations that labeled her evil, inferior, and seductive.”
The story of Bluebeard, the rake (whoops! — the libertine) who killed his seven
wives, she says, is also to be avoided, as is the biblical story of Jezebel. Of Jesus Christ,
Ms. Maggio writes: “There have been few individuals in history as completely
androgynous as Christ, and it does his message a disservice to overinsist on his
maleness.” She doesn’t give the reader any hints on how this might be accomplished; presumably, one is supposed to avoid describing him as the Son of God.
Of course the P.C. police aren’t the only ones who want to proscribe what people
should say or give them guidelines for how they may use an idea; Jesse Helms and his
supporters are up to exactly the same thing when they propose to patrol the boundaries of the permissible in art. In each case, the would-be censor aspires to suppress
what he or she finds distasteful — all, of course, in the name of the public good.
In the case of the politically correct, the prohibition of certain words, phrases
and ideas is advanced in the cause of building a brave new world free of racism
and hate, but this vision of harmony clashes with the very ideals of diversity and
inclusion that the multicultural movement holds dear, and it’s purchased at the
cost of freedom of expression and freedom of speech.
In fact, the utopian world envisioned by the language police would be bought
at the expense of the ideas of individualism and democracy articulated in “The
Gettysburg Address”: “Fourscore and seven years ago our fathers brought forth
on this continent a new nation, conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.”
Of course, the P.C. police have already found Lincoln’s words hopelessly
“phallocentric.” No doubt they would rewrite the passage: “Fourscore and seven
years ago our foremothers and forefathers brought forth on this continent a new
nation, formulated with liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all humankind is created equal.”

25

30

Questions
1. Michiko Kakutani opens with a reference to the poem “On the Pulse of Morning”
that Maya Angelou read at the inauguration of President Bill Clinton. Why does
she connect a poem and an event that illustrate the “politics of inclusion” (para. 1)
to the “mood of political correctness” (para. 2)?

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 765

6/18/12 3:12 PM

766​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

2. What does she mean by “the increasingly noisy debate over language” that “both
underscores Americans’ puritanical zeal for reform and their unwavering faith in
the talismanic power of words” (para. 4)?
3. By using the term “language police” (para. 5), what attitude does Kakutani convey
toward political correctness? Do you find the term appropriate? Explain why or
why not.
4. Kakutani states her argument about language and political correctness most
emphatically in the final paragraphs of the essay. What tension does she develop?
To what extent do you agree with her?

3. Nonviolent Language
North York Women Teachers’ Association
The​following​language​guidelines​appeared​in​a​brochure​written​for​elementary​teachers​in​ontario.​The​guidelines​were​reprinted​in​Harper’s magazine​
in​February​1995.

VIOLENT PHRASE

ALTERNATIVE

Kill two birds with one stone

Get two for the price of one

There’s more than one way to skin a cat

There are different ways to solve a problem

Take a stab at it

Go for it!

Get away with murder

Avoid consequences

It’s an uphill battle

It’s next to impossible

You’re dead meat

You’re in serious trouble

Kick it around

Consider the options

That’s a low blow

That’s outside the rules

Hit them where it hurts

Find their vulnerability

Crash the party

Show up anyway

Shoot yourself in the foot

Undermine your own position

Hit the computer key

Press the computer key

Blown out of the water

Reduced to nothing

Questions
1. Which of these “violent phrase[s]” do you find offensive and thus in need of
change? Which do you find foolish or silly?

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 766

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

ConVERSATIon​

767

2. Which of the alternatives would you say most change the meaning of the original
phrase?
3. This list was suggested by a Canadian organization of teachers. Explain why you
think it would or would not be taken seriously in the United States.
4. Most of these phrases are slang or clichés. What phrases in common parlance
today might be considered “violent” and thus offensive?

4. NCAA Native American Mascots
Mike Lester
The​following​cartoon​by​Mike​Lester,​cartoonist​for​the​Rome News-Tribune​in​
georgia,​appeared​in​2005.​It​refers​to​the​national​College​Athletic​Association’s​position​on​the​use​of​native​American​names​for​sports​teams​and​their​
mascots.

(See​insert​for​color​version.)

Questions
1. What is the setting of Mike Lester’s cartoon? Why is it important to his subject?
2. How does the written text contribute to the cartoon’s message?
3. What point is Lester making? What role does irony play in making the point?

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 767

6/18/12 3:12 PM

768​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

4. What are at least two different ways to interpret the point Lester is making in this
cartoon?
5. Do you find this cartoon persuasive? Humorous? Insightful? Explain your response.

5. The -Ism Schism: How Much Wallop
Can a Simple Word Pack?
Geoffrey Nunberg
In​the​following​New York Times​editorial,​geoffrey​nunberg,​a​senior​researcher​
and​linguistics​professor​at​Stanford​university,​examines​the​history​and​use​
of​the​word​terror​and​its​derivatives.

“The long-term defeat of terror will happen when freedom takes hold in the
broader Middle East,” President Bush said on June 28, [2004], as he announced
the early transfer of sovereignty to the Iraqis.
The “defeat of terror” — the working suggests that much has changed since
Sept. 11, 2001. In his speech on that day, Mr. Bush said, “We stand together to win
the war against terrorism,” and over the following year in the White House
described the enemy as terrorism twice as often as terror. But in White House
speeches over the past year, those proportions have been reversed. And the shift
from “terrorism” to “terror” has been equally dramatic in major newspapers,
according to a search of several databases.
Broad linguistic shifts like those usually owe less to conscious decisions by
editors or speechwriters than to often unnoticed changes in the way people perceive their world. Terrorism may itself be a vague term, as critics have argued. But
terror is still more amorphous and elastic, and alters the understanding not just
of the enemy but of the war against it.
True, phrases like “terror plots” or “terror threat level” can make terror seem
merely a headline writer’s shortening of the word terrorism. But even there, “terror” draws on a more complex set of meanings. It evokes both the actions of terrorists and the fear they are trying to engender.
“Do we cower in the face of terror?” Mr. Bush asked on Irish television a few
days before the handover in Iraq, with terror doing double work.
And unlike “terrorism,” “terror” can be applied to states as well as to insurgent groups, as in the President’s frequent references to Saddam Hussein’s “terror
regime.” Even if Mr. Hussein can’t actually be linked to the attacks of Sept. 11,
“terror” seems to connect them etymologically.
The modern senses of “terror” and “terrorism” reach back to a single historical moment: “la Terreur,” Robespierre’s Reign of Terror in 1793 and 1794.
“Terror,” Robespierre said, “is nothing other than justice, prompt, severe,
inflexible, it is therefore an emanation of virtue.”

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 768

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

ConVERSATIon​

769

It was the ruthless severity of that emanation that moved Edmund Burke to
decry “those hell-hounds called terrorists,” in one of the first recorded uses of
“terrorist” in English.
For Robespierre and his contemporaries, “terror” conveyed the exalted emotion people may feel when face to face with the absolute. That was what led Albert
Camus to describe terror as the urge that draws people to the violent certainties
of totalitarianism, where rebellion hardens into ideology.
With time, though, the word’s aura of sublimity faded. By 1880, “holy terror”
was only a jocular name for an obstreperous child and “terrible” no longer suggested the sense of awe it had in “terrible swift sword.” By the Jazz Age, “terrific”
was just a wan superlative. Terror was still a name for intense fear, but it no longer
connoted a social force.
“Terrorism,” too, has drifted since its origin. By modern times, the word
could refer only to the use of violence against a government, not on its behalf —
though some still claimed the “terrorist” designation proudly, like the Russian
revolutionaries who assassinated Czar Alexander II in 1881 and the Zionist Stern
Gang (later the Lehi), which, in the 1940’s used assassination and other violent
means in hopes of driving the British occupiers out of Palestine.
It wasn’t until the beginning of the post-colonial period that all groups rejected
the terrorist label in favor of names like freedom fighters or mujahadeen. By then,
“terrorism” was no longer a genuine -ism, but the name for a reprehensible strategy, often extended as a term of abuse for anyone whose methods seemed ruthless.
But the recent uses of “terror” seem to draw its disparate, superseded senses
back together in a way that Burke might have found familiar. Today, it is again a
name that encompasses both the dark forces that threaten “civilization” and the
fears they arouse.
The new senses of the noun are signaled in another linguistic shift in the
press and in White House speeches. Just as “terrorism” has been replaced by “terror,” so “war” is much more likely now to be followed by “on” rather than “against.”
That “war on” pattern dates from the turn of the 20th century, when people
adapted epidemiological metaphors like “the war on typhus” to describe campaigns against social evils like alcohol, crime and poverty — endemic conditions
that could be mitigated but not eradicated. Society may declare a war on drugs or
drunken driving, but no one expects total victory.
“The war on terror,” too, suggests a campaign aimed not at human adversaries but at a pervasive social plague. At its most abstract, terror comes to seem as
persistent and inexplicable as evil itself, without raising any inconvenient theological qualms. And in fact, the White House’s use of “evil” has declined by
80 percent over the same period that its use of “terror” has been increasing.
Like wars on ignorance and crime, a “war on terror” suggests an enduring state of struggle — a “never ending fight against terror and its relentless
onslaughts,” as Camus put it in The Plague, his 1947 allegory on the rise and fall
of Fascism. It is as if the language is girding itself for the long haul.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 769

10

15

6/18/12 3:12 PM

770​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

Questions
1. What is Geoffrey Nunberg’s main point?
2. What is Nunberg’s purpose in offering a historical perspective on the word terror
and its derivatives?
3. What allusions does Nunberg make? What is the effect of these allusions?
4. Why does Nunberg include the analysis of “war on” versus “war against”? Do
you see the analysis as peripheral or essential to his discussion of terror? Explain why.
5. Is Nunberg being critical of George W. Bush by using examples from his speeches?
Cite specific passages to support your opinion.

6. The War of the Words: A Dispatch from the
Front Lines
Daniel Okrent
In​the​following​2005​​article,​Daniel​okrent,​then​public​editor​of​the​New
York Times,​ discusses​ the​ use​ of​ terrorist​ and​ terrorism​ in​ the​ Times​ and​ the​
language​used​to​report​news​from​the​​Middle​East.

Nothing provokes as much rage as what many perceive to be the Times’s policy on
the use of “terrorist,” “terrorism” and “terror.” There is no policy, actually, but
except in the context of Al Qaeda, or in direct quotations, these words, as explosive as what they describe, show up very rarely.
Among pro-Israeli readers (and nonreaders urged to write to me by media
watchdog organizations), the controversy over variants of the T-word has become
the stand-in for the Israel-Palestine conflict itself. When Israel’s targeted assassinations of suspected sponsors of terrorism provoke retaliation, some proPalestinian readers argue that any armed response against civilians by such groups
as Hamas is morally equivalent. Critics on the other side say the Times’s general
avoidance of the word “terrorism” is a political decision, and exactly what Hamas
wants.
Here’s what I want: A path out of this thicket, which is snarled with far more
than “terror” and its derivative tendrils. I packed the preceding paragraph with
enough verbal knots to secure the QE2, so I’ll untangle them one by one.
“Pro-Israeli” and “pro-Palestinian”: Adem Carroll of the Islamic Circle of
North America has pointed out to me that both epithets represent value judgments. Are Ariel Sharon’s policies pro-Israel? Not in the minds of his critics on
the Israeli left. Is Mahmoud Abbas’s negotiation policy pro-Palestinian? I doubt
that supporters of Islamic jihad believe it is.
“Israel-Palestine conflict”: I’ve heard from ardent Zionists who deplore this
usage because, they say, “There is no Palestine.”

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 770

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

ConVERSATIon​

771

“Targeted assassinations”: The Israel Defense Forces use this term; Palestinians believe it implicitly exonerates Israel for the deaths of nearby innocents. The
Times tries to avoid it, but an editor’s attempt at a substitute on Jan. 27 [2005] —
“pinpoint killings” — was even more accepting of the Israeli line.
“Settlers”: Are they merely settlers when they carry out armed actions against
Palestinians?
“Groups such as Hamas”: According to the European Union and the United
States government, which are both cited regularly by an army of readers, Hamas
is a terrorist organization. According to Times deputy foreign editor Ethan Bronner: “We use ‘terrorist’ sparingly because it is a loaded word. Describing the goals
or acts of a group often serves readers better than repeating the term ‘terrorist.’
We make clear that Hamas seeks the destruction of Israel through violence but
that it is also a significant political and social force among Palestinians, fielding
candidates and clinics and day care centers.” According to many Times critics, that
just won’t do.
There was one more bugbear in that overloaded paragraph up top: “Media
watchdog organizations.” That’s what you call the noble guardians on your side;
the other guy’s dishonest advocates are “pressure groups.” Both are accurate characterizations, but trying to squeeze them into the same sentence can get awfully
clumsy. It’s also clumsy to befog clear prose by worrying over words so obsessively
that strong sentences get ground into grits. But closing one’s ears to the complaints of partisans would also entail closing one’s mind to the substance of their
arguments.
The Armed Conflict in the Area Between Lebanon and Egypt may yield the
most linguistically volatile issues confronting Times editors, but I’ve encountered
a ferocious tug-of-war between advocates of each of the following as well: Genital
mutilation vs. genital cutting (“would you call ritual male circumcision ‘genital
mutilation’?”). Liberal vs. moderate (“you’re simply trying to make liberalism
look reasonable and inoffensive” as in calling Michael Bloomberg a “moderate
Republican”). Abuse vs. torture (“if the Abu Ghraib victims had been American
soldiers,” the Times “would have described it as torture”). Partial birth vs. intact
dilation and extraction (the use of the former demonstrates that the Times “has
embraced the terminology of anti-abortion forces”). “Iraqi forces” vs. “Americanbacked forces” (“aren’t the Sunni insurgents Iraqis?”). Don’t get me started on
“insurgents,” much less homeless vs. vagrant, affirmative action vs. racial preferences, or loophole vs. tax incentive.
Now a rugby scrum has gathered around the Bush Social Security plan.
Republicans tout “personal accounts”; Democrats trash “private accounts.” In this
atmosphere, I don’t think reporters have much choice other than to use “private”
and “personal” interchangeably, and to interchange them often. Once one side of
an ideological conflict has seized control of a word, it no longer has a meaning of
its own; opting for one or the other would be a declaration that doesn’t belong in
the news reports.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 771

10

6/18/12 3:12 PM

772​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

Hijacking the language proves especially pernicious when government officials deodorize their programs with near-Orwellian euphemism. (If Orwell were
writing “Politics and the English Language” today, he’d need a telephone book to
contain his “catalog of swindles and perversions.”) The Bush administration has
been especially good at this; just count the number of times self-anointing phrases
like “Patriot Act,” “Clear Skies Act” or “No Child Left Behind Act” appear in the
Times, at each appearance sounding as wholesome as a hymn. Even the most
committed Republicans must recognize that such phrases could apply to measures guaranteeing the opposite of what they claim to accomplish.
When the next Democratic administration rolls around, Republicans will
likely discover how it feels to be on the losing side of a propaganda war. (The
Clinton White House wasn’t very good at this: somehow, the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996, which remade federal
welfare policy, never hit the top of the charts.)
The Times shouldn’t play along. If the sports section calls the Orange Bowl
the Orange Bowl, even if its formal name is the Federal Express Orange Bowl,
why can’t the news pages refer to the Public Education Act of 2002, or the Industrial Emissions Act of 2005? Similarly, editors could ban the use of “reform” as a
description of legislative action. It’s even worse than “moderate,” something so
benign in tone and banal in substance that it can be used to camouflage any depredations its sponsors propose. Who could oppose health care reform, Social
Security reform or welfare reform, and who could tell me what any of them
means? You could call the rule barring (or at least radically limiting) the use of
these shameless beards the Save the Language Act.
Of course, reform of the use of “reform,” or a consistent assault on any of the
linguistic cosmetics used by politicians and interest groups to disfigure public
debate, could bring on charges of bias (a word which itself has almost come to
mean “something I disagree with”).
But I think in some instances the Times’s earnest effort to avoid bias can desiccate language and dilute meaning. In a January memo to the foreign desk, former Jerusalem bureau chief James Bennet addressed the paper’s gingerly use of
the word “terrorism.”
“The calculated bombing of students in a university cafeteria, or of families
gathered in an ice cream parlor, cries out to be called what it is,” he wrote. “I
wanted to avoid the political meaning that comes with ‘terrorism,’ but I couldn’t
pretend that the word had no usage at all in plain English.” Bennet came to believe
that “not to use the term began to seem like a political act in itself.”
I agree. While some Israelis and their supporters assert that any Palestinian
holding a gun is a terrorist, there can be neither factual nor moral certainty that
he is. But if the same man fires into a crowd of civilians, he has committed an act
of terror, and he is a terrorist. My own definition is simple: an act of political
violence committed against purely civilian targets is terrorism; attacks on military targets are not. The deadly October 2000 assault on the American destroyer

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 772

15

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

ConVERSATIon​

773

Cole or the devastating suicide bomb that killed 18 American soldiers and 4 Iraqis
in Mosul last December may have been heinous, but these were acts of war, not
terrorism. Beheading construction workers in Iraq and bombing a market in
Jerusalem are terrorism pure and simple.
Given the word’s history as a virtual battle flag over the past several years, it
would be tendentious for the Times to require constant use of it, as some of the
paper’s critics are insisting. But there’s something uncomfortably fearful, and
inevitably self-defeating, about struggling so hard to avoid it.

7. Letters to the Editor in Response to
The War of the Words
Following​is​a​series​of​letters​to​Daniel​okrent​in​response​to​his​​article​“The​
war​of​the​words.”

Re “The War of the Words: A Dispatch from the Front Lines” (March 6):
The right definition of terrorism is “acts of war by nongovernmental organizations.” But the fact that this is the only definition that matches both intent and
usage is irrelevant. “Terrorism” has no agreed-upon definition. We should therefore drop the use of the term. Palestinian bus bombers should be called “bus
bombers.” Hamas should be called a “quasi-military group.” The attack on New
York and Washington by Al Qaeda should be called an “attack.”
— Warren Seltzer, Jerusalem, March 6, 2005

You write: “The deadly October 2000 assault on the American destroyer Cole or
the devastating suicide bomb that killed 18 American soldiers and 4 Iraqis in
Mosul last December may have been heinous, but these were acts of war, not
terrorism.”
The bombing of the Cole was an “act of war”? Isn’t war a conflict between
legitimate governments, adhering to certain universally agreed-upon “rules”? As
far as I know, no government declared war against the United States by attacking
the Cole, just as no government declared war by attacking the World Trade Center
and the Pentagon.
— Cathleen Medwick, Somers, N.Y., March 6, 2005

Supporters of Israel’s policies have long dominated this war of words in the
American news media. Otherwise, you and your colleagues might be debating
whether to use “settlers” or “colonists” for the inhabitants of Israeli enclaves in the
occupied territories: the former implies that they moved into uninhabited territory; the latter that someone else might already have been living there. Use of
“colonists” brings charges of anti-Semitism, however, while “settlers,” which is at
least equally partisan, is widely treated as a neutral descriptive term.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 773

6/18/12 3:12 PM

774​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

Journalists at the New York Times will never satisfy everyone when writing
about the Middle East. But trying not to ruffle feathers should take a back seat to
accuracy and clarity.
— Robert Dimit, New York, March 6, 2005

Regarding the phrasing “Israel-Palestine conflict,” you write, “I’ve heard from
ardent Zionists who deplore this usage because they say, ‘There is no Palestine.’ ”
You failed to mention that most Palestinians, and other Arabs for that matter, say,
“There is no Israel.”
— Shlomo Singer, New York, March 6, 2005

You call terrorism “an act of political violence committed against purely civilian
targets.” By this definition the British and American bombing of Dresden was
terrorism, as was the fire-bombing of Tokyo and the nuclear attacks on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. (Almost no one argues there was military value to these
targets.) These were attacks meant to change people’s minds by invoking fear. The
same can be said for the German attacks on London, which were clearly aimed at
the will of the British people. And, if you accept the argument that these attacks
were military because they forced the diversion of military forces to stop them,
then any civilian attack becomes a military one.
— John A. Kroll, Tarpon Springs, Fla., March 6, 2005

Terrorism is the intentional harming of innocent civilians for political purposes.
The Times should have the courage to use this term correctly, consistently and as
often (or seldom) as the facts require. Let the political chips fall where they may.
— John Tomasi, Providence, March 6, 2005
The writer is an associate professor of political science at Brown University.

Questions
1. In his article, how does Daniel Okrent fulfill his duty as a commentator on
journalistic issues? Does he offer information and interpretation objectively? If
so, how?
2. What is Okrent’s main argument? Does it transcend the specific case of Israel and
Palestine, or does it apply only to that conflict? Explain your response.
3. Okrent uses many metaphors and analogies. Identify three, and comment on their
individual effectiveness. Then consider the overall effectiveness of Okrent’s use of
figurative language.
4. What does Okrent mean when he writes, “Hijacking the language proves especially
pernicious when government officials deodorize their programs with nearOrwellian euphemism” (para. 12)? Try rewriting that sentence with entirely literal
language — no metaphors and no allusions allowed.
5. What objections do the letters to the editor raise? Paraphrase at least three of
them.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 774

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

ConVERSATIon​

775

8. from Words That Work
Frank Luntz
Dr.​Frank​Luntz​is​a​political​consultant​​specializing​in​the​use​of​polling​and​
focus​ groups​ to​ effectively​ shape​ messages.​ The​ following​ selection​ comes​
from​his​2007​book​Words That Work.

Sometimes it is not what you say that matters but what you don’t say. Other times,
a single word or phrase can undermine or destroy the credibility of an otherwise
successful pitch or presentation. Effective communication requires that you stop
saying words and phrases that undermine your ability to educate the American
people.
This memo is adopted from a document I originally prepared and presented
to Republican congressional spouses in January 2005.
NEVER SAY
Global economy
Globalization
Capitalism

INSTEAD SAY
Free market economy

More Americans are afraid of “globalization” than even “privatization.” The
reason? “Globalization” represents something big, something distant, and something foreign. We distrust “globalization” for the same reason we like our local
government but dislike Washington — the closer you are, the more control you
have. So instead of talking about the principles of “globalization,” instead emphasize “the value and benefits of a free market economy.” True, blue collar and manufacturing audiences probably won’t like any terminology you use — to them,
anything global is a direct threat to their personal employment.
Similarly, “capitalism” reminds people of harsh economic competition that
yields losers as well as winners, while “the free market economy” provides opportunity to all and allows everyone to succeed. And here’s one more economic label:
“Small business owner” is looked at more favorably than “entrepreneur,” even
though people think the latter occupation is more financially successful. The difference? A “small business owner” is perceived to use her own money, her own
skills, and her own sweat to build a business (the gender reference is correct —
more women than men are small business owners), while “entrepreneurs” are
more like speculators who benefit from other people’s money and effort.
NEVER SAY
Foreign trade

INSTEAD SAY
International trade

For many reasons unrelated to this specific issue, the word “foreign” conjures
up negative images in the minds of many Americans. We simply don’t like “foreign

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 775

5

6/18/12 3:12 PM

776​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

oil ” or “foreign products” or “foreign nationals.” Even though we are truly a nation
of foreigners, we have grave concerns about the motives of foreigners — and that
concern has only increased since 9/11. “International” is a more positive concept
than either “foreign” or “global” not because of anything positive but because it
doesn’t come wrapped with all the negative connotations.
In the early days of CNN, network founder Ted Turner forbade anyone to
say “foreign” on the air. After all, CNN was an international network and what
was “foreign” to one person was likely home to another. The punishment for saying “foreign” rather than “international” was a $50 fine.
NEVER SAY
Undocumented workers/aliens

INSTEAD SAY
Illegal immigrants
Border security

This linguistic distinction may prove to be the political battle of the decade.
The label used to describe those who enter America illegally determines the attitudes people have toward them. Those supportive of a guest worker program that
would allow illegal immigrants to remain in the country tend to label these people
“undocumented workers” because it suggests legitimate employees who simply don’t
have the right paperwork, while those who want to deport these same individuals
use the term “illegal aliens” because alien has the most negative connotations.
And instead of addressing “immigration reform,” which polarizes Americans,
you should be talking about “border security” issues. Securing our borders and
our people has universal support.
NEVER SAY
Drilling for oil

INSTEAD SAY
Exploring for energy

I have been involved in an entire language creation effort involving environmental issues, some of which is included in this book. But the one phrase that
stands out more than any other is in some ways an energy issue rather than an
environmental concern. “Drilling for oil” causes people to paint a picture in their
minds of an old-fashioned oil rig that gushes up black goop. “Exploring for
energy” conjures a picture of twenty-first-century technology and innovation that
“responsibly harvests energy” and provides us the ability to heat our homes and
drive our cars. When you talk about energy, use words such as “efficient” and “balanced,” and always express concern for the environment.
NEVER SAY
School choice
Vouchers

INSTEAD SAY
Parental choice
Equal opportunity in education
Opportunity scholarships

Thanks to an effective advertising campaign by national and state teacher
unions, Americans remain at best evenly split over whether they support “school

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 776

10

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

ConVERSATIon​

777

choice.” But they are heavily in favor of “giving parents the right to choose the
schools that are right for their children,” and there is almost universal support for
“equal opportunity in education.”
“Vouchers,” seen as depriving public schools of necessary dollars, have even
less support than the principle of school choice. However, “opportunity scholarships” do have widespread backing, as they are perceived to be a reward for good
students to get a good education. Here again, the words you use determine the
support you will receive. . . .
NEVER SAY
Deny

INSTEAD SAY
Not give

Yes, the two phrases mean exactly the same thing and yield exactly the same
result. But “to deny” implies that you are preventing someone from receiving
something they are entitled to, while “not to give” suggests it was only a choice.

Questions
1. This memo was directed to the spouses of members of Congress — not the elected
officials. What is the importance of this audience to the content Frank Luntz is
explaining?
2. What is the difference between euphemisms and Luntz’s recommendations?
3. Use the logic of Luntz. Imagine that a political client’s staff has just hired you to
help determine whether they should use the term “climate change” or “global
warming” in their campaign. Depending on their political leanings, explain why
they should choose one or the other.
4. Luntz writes: “The label used to describe those who enter America illegally determines the attitudes people have toward them” (para. 7). Do you think this statement about labels is true about any group, not just “those who enter America
illegally”? Explain.
5. Develop your own list of at least three examples of what you should “never say” versus what you should “say instead” in a job application, on a date, or in a college essay.

Making Connections
1. How might the Institute for Propaganda Analysis respond to Daniel Okrent’s
assertion that “the Times’s earnest effort to avoid bias can desiccate language
and dilute meaning” (para. 16)?
2. Is the main point made by Michiko Kakutani more like the one Okrent or
Frank Luntz makes? Explain your response.
3. Which examples, if any, of the suggestions made in “Nonviolent Language”
would Kakutani likely approve of ? Why?

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 777

6/18/12 3:12 PM

778​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

4. Which of the authors in this Conversation would probably not find Mike Lester’s
cartoon funny? Why?
5. Using what you learned in the piece by the Institute for Propaganda Analysis,
select two examples from the pieces by Kakutani or Geoffrey Nunberg and
discuss which propaganda devices you detect.
6. Which examples from “Words That Work” might Okrent cite to illustrate his
claim that “hijacking the language proves especially pernicious when government officials deodorize their programs with near-Orwellian euphemism”
(para. 12)?

Entering the Conversation
As you respond to the following prompts, support your argument with references to
at least three of the sources in this Conversation on American Politics and the English
Language. For help using sources, see Chapter 4.

1. Find an article related to terrorism in two different newspapers, magazines, or
blogs, preferably two with different styles and political leanings. Using at least
two sources from this Conversation as references, analyze the use of language
in the articles you selected.
2. Write an essay explaining whether you believe that efforts to eliminate sexism,
racism, and violence in language are effective, or whether such efforts simply
mask these issues.
3. Choose a controversial local or national issue, and write an essay analyzing the
language used in the debate. Use at least three sources from this Conversation
to inform your analysis.
4. In The Political Mind, linguist George Lakoff makes the following statement
about the importance of the language that politicians use to present ideas to
us rather than the substance of the ideas alone:
The political power of words lies not primarily in their form — that is, in speech — or
even in the meanings they are directly linked to, but in the totality of brain circuitry
that activation can spread to: the frames, metaphors, prototypes, metonymies, and
the entire system of concepts. Words matter. They shape our politics — and our lives.

Write an essay that supports, challenges, or qualifies Lakoff ’s assertion. Develop
your position with evidence from your own experience along with at least
three sources from this Conversation.
5. In 2011, Washington Post columnist Courtland Milloy urged the Washington
Redskins football team to change its name. He wrote:

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 778

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

STuDEnT​wRITIng​

779

After a recent visit to the National Museum of the American Indian on the Mall, I’m
wondering how much longer our city will tolerate having a football team known as
“Redskins.”
It’s a racist name, patently offensive and the incongruence is simply ridiculous:
a world-class institution devoted to showcasing Native American heritage in a city
whose leading sports franchise makes a mockery of that heritage.

Write an essay agreeing or disagreeing with Milloy’s assertion that the name
“Washington Redskins” should be changed. Argue specifically about this team
in the nation’s capital, or broaden your argument to the use of Native American names in sports in general.
6. In his 1946 essay “Politics and the English Language” (p. 707), Orwell describes the English language by saying: “It becomes ugly and inaccurate because our thoughts are foolish, but the sloveliness of our language makes it
easier for us to have foolish thoughts” (para. 2). Using at least three sources
from this Conversation, explain whether you believe Orwell’s statement is true
today.

Student Writing
Narrative: Reflecting on Personal Experience
The following student essay was written in response to this prompt:
Write a narrative explaining the different “Englishes,” as Amy Tan calls them, that you
speak and write. If your home language is not English, consider the reasons and ways
you switch from it to English and vice versa. But even if English is the only language
you know, you “code switch” with different audiences as you speak formally, write
informal e-mails, use jargon with peers, and so forth. After your narrative, discuss
how these different “Englishes” create different personae for you.

As you read this essay, consider how Nazanin Nikaein develops a distinctive voice
and tone. How does she draw her reader in?

My Three Englishes
Nazanin Nikaein
My life consists of three Englishes: the regular English I use for my friends, the
English mixed with Farsi for my parents and family, and a type of Spanglish I use with
my Spanish-speaking friends or friends who know some Spanish. Language can be a big
barrier between people, and sometimes it’s easier to create a blend of two languages so
that both the people can talk to one another.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 779

6/18/12 3:12 PM

780​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

“Salaam, chobee?” “Hi, I’m doing well.” This is the result of the various
“Englishes” in my life. My parents speak to me in Farsi, and I respond in English. Farsi
was originally my first language, but now it’s just an afterthought for me. If I want to
say anything in that language, I have to stop and think about it as if it’s a mathematical
problem and I have to use an equation to find the answer. I try to say something in
Farsi, and it comes out in Spanish or Hebrew. There are too many ways of saying one
phrase, and it eventually comes out wrong when I try to say anything. It may be a
blessing to know multiple languages, but it can be rough on your mind. There are certain
phrases in one language that don’t exist in another language. There are foods and
technology that don’t exist in other languages, and to talk about them you have to
adopt the original language’s version of it. Internet in Hebrew is simply Internet. But,
on the other hand, cheeseburger in Hebrew doesn’t even exist. When my family came
here and heard the term cheeseburger, they were astonished and never even thought
it possible to eat a burger with cheese. So in many ways, culture does affect our
languages.
Attitude and society also play a big role in affecting our languages. When a
Persian person tries to say something in English, it sounds strong and forceful, almost
pushy. But that is just how the power of the Persian attitude comes out in English. Often
people ask me to translate something from Farsi to English, but the translation is never
accurate. The translation sounds almost rude, and it is hard to explain to people that
that is not the way it was intended. Word-for-word translating is not a good idea;
instead I have to rearrange the entire sentence to get the point through correctly. It is
hard to switch languages because you also have to switch mind-sets.
I have always wondered what it is like for people who speak multiple languages
to switch languages around at a moment’s notice. I asked my mother, who speaks three
languages, what it’s like, and she told me how at times she would have to think about it.
She would have to stop and think because otherwise the wrong language would come
out. I then asked her what language she thinks in, and she was stumped. I think in
English, and if I try to think in Spanish or Farsi, it’s hard, and oftentimes nothing
comes out. Most likely, our main language is the one we are able to think in, and I
wonder if we can change languages. What would be wonderful would be if we had a way
of mixing languages so that both sides could understand. That is exactly what people
have done with Spanish and English. Spanglish is an amazing version of English mixed
with Spanish terms and verbs that English and Spanish speakers can understand. It
involves none of the switching between verbs and tenses that would otherwise be called
for if switching languages.
We are lucky to live in a time where we can read novels written in other
languages because there are people out there willing to sit down and translate them.
The only downside is that the meanings are not always accurate. Switching languages
is difficult for me, but getting everything correct in tense and tone is on a completely
different level of difficulty.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 780

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

gRAMMAR​AS​RhEToRIC​AnD​STYLE​

781

Questions
1. What do you find most appealing or effective about Nazanin’s essay?
2. Are the personal examples the author uses more appropriate than ones from other
sources? If you were making suggestions for a revision, would you recommend
adding external sources? Why or why not?
3. Are there places in the essay that would benefit from the addition of another personal example? Explain where and why.
4. How would you describe Nazanin’s tone? Cite passages to support your response.

Grammar as Rhetoric and Style
Concise Diction
At the start of her essay “Mother Tongue,” Amy Tan (p. 700) criticizes herself for
writing that is “burdened . . . with nominalized forms, past perfect tenses, conditional phrases.” Similarly, George Orwell (p. 707) lambasts “the -ize and de- formations,” preferring direct verbs. He also cautions against complex or unusual words
that “dress up simple statements,” preferring economy of language. Both writers
argue for clear, authentic writing using the most straightforward language possible.

Nominalization
Nominalization is the process that changes a verb into its noun form. The verb
discuss becomes discussion, for instance; the verb depend becomes dependence;
recognize becomes recognition. The noun forms often result in wordiness, stiffness,
or awkward constructions, as the following examples (with added color) show.
Marjorie Agosín could have written:
My poem, given expression in another language, spoke for itself . . . and for me.
Instead of its noun form expression, she chose the verb express:
My poem, expressed in another language, spoke for itself . . . and for me.
Notice that her choice results in two strong verbs that reinforce one another (i.e.,
expressed and spoke) and add force to the point she is making.
Similarly, Firoozeh Dumas writes:
When I was twelve, I decided to simplify my life by adding an American
middle name.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 781

6/18/12 3:12 PM

782​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

If she used the nominalized version decision, her sentence would be more wordy
and less clear:
When I was twelve, I made the decision to simplify my life by adding an
American middle name.
These changes might seem very minor, but often they have a cumulative effect. In
paragraph 10 of Dumas’s essay there are several other instances where she could
have used the nominalized form but chose a strong verb instead. We’ve printed
that paragraph below with the nominalized forms in brackets. Read the paragraph aloud and think about the effect of the strong clear verbs as opposed to the
nominalized forms.
When I announced [made the announcement] to my family that I wanted
to add an American name, they reacted with their usual laughter.
My mom suggested [gave the suggestion of] “Farah,” a name easier than
“Firoozeh” yet still Iranian.
I don’t know why we limited [imposed the limitation on] ourselves to
names beginning with my initials. . . .
I finally chose [made the choice of] the name “Julie” mainly for its simplicity.

Showy Vocabulary
Having a large and diverse vocabulary gives a writer many choices and usually
results in more precise writing. Inexperienced writers, however, often believe that
fancier is better and try to show off words they know. In “Mother Tongue,” Amy
Tan looks back on a first draft of a story containing this line:
That was my mental quandary in its nascent state.
With a sense of humor about herself, she tells us that when she first wrote the
questionable sentence she believed that a sentence with such elevated vocabulary
“would finally prove I had mastery over the English language,” but she realized it
was “a terrible line” that needed revision. One such revision might read:
That was my dilemma in its earliest state.
The key to figuring out if a word is too showy is to ask yourself if the fancy
word — for example, pernicious — is more precise than the more ordinary word —

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 782

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

gRAMMAR​AS​RhEToRIC​AnD​STYLE​

783

for example, fatal — or if you think the former is simply more impressive than the
latter. Pernicious seems appropriate when Daniel Okrent (p. 770) says:
Hijacking the language proves especially pernicious when government
officials deodorize their programs with near-Orwellian euphemism.
On the other hand, pernicious is inappropriate in a sentence such as:
We all heard the pernicious gunshots.
The only reason you might laugh when someone says to you, “Felicitations
on your natal day!” is that that expression is so much more pompous than “Happy
birthday!” — and much less authentic. Like Tan, you must make your own decisions because these choices are not a matter of hard-and-fast rules but rather of
how you assess your audience’s expectations and the effect your language will have.

Rhetorical and Stylistic Strategy
Writers who use nominalizations, de- and -ize verbs, and overly complex or
unusual words may think these choices add elegance or complexity to their prose
and the ideas they express. However, the opposite is true. A writer who relies on
expressions that fall into these categories gives the impression of insecurity and
perhaps even insincerity. Whenever possible, follow the aphorism “Less is more”:
less complexity, less length, and less obscurity will lead you toward clear and
readable prose with an authentic voice.

• ExERCISE 1 •
Identify awkward or pretentious diction in the following sentences, and
revise each sentence as necessary to improve clarity.
1. A person who has a dependence on constant approval from others is
usually insecure.
2. Let’s have a discussion of the essay you read for homework.
3. Khaya finally came to the realization that she preferred research to
teaching.
4. A key step toward losing weight is to make a reduction in the amount
of food you consume.
5. A supercilious manager rarely contributes to a felicitous workplace.
6. Recommendations are being made by the faculty for the honor society.
7. Colin filled out his application to work part-time during the holidays.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 783

6/18/12 3:12 PM

784​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

8. We should give serious consideration to the possibility of traveling
to China this summer.
9. The president has every intention of hearing both viewpoints.
10. Before finalizing the meeting, the chair of the group offered a plethora of ideas.
11. Before Derrell made a serious purchase, such as a car, he made a
study of the competition.
12. Many benefits accrue from residing in a heterogeneous community.
13. The press release gave an explanation for the senator’s stance on
homeland security.
14. A recalcitrant attitude has resulted from too many of our colleagues
becoming mired in quotidian concerns.
15. Maya has a lot of sympathy for students who experience test anxiety.

• ExERCISE 2 •
In “Politics and the English Language,” George Orwell cites the following
paragraph as an example of “bad writing.” Revise the paragraph by eliminating pretentious diction and improving clarity.
On the one side we have the free personality: by definition it is not neurotic, for it has neither conflict nor dream. Its desires, such as they are,
are transparent, for they are just what institutional approval keeps in the
forefront of consciousness; another institutional pattern would alter their
number and intensity; there is little in them that is natural, irreducible,
or culturally dangerous. But on the other side, the social bond itself is
nothing but the mutual reflection of these self-secure integrities. Recall
the definition of love. Is not this the very picture of a small academic?
Where is there a place in this hall of mirrors for either personality or
fraternity?

• ExERCISE 3 •
Find an article in a newspaper, a memo from an organization, or a speech
that contains examples of pretentious and awkward diction. Identify the
examples, and explain their effect. Suggest ways to revise that would make
the writing clearer. Do you think the writer is intentionally keeping the language obscure? If so, why might that be the case?

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 784

6/18/12 3:12 PM

​

SuggESTIonS​FoR​wRITIng​

785

Suggestions for Writing
Language
Now that you have examined a number of readings and other texts that focus on
language, explore one dimension of this issue by synthesizing your own ideas and
the texts. You might want to do more research or use readings from other classes
as you prepare for the following projects.
1. The following assertion by Greg Lewis, a pioneer of computer-based technology and author of several books of political analysis, appeared in the Washington Dispatch in 2003:
To succeed in America — with a number of relatively minor although often highly
visible exceptions — it’s important to speak, read, and understand English as most
Americans speak it. There’s nothing cruel or unfair in that; it’s just the way it is. And
when liberals try to downplay that fact in the name of diversity or multiculturalism . . . they’re cynically appealing to a kind of cultural vanity that almost every one
of us possesses. . . . In this case, however, the appeal to cultural vanity is destructive.

Is bilingual education or class instruction and discussion in African American
vernacular English (or Ebonics, as it is often called) a viable alternative to conducting classes in standard American English? Write an essay explaining your
position.
2. Should language be legislated? Congress has debated whether English should be
declared the national language of the United States. What would be the implication of such a law? Do you believe that it is in the interest of national unity to pass
a law making English the national language? Write an essay explaining your view.
3. Trace the history and derivation of terms used to describe one ethnic group.
What do members of the ethnic group themselves prefer to be called? For
instance, discuss the differences among the terms Hispanic, Latino/Latina, and
Chicano/Chicana, both to the general public and to the people who identify
themselves by these terms. Another option is to discuss the meanings of the
terms colored, Negro, black, Afro-American, African American, and person of
color — again to the general public and to members of the group itself. Your
essay should examine why certain terms win favor over others, as well as the
politics and values associated with those terms.
4. Write an essay in which you agree or disagree with the following assertion:
In classrooms and hallways and on the playground, young people are using inappropriate language more frequently than ever, teachers and principals say. Not

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 785

6/18/12 3:12 PM

786​

ChAPTER​10​ •​ LAnguAgE

only is it coarsening the school climate and social discourse, they say, it is evidence
of a decline in language skills. Popular culture has made ugly language acceptable
and hip, and many teachers say they only expect things to get uglier.
— Valerie Strauss, “More and More, Kids Say the Foulest Things”

5. Choose one of the following quotations, and explain why it speaks to you. Use
examples from your own experience and reading to illustrate what the quotation means to you.
• Who does not know another language, does not know his own.
— Johan Wolfgang von Goethe

• Languages are the pedigree of nations.
— Samuel Johnson

• Language is a city to the building of which every human being brought a stone.
— Ralph Waldo Emerson

6. Some believe that the Internet is improving writing skills because everyone,
especially younger people, spends so much time e-mailing, instant messaging,
blogging, and chatting in forums. The very fact that young people are writing
so frequently is bound to increase comfort level and may lead to the development of a creative style, they claim. Others argue that such activity only degrades
writing skills because the language used is so informal, often a series of abbreviations, and the communication is usually a rapid-fire response rather than a
sustained discussion. Write an essay explaining whether you think that writing
online (in whatever form that might take) has a positive or negative impact on
a person’s writing. Feel free to use your own experience in your discussion.
7. Most professions — plumbers, lawyers, teachers, accountants, physicians —
have their jargon, a language that practitioners use among themselves. In
many ways, that language defines the user as a member of the community and
sets him or her apart from others who do not “belong.” Choose one profession
or group (such as those who read graphic novels or listen to a particular type
of music), describe key elements of that group’s language, and analyze how the
language defines the group as a community.
8. Advertisers are keenly aware of the importance of a product’s name. Choose
one specific type of product (for example, men’s or women’s cologne, cars,
shampoos, lines of clothing, laundry detergents, medical remedies), and classify the names according to the connotations or images they suggest.
9. The idea of “voice” and “voicelessness” is a dominant theme in many novels
written by immigrants to the United States. Choose one, and analyze the role
of language use and acquisition in the formation of identity and the development of power relationships. Possibilities include Monkey Bridge by Lan Cao,
Native Speaker by Chang-Rae Lee, The Joy Luck Club by Amy Tan, How the
Garcia Girls Lost Their Accents by Julia Alvarez, and many others.

10_SHE_67650_Ch10_699_786.indd 786

6/18/12 3:12 PM

11
Popular Culture
To what extent does pop culture reflect our
society’s values?

P

opular culture is a term that once characterized mass-produced or lowbrow culture: pop music, potboilers and page-turners, movies, comics,
advertising, radio, and television. Its audience was the masses. Opposite popular
culture were highbrow forms of entertainment: opera, fine art, classical music,
traditional theater, and literature. These were the realm of the wealthy and educated classes.
Today, the line between high and pop culture has blurred. Pop culture is
often at the leading edge of what will become established culture. For example,
the 1980s graffitist Jean-Michel Basquiat is considered a leading figure in contemporary art.
Popular culture moves through our world at warp speed. Rap music and
mash-ups sample and remix current and past albums. Celebrity gossip in the
morning is the talk-show host’s monologue at night. Homemade videos are
posted on the Internet, become cultural phenomena overnight, and are just as
quickly forgotten. Albums and movies are exchanged on peer-to-peer networks
months before they are officially released. What does this onslaught of entertainment and information mean?
These days, most people realize that pop culture asks many of the same questions that high culture does: Does it say something new? Does it tell us about
ourselves? Popular culture also spawns new questions: What is pop? Should pop
culture respect its roots? What is the relationship among pop culture, politics,
and commerce? Do commercial interests control what is offered to the public, or
does old-fashioned word of mouth still tell us what’s hot and what’s not?
The selections in this chapter are about media that you can access. Listen
to the music, watch the films and TV shows, and look at the art. The connections
made in this chapter prompt a conversation between the past and the present;
enter the conversation, consider both, and imagine the future.

787

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 787

6/18/12 3:13 PM

Hip Hop Planet
James McBride
American writer and musician James McBride was born in 1957 in
New York City. His father was an African American minister and his
mother a Jewish immigrant from Poland who later converted to Christianity. His best-selling memoir, The Color of Water (1996), is about
growing up in a large African American family and the influence of
his Jewish mother, whose father was an orthodox rabbi. McBride is
also a saxophonist and composer. His first novel, Miracle at St. Anna
(2003), was made into a film by Spike Lee. His latest novel is Song Yet Sung
(2008). McBride has written for the Boston Globe, People magazine, the Washington Post, and Rolling Stone. The essay that follows appeared in National Geographic in 2007.

T

his is my nightmare: My daughter comes home with a guy and says, “Dad,
we’re getting married.” And he’s a rapper, with a mouthful of gold teeth, a
do-rag on his head, muscles popping out his arms, and a thug attitude. And then the
nightmare gets deeper, because before you know it, I’m hearing the pitter-patter of
little feet, their offspring, cascading through my living room, cascading through my
life, drowning me with the sound of my own hypocrisy, because when I was young, I
was a knucklehead, too, hearing my own music, my own sounds. And so I curse the
day I saw his face, which is a reflection of my own, and I rue the day I heard his
name, because I realize to my horror that rap — music seemingly without melody,
sensibility, instruments, verse, or harmony, music with no beginning, end, or middle,
music that doesn’t even seem to be music — rules the world. It is no longer my world.
It is his world. And I live in it. I live on a hip hop planet.

High-Stepping
I remember when I first heard rap. I was standing in the kitchen at a party in
Harlem. It was 1980. A friend of mine named Bill had just gone on the blink. He
slapped a guy, a total stranger, in the face right in front of me. I can’t remember
why. Bill was a fellow student. He was short-circuiting. Problem was, the guy he
slapped was a big guy, a dude wearing a do-rag who’d crashed the party with three
friends, and, judging by the fury on their faces, there would be no Martin Luther
King moments in our immediate future.
There were no white people in the room, though I confess I wished there had
been, if only to hide the paleness of my own frightened face. We were black and
Latino students about to graduate from Columbia University’s journalism school,
having learned the whos, whats, wheres, whens, and whys of American reporting.
But the real storytellers of the American experience came from the world of the

788

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 788

6/18/12 3:13 PM

McBride • HiP HoP PLANeT

789

guy that Bill had just slapped. They lived less than a mile from us in the South
Bronx. They had no journalism degrees. No money. No credibility. What they did
have, however, was talent.
Earlier that night, somebody tossed a record on the turntable, which sent my
fellow students stumbling onto the dance floor, howling with delight, and made
me, a jazz lover, cringe. It sounded like a broken record. It was a version of an old
hit record called “Good Times,” the same four bars looped over and over. And on
top of this loop, a kid spouted a rhyme about how he was the best disc jockey in
the world. It was called “Rapper’s Delight.” I thought it was the most ridiculous
thing I’d ever heard. More ridiculous than Bill slapping that stranger.
Bill survived that evening, but in many ways, I did not. For the next 26 years,
I high-stepped past that music the way you step over a crack in the sidewalk. I
heard it pounding out of cars and alleyways from Paris to Abidjan, yet I never
listened. It came rumbling out of boomboxes from Johannesburg to Osaka, yet I
pretended not to hear. I must have strolled past the corner of St. James Place and
Fulton Street in my native Brooklyn where a fat kid named Christopher Wallace,
aka Biggie Smalls, stood amusing his friends with rhyme, a hundred times, yet I
barely noticed. I high-stepped away from that music for 26 years because it was
everything I thought it was, and more than I ever dreamed it would be, but
mostly, because it held everything I wanted to leave behind.
In doing so, I missed the most important cultural event in my lifetime.
Not since the advent of swing jazz in the 1930s has an American music
exploded across the world with such overwhelming force. Not since the Beatles
invaded America and Elvis packed up his blue suede shoes has a music crashed
against the world with such outrage. This defiant culture of song, graffiti, and
dance, collectively known as hip hop, has ripped popular music from its moorings in every society it has permeated. In Brazil, rap rivals samba in popularity. In
China, teens spray-paint graffiti on the Great Wall. In France it has been blamed,
unfairly, for the worst civil unrest that country has seen in decades.
Its structure is unique, complex, and at times bewildering. Whatever music it
eats becomes part of its vocabulary, and as the commercial world falls into place
behind it to gobble up the powerful slop in its wake, it metamorphoses into the
Next Big Thing. It is a music that defies definition, yet defines our collective societies in immeasurable ways. To many of my generation, despite all attempts to
exploit it, belittle it, numb it, classify it, and analyze it, hip hop remains an enigma,
a clarion call, a cry of “I am” from the youth of the world. We’d be wise, I suppose,
to start paying attention.

5

Burning Man
Imagine a burning man. He is on fire. He runs into the room. You put out the
flames. Then another burning man arrives. You put him out and go about your
business. Then two, three, four, five, ten appear. You extinguish them all, send

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 789

6/18/12 3:13 PM

790

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

them to the hospital. Then imagine no one bothers to examine why the men
caught fire in the first place. That is the story of hip hop.
It is a music dipped in the boiling cauldron of race and class, and for that
reason it is clouded with mystics, snake oil salesmen, two-bit scholars, racebaiters, and sneaker salesmen, all professing to know the facts, to be “real,” when
the reality of race is like shifting sand, dependent on time, place, circumstance,
and who’s telling the history. Here’s the real story: In the mid-1970s, New York
City was nearly broke. The public school system cut funding for the arts drastically. Gone were the days when you could wander into the band room, rent a
clarinet for a minimal fee, and march it home to squeal on it and drive your parents nuts.
The kids of the South Bronx and Harlem came up with something else. In
the summer of 1973, at 1595 East 174th Street in the Bronx River Houses, a
black teenager named Afrika Bambaataa stuck a speaker in his mother’s firstfloor living room window, ran a wire to the turntable in his bedroom, and set the
housing project of 3,000 people alight with party music. At the same time, a
Jamaican teenager named Kool DJ Herc was starting up the scene in the East
Bronx, while a technical whiz named Grandmaster Flash was rising to prominence a couple of miles south. The Bronx became a music magnet for Puerto
Ricans, Jamaicans, Dominicans, and black Americans from the surrounding
areas. Fab 5 Freddy, Kurtis Blow, and Melle Mel were only a few of the pioneers.
Grand Wizard Theodore, Kool DJ AJ, the Cold Crush Brothers, Spoony Gee, and
the Rock Steady Crew of B-boys showed up to “battle” — dance, trade quips and
rhymes, check out each other’s records and equipment — not knowing as they
strolled through the doors of the community center near Bambaataa’s mother’s
apartment that they were writing musical history. Among them was an MC
named Lovebug Starski, who was said to utter the phrase “hip hop” between
breaks to keep time.
This is how it worked: One guy, the DJ, played records on two turntables.
One guy — or girl — served as master of ceremonies, or MC. The DJs learned to
move the record back and forth under the needle to create a “scratch,” or to drop
the needle on the record where the beat was the hottest, playing “the break” over
and over to keep the folks dancing. The MCs “rapped” over the music to keep the
party going. One MC sought to outchat the other. Dance styles were created —
“locking” and “popping” and “breaking.” Graffiti artists spread the word of the “I”
because the music was all about identity: I am the best. I spread the most love in
the Bronx, in Harlem, in Queens. The focus initially was not on the MCs, but
on the dancers, or B-boys. Commercial radio ignored it. DJs sold mix tapes out of
the back of station wagons. “Rapper’s Delight” by the Sugarhill Gang — the song
I first heard at that face-slapping party in Harlem — broke the music onto radio
in 1979.
That is the short history.
The long history is that spoken-word music made its way here on slave ships

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 790

10

6/18/12 3:13 PM

McBride • HiP HoP PLANeT

791

from West Africa centuries ago: Ethnomusicologists trace hip hop’s roots to the
dance, drum, and song of West African griots, or storytellers, its pairing of word
and music the manifestation of the painful journey of slaves who survived the
middle passage. The ring shouts, field hollers, and spirituals of early slaves drew
on common elements of African music, such as call and response and improvisation. “Speech-song has been part of black culture for a long, long time,” says
Samuel A. Floyd, director of the Center for Black Music Research at Columbia
College in Chicago. The “dozens,” “toasts,” and “signifying” of black Americans —
verbal dueling, rhyming, self-deprecating tales, and stories of blacks outsmarting
whites — were defensive, empowering strategies.
You can point to jazz musicians such as Oscar Brown, Jr., Edgar “Eddie”
Jefferson, and Louis Armstrong, and blues greats such as John Lee Hooker, and
easily find the foreshadowing of rap music in the verbal play of their work.
Black performers such as poet Nikki Giovanni and Gil Scott-Heron, a pianist and
vocalist who put spoken political lyrics to music (most famously in “The Revolution Will Not Be Televised”), elevated spoken word to a new level.
But the artist whose work arguably laid the groundwork for rap as we know
it was Amiri Baraka, a beat poet out of Allen Ginsberg’s Greenwich Village scene.
In the late 1950s and ’60s, Baraka performed with shrieks, howls, cries, stomps,
verse floating ahead of or behind the rhythm, sometimes in staccato syncopation.
It was performance art, delivered in a dashiki and Afro, in step with the anger of
a bold and sometimes frightening nationalistic black movement, and it inspired
what might be considered the first rap group, the Last Poets.
I was 13 when I first heard the Last Poets in 1970. They scared me. To black
America, they were like the relatives you hoped wouldn’t show up at your barbecue because the boss was there — the old Aunt Clementine who would arrive,
get drunk, and pull out her dentures. My parents refused to allow us to play
their music in our house — so my siblings waited until my parents went to work
and played it anyway. They were the first musical group I heard to use the N-word
on a record, with songs like “N______ Are Scared of Revolution.” In a world
where blacks were evolving from “Negroes” to “blacks,” and the assassinations
of civil rights leaders Malcolm X and Martin Luther King, Jr., still reverberated in the air like a shotgun blast, the Last Poets embodied black power. Their
records consisted of percussion and spoken-word rhyme. They were wildly popular in my neighborhood. Their debut recording sold 400,000 records in three
months, says Last Poet member Umar Bin Hassan. “No videos, no radio play,
strictly word of mouth.” The group’s demise coincided with hip hop’s birth in the
1970s.
It’s unlikely that the Last Poets ever dreamed the revolution they sang of
would take the form it has. “We were about the movement,” Abiodun Oyewole, a
founder of the group, says. “A lot of today’s rappers have talent. But a lot of them
are driving the car in the wrong direction.”

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 791

15

6/18/12 3:13 PM

792

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

The Crossover
Highways wrap around the city of Dayton, Ohio, like a ribbon bow-tied on a box
of chocolates from the local Esther Price candy factory. They have six ladies at the
plant who do just that: Tie ribbons around boxes all day. Henry Rosenkranz can
tell you about it. “I love candy,” says Henry, a slim white teenager in glasses and a
hairnet, as he strolls the factory, bucket in hand. His full-time after-school job is
mopping the floors.
Henry is a model American teenager — and the prototypical consumer at
which the hip hop industry is squarely aimed, which has his parents sitting up in
their seats. The music that was once the purview of black America has gone white
and gone commercial all at once. A sea of white faces now rises up to greet rap
groups as they perform, many of them teenagers like Henry, a NASCAR fanatic
and self-described redneck. “I live in Old North Dayton,” he says. “It’s a white,
redneck area. But hip hop is so prominent with country people . . . if you put
them behind a curtain and hear them talk, you won’t know if they’re black or
white. There’s a guy I work with, when Kanye West sings about a gold digger, he
can relate because he’s paying alimony and child support.”
Obviously, it’s not just working-class whites, but also affluent, suburban kids
who identify with this music with African-American roots. A white 16-year-old
hollering rap lyrics at the top of his lungs from the driver’s seat of his dad’s latemodel Lexus may not have the same rationale to howl at the moon as a workingclass kid whose parents can’t pay for college, yet his own anguish is as real to him
as it gets. What attracts white kids to this music is the same thing that prompted
outraged congressmen to decry jazz during the 1920s and Tipper Gore to campaign decades later against violent and sexually explicit lyrics: life on the other
side of the tracks; its “cool” or illicit factor, which black Americans, like it or not,
are always perceived to possess.
Hip hop has continually changed form, evolving from party music to social
commentary with the 1982 release of Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five’s
“The Message.” Today, alternative hip hop artists continue to produce socially
conscious songs, but most commercial rappers spout violent lyrics that debase
women and gays. Beginning with the so-called gangsta rap of the ’90s, popularized by the still unsolved murders of rappers Biggie Smalls and Tupac Shakur, the
genre has become dominated by rappers who brag about their lives of crime.
50 Cent, the hip hop star of the moment, trumpets his sexual exploits and boasts
that he has been shot nine times.
“People call hip hop the MTV music now,” scoffs Chuck D, of Public Enemy,
known for its overtly political rap. “It’s Big Brother controlling you. To slip something in there that’s indigenous to the roots, that pays homage to the music that
came before us, it’s the Mount Everest of battles.”
Most rap songs unabashedly function as walking advertisements for luxury
cars, designer clothes, and liquor. Agenda Inc., a “pop culture brand strategy

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 792

20

6/18/12 3:13 PM

McBride • HiP HoP PLANeT

793

agency,” listed Mercedes-Benz as the number one brand mentioned in Billboard’s
top 20 singles in 2005. Hip hop sells so much Hennessy cognac, listed at number
six, that the French makers, deader than yesterday’s beer a decade ago, are now
rolling in suds. The company even sponsored a contest to win a visit to its plant
in France with a famous rapper.
In many ways, the music represents an old dream. It’s the pot of gold to millions of kids like Henry, who quietly agonizes over how his father slaves 14 hours
a day at two tool-and-die machine jobs to make ends meet. Like teenagers across
the world, he fantasizes about working in the hip hop business and making millions himself.
“My parents hate hip hop,” Henry says, motoring his 1994 Dodge Shadow
through traffic on the way home from work on a hot October afternoon. “But I
can listen to Snoop Dogg and hear him call women whores, and I know he has a
wife and children at home. It’s just a fantasy. Everyone has the urge deep down to
be a bad guy or a bad girl. Everyone likes to talk the talk, but not everyone will
walk the walk.”

25

Full Circle
You breathe in and breathe out a few times and you are there. Eight hours and a
wake-up shake on the flight from New York, and you are on the tarmac in Dakar,
Senegal. Welcome to Africa. The assignment: Find the roots of hip hop. The
music goes full circle. The music comes home to Africa. That whole bit. Instead it
was the old reporter’s joke: You go out to cover a story and the story covers you.
The stench of poverty in my nostrils was so strong it pulled me to earth like a
hundred-pound ring in my nose. Dakar’s Sandaga market is full of “local
color” — unless you live there. It was packed and filthy, stalls full of new merchandise surrounded by shattered pieces of life everywhere, broken pipes, bicycle handlebars, fruit flies, soda bottles, beggars, dogs, cell phones. A teenage beggar, his
body malformed by polio, crawled by on hands and feet, like a spider. He said,
“Hey brother, help me.” When I looked into his eyes, they were a bottomless ocean.
The Hotel Teranga is a fortress, packed behind a concrete wall where beggars
gather at the front gate. The French tourists march past them, the women in high
heels and stonewashed jeans. They sidle through downtown Dakar like royalty,
haggling in the market, swimming in the hotel pool with their children, a scene
that resembles Birmingham, Alabama, in the 1950s — the blacks serving, the
whites partying. Five hundred yards (460 meters) away, Africans eat off the sidewalk and sell peanuts for a pittance. There is a restlessness, a deep sense of something gone wrong in the air.
The French can’t smell it, even though they’ve had a mouthful back home. A
good amount of the torching of Paris suburbs in October 2005 was courtesy of
the children of immigrants from former French African colonies, exhausted from
being bottled up in housing projects for generations with no job prospects. They

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 793

6/18/12 3:13 PM

794

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

telegraphed the punch in their music — France is the second largest hip hop market in the world — but the message was ignored. Around the globe, rap music has
become a universal expression of outrage, its macho pose borrowed from commercial hip hop in the U.S.
In Dakar, where every kid is a microphone and turntable away from squalor,
and American rapper Tupac Shakur’s picture hangs in market stalls of folks who
don’t understand English, rap is king. There are hundreds of rap groups in Senegal today. French television crews troop in and out of Dakar’s nightclubs filming
the kora harp lute and tama talking drum with regularity. But beneath the drumming and the dance lessons and the jingling sound of tourist change, there is a
quiet rage, a desperate fury among the Senegalese, some of whom seem to bear an
intense dislike of their former colonial rulers.
“We know all about French history,” says Abdou Ba, a Senegalese producer
and musician. “We know about their kings, their castles, their art, their music. We
know everything about them. But they don’t know much about us.”
Assane N’Diaye, 19, loves hip hop music. Before he left his Senegalese village
to work as a DJ in Dakar, he was a fisherman, just like his father, like his father’s
father before him. Tall, lean, with a muscular build and a handsome chocolate
face, Assane became a popular DJ, but the equipment he used was borrowed, and
when his friend took it back, success eluded him. He has returned home to Toubab Dialaw, about 25 miles (40 kilometers) south of Dakar, a village marked by a
huge boulder, perhaps 40 feet (12 meters) high, facing the Atlantic Ocean.
About a century and a half ago, a local ruler led a group of people fleeing
slave traders to this place. He was told by a white trader to come here, to Toubab
Dialaw. When he arrived, the slavers followed. A battle ensued. The ruler fought
bravely but was killed. The villagers buried him by the sea and marked his grave
with a small stone, and over the years it is said to have sprouted like a tree planted
by God. It became a huge, arching boulder that stares out to sea, protecting the
village behind it. When the fishermen went deep out to sea, the boulder was like
a lighthouse that marked the way home. The Great Rock of Toubab Dialaw is said
to hold a magic spirit, a spirit that Assane N’Diaye believes in.
In the shadow of the Great Rock, Assane has built a small restaurant, Chez
Las, decorated with hundreds of seashells. It is where he lives his hip hop dream.
At night, he and his brother and cousin stand by the Great Rock and face the sea.
They meditate. They pray. Then they write rap lyrics that are worlds away from
the bling-bling culture of today’s commercial hip hoppers. They write about their
lives as village fishermen, the scarcity of catch forcing them to fish in deeper and
deeper waters, the hardship of fishing for 8, 10, 14 days at a time in an open
pirogue in rainy season, the high fee they pay to rent the boat, and the paltry price
their catches fetch on the market. They write about the humiliation of poverty,
watching their town sprout up around them with rich Dakarians and richer
French. And they write about the relatives who leave in the morning and never
return, surrendered to the sea, sharks, and God.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 794

30

6/18/12 3:13 PM

McBride • HiP HoP PLANeT

795

The dream, of course, is to make a record. They have their own demo, their
own logo, and their own name, Salam T. D. (for Toubab Dialaw). But rap music
represents a deeper dream: a better life. “We want money to help our parents,”
Assane says over dinner. “We watch our mothers boil water to cook and have
nothing to put in the pot.”
He fingers his food lightly. “Rap doesn’t belong to American culture,” he says.
“It belongs here. It has always existed here, because of our pain and our hardships
and our suffering.”
On this cool evening in a restaurant above their village, these young men, clad
in baseball caps and T-shirts, appear no different from their African-American
counterparts, with one exception. After a dinner of chicken and rice, Assane
says something in Wolof to the others. Silently and without ceremony, they take
every bit of the leftover dinner — the half-eaten bread, rice, pieces of chicken, the
chicken bones — and dump them into a plastic bag to give to the children in the
village. They silently rise from the table and proceed outside. The last I see of
them, their regal figures are outlined in the dim light of the doorway, heading out
to the darkened village, holding on to that bag as though it held money.

35

The City of Gods
Some call the Bronx River Houses the City of Gods, though if God has been by
lately, he must’ve slipped out for a chicken sandwich. The 10 drab, red-brick
buildings spread out across 14 acres (5.7 hectares), coming into view as you drive
east across the East 174th Street Bridge. The Bronx is the hallowed holy ground
of hip hop, the place where it all began. Visitors take tours through this neighborhood now, care of a handful of fortyish “old-timers,” who point out the high and
low spots of hip hop’s birthplace.
It is a telling metaphor for the state of America’s racial landscape that you
need a permit to hold a party in the same parks and playgrounds that produced
the music that changed the world. The rap artists come and go, but the conditions
that produced them linger. Forty percent of New York City’s black males are jobless. One in three black males born in 2001 will end up in prison. The life expectancy of black men in the U.S. ranks below that of men in Sri Lanka and
Colombia. It took a massive hurricane in New Orleans for the United States to
wake up to its racial realities.
That is why, after 26 years, I have come to embrace this music I tried so hard
to ignore. Hip hop culture is not mine. Yet I own it. Much of it I hate. Yet I love it,
the good of it. To confess a love for a music that, at least in part, embraces violence is no easy matter, but then again our national anthem talks about bombs
bursting in air, and I love that song, too. At its best, hip hop lays bare the empty
moral cupboard that is our generation’s legacy. This music that once made visible
the inner culture of America’s greatest social problem, its legacy of slavery, has
taken the dream deferred to a global scale. Today, 2 percent of the Earth’s adult

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 795

40

6/18/12 3:13 PM

796

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

population owns more than 50 percent of its household wealth, and indigenous
cultures are swallowed with the rapidity of a teenager gobbling a bag of potato
chips. The music is calling. Over the years, the instruments change, but the message is the same. The drums are pounding out a warning. They are telling us
something. Our children can hear it.
The question is: Can we?

Questions for Discussion
1. What do you consider James McBride’s primary purpose in “Hip Hop Planet”? Do
you think this is a personal essay or a cultural study? Explain your response.
2. “Hip Hop Planet” was included in the inaugural edition of Best African-American
Essays (2009). In her review of the collection on the Kenyon Review’s Web site,
Samantha Simpson notes that the collection “strains against the oversimplification of the African-American community’s concerns. The collection does not only
cull the voices concerned with the politics of race, but it also includes essays that
deal with matters of the heart. That is, the collection is a far cry from the obligatory Black History Month lessons on important Black People.” Do you consider
McBride’s essay to be about matters of the heart, or is it about the politics of race?
Explain your answer.
3. McBride’s lead (the opening paragraph of his essay) could be considered provocative, if not confrontational. Having read the whole essay, go back and reread the
lead. Is it an effective introduction to the essay, or could it be considered misleading? Explain.
4. David Brooks, writing in the New York Times in 2005 about riots in French housing projects, says, “In a globalized age it’s perhaps inevitable that the culture of
resistance gets globalized, too. What we are seeing is what Mark Lilla of the University of Chicago calls a universal culture of the wretched of the earth. The images,
modes and attitudes of hip hop and gangsta rap are so powerful they are having
a hegemonic effect across the globe.” How does that view of hip hop compare
to McBride’s? Do you think McBride would agree with Brooks? Explain why or
why not.
5. In paragraph 23 McBride quotes Chuck D, of Public Enemy. What is your view of
Chuck D’s assertion? Are there ways in which rap music does pay “homage to the
music that came before”? If so, what are they?
6. Read the description of the music composed by the would-be Senegalese rapper
Assane N’Diaye (para. 34). Do you consider this to be a lesser form of rap or a
truer form? Explain your answer.
7. In the next-to-last paragraph of McBride’s essay, he justifies his acceptance of the
violence that hip hop music embraces by saying that our national anthem is also
about violence. What do you think of that comparison? In what ways does it help
his argument? In what ways might it hinder it?

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 796

6/18/12 3:13 PM

McBride • HiP HoP PLANeT

797

Questions on Rhetoric and Style
1. What rhetorical strategies does McBride use in his lead (the opening paragraph)
to establish his persona and his credibility? Consider irony, hyperbole, metaphor,
and colloquialisms.
2. Why do you think McBride calls the first section of his essay “High-Stepping”? In
what ways does he play on the phrase? How do the rest of the essay’s section
names relate to their contents?
3. McBride transitions from the personal to the historical several times in “Hip Hop
Planet.” How does he achieve these transitions? What are some of the strategies
he uses to make the transitions?
4. McBride names a dozen rappers in paragraph 11. What is the effect of mentioning all these names?
5. Find examples of figurative language in “Hip Hop Planet.” How does McBride
use them to connect to his audience and achieve his purpose?
6. How would you characterize Henry Rosenkranz, from Dayton, Ohio, whom we
meet in “The Crossover”? How does Rosenkranz help McBride establish his own
credibility? What about Assane N’Diaye, the young Senegalese man whom we
meet in “Full Circle”?
7. What is McBride’s central argument? What are his secondary arguments? How
does he bring them together?
8. How does McBride use cause and effect to provide the reasons for hip hop’s
development?
9. Look carefully at paragraph 12. How does McBride’s style mirror the paragraph’s
subject matter?
10. McBride is a novelist as well as a memoirist and essayist. What techniques of fiction does he employ in “Hip Hop Planet”? What are their effects?
11. McBride ends the essay with a question. Why do you think he gives that question
its own paragraph?
12. Who is the likely audience for this essay? How does McBride consider audience
throughout his essay?

Suggestions for Writing
1. McBride argues that hip hop music is a warning (para. 40). Write an essay in which
you support, challenge, or qualify his assertion.
2. McBride quotes Abiodun Oyewole, a founder of what he considers the first rap
group, the Last Poets (para. 18): “ ‘A lot of today’s rappers have talent. But a lot of
them are driving the car in the wrong direction.’” Analyze Oyewole’s statement,
and write an essay in which you support, challenge, or qualify his assertion. Be
sure to use examples of today’s rappers who illustrate your argument.
3. Listen to the music and poetry of some of the old-school musicians and writers
McBride cites, such as Louis Armstrong, Nikki Giovanni, and Amiri Baraka. Write
an essay in which you examine their influence on specific hip hop musicians.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 797

6/18/12 3:13 PM

798

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

4. McBride suggests that the anger from the 2005 riots in the Paris suburbs found its
way into hip hop music, its “macho pose borrowed from commercial hip hop in
the U.S.” (para. 29). Judy Rosen, writing in the online magazine Slate, argues that
“France, the nation that enshrines conversational grandiloquence as a civic virtue
right up there with fraternité, would take to the most blabbermouthed genre in
music history,” suggesting that it has remade hip hop in its own fashion. Research
rap music in countries such as France, Brazil, and England; then write an essay in
which you examine the influence of American hip hop on the music of these
countries as well as the influence of foreign musicians on American rap and
hip hop.
5. Imagine and write a conversation between Henry Rosenkranz and Assane N’Diaye
in which they discuss the sources, messages, and benefits of hip hop music.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 798

6/18/12 3:13 PM

Corn-Pone Opinions
Mark Twain
Mark Twain (1835–1910) is the pseudonym of Samuel Langhorne
Clemens. Best known as a novelist — The Adventures of Huckleberry
Finn (1884), Tom Sawyer (1876), and A Connecticut Yankee in King
Arthur’s Court (1889) are among Twain’s most famous — Twain also
worked as a typesetter, a riverboat pilot, a miner, a reporter, and an
editor. His early writings reflect his pre–Civil War upbringing in their
idyllic images as well as in their reminders of some of America’s least
acceptable social realities. Twain spent his life observing and reporting on his surroundings, and his work provides a glimpse into the mind-set of the
late nineteenth century. “Corn-Pone opinions,” which was found in his papers
after his death, was first published in 1923 in Europe and Elsewhere. in it, Twain
comments — not always approvingly — on word of mouth as the spreader of popular opinion and culture.

F

ifty years ago, when I was a boy of fifteen and helping to inhabit a Missourian village on the banks of the Mississippi, I had a friend whose society was very dear to me because I was forbidden by my mother to partake of it.
He was a gay and impudent and satirical and delightful young black man — a
slave — who daily preached sermons from the top of his master’s woodpile, with
me for sole audience. He imitated the pulpit style of the several clergymen of the
village, and did it well, and with fine passion and energy. To me he was a wonder.
I believed he was the greatest orator in the United States and would some day be
heard from. But it did not happen; in the distribution of rewards he was overlooked. It is the way, in this world.
He interrupted his preaching, now and then, to saw a stick of wood; but the
sawing was a pretense — he did it with his mouth; exactly imitating the sound the
bucksaw makes in shrieking its way through the wood. But it served its purpose;
it kept his master from coming out to see how the work was getting along. I listened to the sermons from the open window of a lumber room at the back of the
house. One of his texts was this:
“You tell me whar a man gits his corn pone, en I’ll tell you what his ’pinions is.”
I can never forget it. It was deeply impressed upon me. By my mother. Not
upon my memory, but elsewhere. She had slipped in upon me while I was
absorbed and not watching. The black philosopher’s idea was that a man is not
independent, and cannot afford views which might interfere with his bread and
butter. If he would prosper, he must train with the majority; in matters of large
moment, like politics and religion, he must think and feel with the bulk of his

799

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 799

6/18/12 3:13 PM

800

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

neighbors, or suffer damage in his social standing and in his business prosperities. He must restrict himself to corn-pone opinions — at least on the surface. He
must get his opinions from other people; he must reason out none for himself; he
must have no first-hand views.
I think Jerry was right, in the main, but I think he did not go far enough.

5

1. It was his idea that a man conforms to the majority view of his locality by
calculation and intention. This happens, but I think it is not the rule.
2. It was his idea that there is such a thing as a first-hand opinion; an original
opinion; an opinion which is coldly reasoned out in a man’s head, by a
searching analysis of the facts involved, with the heart unconsulted, and
the jury room closed against outside influences. It may be that such an
opinion has been born somewhere, at some time or other, but I suppose it
got away before they could catch it and stuff it and put it in the museum.
I am persuaded that a coldly-thought-out and independent verdict upon a
fashion in clothes, or manners, or literature, or politics, or religion, or any other
matter that is projected into the field of our notice and interest, is a most rare
thing — if it has indeed ever existed.
A new thing in costume appears — the flaring hoopskirt, for example — and
the passers-by are shocked, and the irreverent laugh. Six months later everybody
is reconciled; the fashion has established itself; it is admired, now, and no one laughs.
Public opinion resented it before, public opinion accepts it now, and is happy in
it. Why? Was the resentment reasoned out? Was the acceptance reasoned out? No.
The instinct that moves to conformity did the work. It is our nature to conform;
it is a force which not many can successfully resist. What is its seat? The inborn
requirement of self-approval. We all have to bow to that; there are no exceptions.
Even the woman who refuses from first to last to wear the hoopskirt comes under
that law and is its slave; she could not wear the skirt and have her own approval;
and that she must have, she cannot help herself. But as a rule our self-approval
has its source in but one place and not elsewhere — the approval of other people.
A person of vast consequences can introduce any kind of novelty in dress and the
general world will presently adopt it — moved to do it, in the first place, by the
natural instinct to passively yield to that vague something recognized as authority, and in the second place by the human instinct to train with the multitude and
have its approval. An empress introduced the hoopskirt, and we know the result.
A nobody introduced the bloomer, and we know the result. If Eve should come
again, in her ripe renown, and reintroduce her quaint styles — well, we know
what would happen. And we should be cruelly embarrassed, along at first.
The hoopskirt runs its course and disappears. Nobody reasons about it. One
woman abandons the fashion; her neighbor notices this and follows her lead; this
influences the next woman; and so on and so on, and presently the skirt has vanished out of the world, no one knows how nor why, nor cares, for that matter. It
will come again, by and by and in due course will go again.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 800

6/18/12 3:13 PM

TWAiN • CorN-PoNe oPiNioNS

801

Twenty-five years ago, in England, six or eight wine glasses stood grouped by
each person’s plate at a dinner party, and they were used, not left idle and empty;
to-day there are but three or four in the group, and the average guest sparingly
uses about two of them. We have not adopted this new fashion yet, but we shall
do it presently. We shall not think it out; we shall merely conform, and let it go at
that. We get our notions and habits and opinions from outside influences; we do
not have to study them out.
Our table manners, and company manners and street manners change from
time to time, but the changes are not reasoned out; we merely notice and conform. We are creatures of outside influences; as a rule we do not think, we only
imitate. We cannot invent standards that will stick; what we mistake for standards
are only fashions, and perishable. We may continue to admire them, but we drop
the use of them. We notice this in literature. Shakespeare is a standard, and fifty
years ago we used to write tragedies which we couldn’t tell from — from somebody else’s; but we don’t do it any more, now. Our prose standard, three quarters
of a century ago, was ornate and diffuse; some authority or other changed it in
the direction of compactness and simplicity, and conformity followed, without
argument. The historical novel starts up suddenly, and sweeps the land. Everybody writes one, and the nation is glad. We had historical novels before; but
nobody read them, and the rest of us conformed — without reasoning it out. We
are conforming in the other way, now, because it is another case of everybody.
The outside influences are always pouring in upon us, and we are always
obeying their orders and accepting their verdicts. The Smiths like the new play;
the Joneses go to see it, and they copy the Smith verdict. Morals, religions, politics, get their following from surrounding influences and atmospheres, almost
entirely; not from study, not from thinking. A man must and will have his own
approval first of all, in each and every moment and circumstance of his life —
even if he must repent of a self-approved act the moment after its commission,
in order to get his self-approval again: but, speaking in general terms, a man’s
self-approval in the large concerns of life has its source in the approval of the
peoples about him, and not in a searching personal examination of the matter.
Mohammedans are Mohammedans because they are born and reared among
that sect, not because they have thought it out and can furnish sound reasons
for being Mohammedans; we know why Catholics are Catholics; why Presbyterians are Presbyterians; why Baptists are Baptists; why Mormons are Mormons;
why thieves are thieves; why monarchists are monarchists; why Republicans
are Republicans and Democrats, Democrats. We know it is a matter of association and sympathy, not reasoning and examination; that hardly a man in the
world has an opinion upon morals, politics, or religion which he got otherwise than through his associations and sympathies. Broadly speaking, there
are none but corn-pone opinions. And broadly speaking, corn-pone stands
for self-approval. Self-approval is acquired mainly from the approval of other
people. The result is conformity. Sometimes conformity has a sordid business

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 801

10

6/18/12 3:13 PM

802

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

interest — the bread-and-butter interest — but not in most cases, I think. I think
that in the majority of cases it is unconscious and not calculated; that it’s born of
the human being’s natural yearning to stand well with his fellows and have their
inspiring approval and praise — a yearning which is commonly so strong and so
insistent that it cannot be effectually resisted, and must have its way. A political
emergency brings out the corn-pone opinion in fine force in its two chief varieties — the pocketbook variety, which has its origin in self-interest, and the bigger
variety, the sentimental variety — the one which can’t bear to be outside the pale;
can’t bear to be in disfavor; can’t endure the averted face and the cold shoulder;
wants to stand well with his friends, wants to be smiled upon, wants to be welcome, wants to hear the precious words, “He’s on the right track!” Uttered, perhaps by an ass, but still an ass of high degree, an ass whose approval is gold and
diamonds to a smaller ass, and confers glory and honor and happiness, and membership in the herd. For these gauds many a man will dump his life-long principles into the street, and his conscience along with them. We have seen it happen.
In some millions of instances.
Men think they think upon great political questions, and they do; but they
think with their party, not independently; they read its literature, but not that of
the other side; they arrive at convictions, but they are drawn from a partial view
of the matter in hand and are of no particular value. They swarm with their party,
they feel with their party, they are happy in their party’s approval; and where the
party leads they will follow, whether for right and honor, or through blood and
dirt and a mush of mutilated morals.
In our late canvass half of the nation passionately believed that in silver lay
salvation, the other half as passionately believed that that way lay destruction. Do
you believe that a tenth part of the people, on either side, had any rational excuse
for having an opinion about the matter at all? I studied that mighty question to
the bottom — came out empty. Half of our people passionately believe in high
tariff, the other half believe otherwise. Does this mean study and examination, or
only feeling? The latter, I think. I have deeply studied that question, too — and
didn’t arrive. We all do no end of feeling, and we mistake it for thinking. And out
of it we get an aggregation which we consider a boon. Its name is Public Opinion.
It is held in reverence. It settles everything. Some think it the Voice of God.

Questions for Discussion
1. According to Mark Twain, “It is our nature to conform” (para. 7); he also says that
we do so for self-approval. The two statements seem contradictory; how does
Twain connect conformity and self-approval?
2. Twain makes a distinction between “standards” and “fashions” (para. 10). What is
the difference? What examples does he provide for each? How does the distinction
apply to the twenty-first century?

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 802

6/18/12 3:13 PM

TWAiN • CorN-PoNe oPiNioNS

803

3. Twain’s essay is ultimately a denunciation of cultural chauvinism. What consequences does he suggest are the result of “corn-pone opinions”? Which are explicit?
Which are implicit?
4. The last paragraph begins with a reference to a “late canvass” in which “half the
nation passionately believed” in one path and “the other half as passionately
believed” in another. To what was Twain probably referring? Does he take sides?
How does he distinguish between thinking and feeling?
5. In what two ways does a political emergency bring out corn-pone opinions? What
does Twain mean by “an ass of high degree” (para. 11)?

Questions on Rhetoric and Style
1. What is Twain’s purpose in “Corn-Pone Opinions”?
2. Trace Twain’s use of the personal pronoun. What is the effect of changing from
I to we?
3. Twain claims he got the idea of corn-pone opinions from a young slave with a
talent for preaching. What does the anecdote add to his argument? Does it detract
in any way? If so, how?
4. How does Twain expand Jerry’s definition of corn-pone opinions? What is the
effect of numbering the two items in which he begins to expand Jerry’s definition
(para. 5)?
5. Identify Twain’s appeals to logos. Do the subjects of the appeals (hoopskirts,
bloomers, wine glasses) strengthen the appeals or weaken them? Explain your
response.
6. Explain the irony of Twain’s qualification of Jerry’s statement about calculation
and intention in paragraph 5.
7. Why is paragraph 11 so long? Where, if anywhere, could Twain have broken it up?
What is the effect of the series of subordinate clauses in the middle of the paragraph?
8. What is the effect of the parallelism in the two long sentences that make up paragraph 12?
9. What is the effect of capitalizing “Public Opinion” and “Voice of God” at the end
of the essay?
10. How does a phrase such as “helping to inhabit” in the first paragraph contribute
to the tone of the essay?
11. Find examples of understatement and hyperbole. Discuss their effects.

Suggestions for Writing
1. Do you agree or disagree with Twain’s assertion that “[i]t is our nature to conform” (para. 7)? Explain why.
2. Refute Twain’s view of Public Opinion by defending word of mouth as the most
reliable communicator of cultural innovation.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 803

6/18/12 3:13 PM

804

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

3. In paragraph 10, Twain contrasts prose styles that are “ornate and diffuse” with
those that are characterized by “compactness and simplicity.” Find examples of
each, and write an essay comparing and contrasting the effects of the two prose
styles.
4. Twain says he believed that the slave Jerry was “the greatest orator in the United
States” (para. 1) but that “in the distribution of rewards he was overlooked.” Write
about how Jerry might have viewed his situation.
5. Write your own version of “Corn-Pone Opinions,” giving examples from contemporary culture and politics. Do you end up making the same argument as Twain,
or do you think Americans are more independent thinkers now? Explain why.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 804

6/18/12 3:13 PM

from Show and Tell
Scott McCloud
Scott McCloud (b. 1960) decided to become a comics artist when he was in tenth
grade. After graduating from Syracuse university with a degree in illustration,
McCloud worked in the production department of dC Comics until he began publishing his own comic series, “Zot!” and “destroy!!” McCloud is the author of
Understanding Comics (1993), Reinventing Comics (2000), and Making Comics
(2006). in Understanding Comics, from which the accompanying excerpts are
taken, a caricature of McCloud guides the reader through a study of “sequential
art” by tracing the relationship between words and images.

Exploring the Text
1. Scott McCloud begins with a series of sixteen panels of a boy demonstrating how
his toy robot turns into an airplane. Six of the panels have no words, yet the vignette
manages to establish both pathos and ethos. How does McCloud accomplish this?
Consider the drawings and the words separately, and then consider them together.
2. Why does McCloud use the show-and-tell vignette to open the piece? How does it
support the piece’s main idea?
3. On page 809, McCloud defines comics (although he says it isn’t his definition) as
“words and pictures in combination.” He suggests that this is essentially showand-tell. Trace how he uses classification to expand and refine his definition. How
does he provide examples for each of his categories?
4. On page 813, McCloud uses dance as a metaphor to explain the relationship
between words and images. Do you consider the words or the illustrations more
powerful in illustrating that relationship? Can either stand alone? Explain.
5. What audience is McCloud addressing? In what ways does he acknowledge that
audience? How does he establish ethos?
6. McCloud uses comic-book conventions such as exaggerated facial expressions to
show emotion and a character walking left to right to create a sense of slowness
and difficulty. Find other examples of these conventions, and compare them to the
conventions of language he employs.
7. Charles McGrath, an editor of the New York Times Book Review, wrote in a 2004
essay, “Not Funnies,” that comic books are “what novels used to be — an accessible,
vernacular form with mass appeal.” He says that if the “highbrows” are right, they
are a “form perfectly suited to our dumbed-down culture and collective attention
deficit.” How might McCloud respond to McGrath and the “highbrows”? How
does McCloud address the gap between high and low culture?
8. Describe the tone of “Show and Tell” on the following pages. How is it created?
Are the words or images more instrumental in creating the tone? Are there places
where the words and images create different tones? Please explain.

805

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 805

6/18/12 3:13 PM

806

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 806

6/18/12 3:13 PM

McCLoud • SHoW ANd TeLL

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 807

807

6/18/12 3:13 PM

808

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

...

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 808

6/18/12 3:13 PM

McCLoud • SHoW ANd TeLL

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 809

809

6/18/12 3:13 PM

810

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 810

6/18/12 3:13 PM

McCLoud • SHoW ANd TeLL

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 811

811

6/18/12 3:13 PM

812

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 812

6/18/12 3:13 PM

McCLoud • SHoW ANd TeLL

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 813

813

6/18/12 3:13 PM

814

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 814

6/18/12 3:13 PM

McCLoud • SHoW ANd TeLL

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 815

815

6/18/12 3:13 PM

816

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 816

6/18/12 3:13 PM

McCLoud • SHoW ANd TeLL

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 817

817

6/18/12 3:13 PM

818

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 818

6/18/12 3:13 PM

deNBY • HigH-SCHooL CoNfideNTiAL

819

High-School Confidential
Notes on Teen Movies

David Denby
david denby (b. 1943), who lives in New York City, is a staff writer and film critic
for the New Yorker and the former film critic for New York. His writing has also
appeared in the Atlantic, the New York Review of Books, and the New Republic.
His first book, Great Books: My Adventures with Homer, Rousseau, Woolf, and
Other Indestructible Writers of the Western World (1996), was a finalist for the
National Book Critics Circle Award. denby is also the editor of Awake in the Dark:
An Anthology of Film Criticism from 1915 to the Present (1977), American Sucker
(2004), and Snark (2009). The essay that follows was originally published in the
New Yorker in May 1999.

T

he most hated young woman in America is a blonde — well, sometimes
a redhead or a brunette, but usually a blonde. She has big hair flipped
into a swirl of gold at one side of her face or arrayed in a sultry mane, like the
magnificent pile of a forties movie star. She’s tall and slender, with a waist as
supple as a willow, but she’s dressed in awful, spangled taste: her outfits could
have been put together by warring catalogues. And she has a mouth on her, a low,
slatternly tongue that devastates other kids with such insults as “You’re vapor,
you’re Spam!” and “Do I look like Mother Teresa? If I did, I probably wouldn’t
mind talking to the geek squad.” She has two or three friends exactly like her, and
together they dominate their realm — the American high school as it appears in
recent teen movies. They are like wicked princesses, who enjoy the misery of their
subjects. Her coronation, of course, is the senior prom, when she expects to be
voted “most popular” by her class. But, though she may be popular, she is certainly not liked, so her power is something of a mystery. She is beautiful and rich,
yet in the end she is preeminent because . . . she is preeminent, a position she
works to maintain with Joan Crawford–like tenacity. Everyone is afraid of her;
that’s why she’s popular.
She has a male counterpart. He’s usually a football player, muscular but
dumb, with a face like a beer mug and only two ways of speaking — in a conspiratorial whisper, to a friend; or in a drill sergeant’s sudden bellow. If her
weapon is the snub, his is the lame but infuriating prank — the can of Sprite emptied into a knapsack, or something sticky, creamy, or adhesive deposited in a
locker. Sprawling and dull in class, he comes alive in the halls and in the cafeteria.
He hurls people against lockers; he spits, pours, and sprays; he has a projectile
relationship with food. As the crown prince, he claims the best-looking girl for
himself, though in a perverse display of power he may invite an outsider or an

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 819

6/18/12 3:13 PM

820

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

awkward girl — a “dog” — to the prom, setting her up for some special humiliation. When we first see him, he is riding high, and virtually the entire school colludes in his tyranny. No authority figure — no teacher or administrator — dares
correct him.
Thus the villains of the recent high-school movies. Not every American teen
movie has these two characters, and not every social queen or jock shares all the
attributes I’ve mentioned. (Occasionally, a handsome, dark-haired athlete can be
converted to sweetness and light.) But as genre figures these two types are hugely
familiar; that is, they are a common memory, a collective trauma, or at least a
social and erotic fantasy. Such movies . . . as Disturbing Behavior, She’s All That,
Ten Things I Hate about You, and Never Been Kissed depend on them as stock
figures. And they may have been figures in the minds of the Littleton shooters,
Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold, who imagined they were living in a school like the
one in so many of these movies — a poisonous system of status, snobbery, and
exclusion.

Y
Do genre films reflect reality? Or are they merely a set of conventions that refer to
other films? Obviously, they wouldn’t survive if they didn’t provide emotional
satisfaction to the people who make them and to the audiences who watch them.
A half century ago, we didn’t need to see ten Westerns a year in order to learn that
the West got settled. We needed to see it settled ten times a year in order to provide ourselves with the emotional gratifications of righteous violence. By drawing his gun only when he was provoked, and in the service of the good, the classic
Western hero transformed the gross tangibles of the expansionist drive (land,
cattle, gold) into a principle of moral order. The gangster, by contrast, is a figure
of chaos, a modern, urban person, and in the critic Robert Warshow’s formulation he functions as a discordant element in an American society devoted to a
compulsively “positive” outlook. When the gangster dies, he cleanses viewers of
their own negative feelings.
High-school movies are also full of unease and odd, mixed-up emotions.
They may be flimsy in conception; they may be shot in lollipop colors, garlanded
with mediocre pop scores, and cast with goofy young actors trying to make an
impression. Yet this most commercial and frivolous of genres harbors a grievance
against the world. It’s a very specific grievance, quite different from the restless
anger of such fifties adolescent-rebellion movies as The Wild One, in which someone asks Marlon Brando’s biker “What are you rebelling against?” and the biker
replies “What have you got?” The fifties teen outlaw was against anything that
adults considered sacred. But no movie teenager now revolts against adult authority, for the simple reason that adults have no authority. Teachers are rarely more
than a minimal, exasperated presence, administrators get turned into a joke, and
parents are either absent or distantly benevolent. It’s a teen world bounded by
school, mall, and car, with occasional moments set in the fast-food outlets where
the kids work, or in the kids’ upstairs bedrooms, with their pinups and rack stereo

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 820

5

6/18/12 3:13 PM

deNBY • HigH-SCHooL CoNfideNTiAL

821

systems. The enemy is not authority; the enemy is other teens and the social system that they impose on one another.
The bad feeling in these movies may strike grownups as peculiar. After all, from
a distance American kids appear to be having it easy these days. The teen audience
is facing a healthy job market; at home, their parents are stuffing the den with computers and the garage with a bulky S.U.V. But most teens aren’t thinking about the
future job market. Lost in the eternal swoon of late adolescence, they’re thinking
about their identity, their friends, and their clothes. Adolescence is the present-tense
moment in American life. Identity and status are fluid: abrupt, devastating reversals
are always possible. (In a teen movie, a guy who swallows a bucket of cafeteria coleslaw can make himself a hero in an instant.) In these movies, accordingly, the senior
prom is the equivalent of the shoot-out at the O.K. Corral; it’s the moment when
one’s worth as a human being is settled at last. In the rather pedestrian new comedy
Never Been Kissed, Drew Barrymore, as a twenty-five-year-old newspaper reporter,
goes back to high school pretending to be a student, and immediately falls into
her old, humiliating pattern of trying to impress the good-looking rich kids.
Helplessly, she pushes for approval, and even gets herself chosen prom queen
before finally coming to her senses. She finds it nearly impossible to let go.

Y
Genre films dramatize not what happens but how things feel — the emotional
coloring of memory. They fix subjectivity into fable. At actual schools, there is no
unitary system of status; there are many groups to be a part of, many places to
excel (or fail to excel), many avenues of escape and self-definition. And often the
movies, too, revel in the arcana of high-school cliques. In . . . Disturbing Behavior,
a veteran student lays out the cafeteria ethnography for a newcomer: Motorheads,
Blue Ribbons, Skaters, Micro-geeks (“drug of choice: Stephen Hawking’s A Brief
History of Time and a cup of jasmine tea on Saturday night”). Subjectively, though,
the social system in Disturbing Behavior (a high-school version of The Stepford
Wives) and in the other movies still feels coercive and claustrophobic: humiliation is the most vivid emotion of youth, so in memory it becomes the norm.
The movies try to turn the tables. The kids who cannot be the beautiful ones,
or make out with them, or avoid being insulted by them — these are the heroes of
the teen movies, the third in the trio of character types. The female outsider is
usually an intellectual or an artist. (She scribbles in a diary, she draws or paints.)
Physically awkward, she walks like a seal crossing a beach, and is prone to drop
her books and dither in terror when she stands before a handsome boy. Her
clothes, which ignore mall fashion, scandalize the social queens. Like them, she
has a tongue, but she’s tart and grammatical, tending toward feminist pungency
and precise diction. She may mask her sense of vulnerability with sarcasm or with
Plathian rue (she’s stuck in the bell jar), but even when she lashes out she can’t
hide her craving for acceptance.
The male outsider, her friend, is usually a mass of stuttering or giggling sexual gloom: he wears shapeless clothes; he has an undeveloped body, either stringy

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 821

6/18/12 3:13 PM

822

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

or shrimpy; he’s sometimes a Jew (in these movies, still the generic outsider). He’s
also brilliant, but in a morose, preoccupied way that suggests masturbatory
absorption in some arcane system of knowledge. In a few special cases, the outsider is not a loser but a disengaged hipster, either saintly or satanic. (Christian
Slater has played this role a couple of times.) This outsider wears black and keeps
his hair long, and he knows how to please women. He sees through everything, so
he’s ironic by temperament and genuinely indifferent to the opinion of others —
a natural aristocrat, who transcends the school’s contemptible status system.
There are whimsical variations on the outsider figure, too. In the recent Rushmore, an obnoxious teen hero, Max Fischer (Jason Schwartzman), runs the entire
school: he can’t pass his courses but he’s a dynamo at extracurricular activities,
with a knack for staging extraordinary events. He’s a con man, a fund-raiser, an
entrepreneur — in other words, a contemporary artist.
In fact, the entire genre, which combines self-pity and ultimate vindication,
might be called “Portrait of the Filmmaker as a Young Nerd.” Who can doubt
where Hollywood’s twitchy, nearsighted writers and directors ranked — or feared
they ranked — on the high-school totem pole? They are still angry, though occasionally the target of their resentment goes beyond the jocks and cheerleaders of
their youth. Consider this anomaly: the young actors and models on the covers of
half the magazines published in this country, the shirtless men with chests like
burnished shields, the girls smiling, glowing, tweezed, full-lipped, full-breasted
(but not too full), and with skin so honeyed that it seems lacquered — these are
the physical ideals embodied by the villains of the teen movies. The social queens
and jocks, using their looks to dominate others, represent an American barbarism of beauty. Isn’t it possible that the detestation of them in teen movies is a
veiled strike at the entire abs-hair advertising culture, with its unobtainable glories of perfection? A critic of consumerism might even see a spark of revolt in
these movies. But only a spark.
My guess is that these films arise from remembered hurts which then get
recast in symbolic form. For instance, a surprising number of the outsider heroes
have no mother. Mom has died or run off with another man; her child, only half
loved, is ill equipped for the emotional pressures of school. The motherless child,
of course, is a shrewd commercial ploy that makes a direct appeal to the members
of the audience, many of whom may feel like outsiders, too, and unloved, or not
loved enough, or victims of some prejudice or exclusion. But the motherless child
also has powers, and will someday be a success, an artist, a screenwriter. It’s the
wound and the bow all over again, in cargo pants.
As the female nerd attracts the attention of the handsomest boy in the senior
class, the teen movie turns into a myth of social reversal — a Cinderella fantasy.
Initially, his interest in her may be part of a stunt or a trick: he is leading her on,
perhaps at the urging of his queenly girlfriend. But his gaze lights her up, and we
see how attractive she really is. Will she fulfill the eternal specs? She wants her
prince, and by degrees she wins him over, not just with her looks but with her
superior nature, her essential goodness. In the male version of the Cinderella trip,

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 822

10

6/18/12 3:13 PM

deNBY • HigH-SCHooL CoNfideNTiAL

823

a few years go by, and a pale little nerd (we see him at a reunion) has become rich.
All that poking around with chemicals paid off. Max Fischer, of Rushmore, can’t
miss being richer than Warhol.
So the teen movie is wildly ambivalent. It may attack the consumerist ethos
that produces winners and losers, but in the end it confirms what it is attacking.
The girls need the seal of approval conferred by the converted jocks; the nerds
need money and a girl. Perhaps it’s no surprise that the outsiders can be validated
only by the people who ostracized them. But let’s not be too schematic: the outsider who joins the system also modifies it, opens it up to the creative power of
social mobility, makes it bend and laugh, and perhaps this turn of events is not so
different from the way things work in the real world, where merit and achievement stand a good chance of trumping appearance. The irony of the Littleton
shootings is that Klebold and Harris, who were both proficient computer heads,
seemed to have forgotten how the plot turns out. If they had held on for a few
years they might have been working at a hip software company, or have started
their own business, while the jocks who oppressed them would probably have
wound up selling insurance or used cars. That’s the one unquestionable social
truth the teen movies reflect: geeks rule.

Y
There is, of course, a menacing subgenre, in which the desire for revenge turns
bloody. Thirty-one years ago, Lindsay Anderson’s semi-surrealistic If . . . was set
in an oppressive, class-ridden English boarding school, where a group of rebellious students drive the school population out into a courtyard and open fire on
them with machine guns. In Brian De Palma’s 1976 masterpiece Carrie, the pale,
repressed heroine, played by Sissy Spacek, is courted at last by a handsome boy
but gets violated — doused with pig’s blood — just as she is named prom queen.
Stunned but far from powerless, Carrie uses her telekinetic powers to set the
room afire and burn down the school. Carrie is the primal school movie, so wildly
lurid and funny that it exploded the clichés of the genre before the genre was
quite set: the heroine may be a wrathful avenger, but the movie, based on a Stephen
King book, was clearly a grinning-gargoyle fantasy. So, at first, was Heathers, in
which Christian Slater’s satanic outsider turns out to be a true devil. He and his
girlfriend (played by a very young Winona Ryder) begin gleefully knocking off
the rich, nasty girls and the jocks, in ways so patently absurd that their revenge
seems a mere wicked dream. I think it’s unlikely that these movies had a direct
effect on the actions of the Littleton shooters, but the two boys would surely have
recognized the emotional world of Heathers and Disturbing Behavior as their
own. It’s a place where feelings of victimization join fantasy, and you experience
the social élites as so powerful that you must either become them or kill them.
But enough. It’s possible to make teen movies that go beyond these fixed
polarities — insider and outsider, blonde-bitch queen and hunch-shouldered nerd.
In Amy Heckerling’s 1995 comedy Clueless, the big blonde played by Alicia Silverstone is a Rodeo Drive clotheshorse who is nonetheless possessed of extraordinary

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 823

15

6/18/12 3:13 PM

824

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

virtue. Freely dispensing advice and help, she’s almost ironically good — a designing goddess with a cell phone. The movie offers a sun-shiny satire of Beverly Hills
affluence, which it sees as both absurdly swollen and generous in spirit. The most
original of the teen comedies, Clueless casts away self-pity. So does Romy and
Michele’s High School Reunion (1997), in which two gabby, lovable friends, played
by Mira Sorvino and Lisa Kudrow, review the banalities of their high-school
experience so knowingly that they might be criticizing the teen-movie genre
itself. And easily the best American film of the year so far is Alexander Payne’s
Election, a high-school movie that inhabits a different aesthetic and moral world
altogether from the rest of these pictures. Election shreds everyone’s fantasies and
illusions in a vision of high school that is bleak but supremely just. The movie’s
villain, an over-achieving girl (Reese Witherspoon) who runs for class president,
turns out to be its covert heroine, or, at least, its most poignant character. A cross
between Pat and Dick Nixon, she’s a lower-middle-class striver who works like
crazy and never wins anyone’s love. Even when she’s on top, she feels excluded.
Her loneliness is produced not by malicious cliques but by her own implacable
will, a condition of the spirit that may be as comical and tragic as it is mysterious.
Election escapes all the clichés; it graduates into art.

Exploring the Text
1. What is David Denby’s opinion of teen movies? Does he find anything redeeming
in them? Do you agree that it is the “most commercial and frivolous of genres”
(para. 5)? Explain your response.
2. Denby mentions three movies that “go beyond [the] fixed polarities” (para. 15):
Clueless, Romy and Michele’s High School Reunion, and Election. Do you agree? Do
any recent teen movies transcend the genre? Explain.
3. What rhetorical strategies does Denby use in the first paragraph to create a picture
of the female villain of teen movies? Consider such strategies as irony, hyperbole,
metaphor, colloquialisms, and opposition. What are their effects?
4. Where do you detect changes in Denby’s tone? How does Denby achieve these
changes?
5. The essay makes several appeals to ethos. Denby is a well-known film critic. How
does he use the expertise of others — implicitly and explicitly — to support his
argument?
6. What is Denby’s central argument? What are his secondary arguments? How does
he bring them together?
7. In paragraph 13, Denby argues that the two teenage boys who killed classmates,
teachers, and then themselves at Columbine High School did not learn the lesson
of teen movies: “geeks rule.” How does he support this argument?
8. Who is the likely audience for this essay? How does Denby consider audience in his
essay?

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 824

6/18/12 3:13 PM

givHAN • AN iMAge A LiTTLe Too CArefuLLY CoordiNATed

825

An Image a Little Too Carefully Coordinated
Robin Givhan
Born in 1965 in detroit, robin givhan was for many years the fashion editor at the
Washington Post, where she won the 2006 Pulitzer Prize for Criticism — the first
time a fashion writer was honored. Known for her bluntness, givhan has commented in the press on, for example, vice President dick Cheney’s dark green
parka and first Lady Michelle obama’s shorts. She is now a special correspondent
for style and culture at Newsweek and the Daily Beast. The piece presented here
appeared in the Washington Post in July 2005 when President Bush named John
roberts as his choice for the Supreme Court.

I

t has been a long time since so much syrupy nostalgia has been in evidence
at the White House. But Tuesday night, when President Bush announced
his choice for the next associate justice of the Supreme Court, it was hard not to
marvel at the 1950s-style tableau vivant that was John Roberts and his family.
There they were — John, Jane, Josie and Jack — standing with the president
and before the entire country. The nominee was in a sober suit with the expected
white shirt and red tie. His wife and children stood before the cameras, groomed
and glossy in pastel hues — like a trio of Easter eggs, a handful of Jelly Bellies,
three little Necco wafers. There was tow-headed Jack — having freed himself from
the controlling grip of his mother — enjoying a moment in the spotlight dressed
in a seersucker suit with short pants and saddle shoes. His sister, Josie, was halfhidden behind her mother’s skirt. Her blond pageboy glistened. And she was
wearing a yellow dress with a crisp white collar, lace-trimmed anklets and black
patent-leather Mary Janes.
(Who among us did a double take? Two cute blond children with a boyishlooking father getting ready to take the lectern — Jack Edwards? Emma Claire? Is
that you? Are all little boys now named Jack?)
The wife wore a strawberry-pink tweed suit with taupe pumps and pearls,
which alone would not have been particularly remarkable, but alongside the nostalgic costuming of the children, the overall effect was of self-consciously crafted
perfection. The children, of course, are innocents. They are dressed by their parents. And through their clothes choices, the parents have created the kind of
honeyed faultlessness that jams mailboxes every December when personalized
Christmas cards arrive bringing greetings “to you and yours” from the Blake family or the Joneses. Everyone looks freshly scrubbed and adorable, just like they
have stepped from a Currier & Ives landscape.
In a time when most children are dressed in Gap Kids and retailers of similar
price-point and modernity, the parents put young master Jack in an ensemble
that calls to mind John F. “John-John” Kennedy Jr.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 825

5

6/18/12 3:13 PM

826

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

Separate the child from the clothes, which do not acknowledge trends, popular culture or the passing of time. They are not classic; they are old-fashioned.
These clothes are Old World, old money and a cut above the light-up/shoebuying hoi polloi.
The clothes also reflect a bit of the aesthetic havoc that often occurs when
people visit the White House. (What should I wear? How do I look? Take my
picture!) The usual advice is to dress appropriately. In this case, an addendum
would have been helpful: Please select all attire from the commonly accepted
styles of this century. (And someone should have given notice to the flip-flopwearing women of Northwestern University’s lacrosse team, who visited the
White House on July 12 for a meet-and-greet with the president: proper footwear
required. Flip-flops, modeled after shoes meant to be worn into a public shower
or on the beach, have no business anywhere in the vicinity of the president and
his place of residence.)
Dressing appropriately is a somewhat selfless act. It’s not about catering to
personal comfort. One can’t give in fully to private aesthetic preferences. Instead,
one asks what would make other people feel respected? What would mark the
occasion as noteworthy? What signifies that the moment is bigger than the
individual?

(See insert for color version.)

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 826

6/18/12 3:13 PM

JoHNSoN • WATCHiNg Tv MAKeS You SMArTer

827

But the Roberts family went too far. In announcing John Roberts as his
Supreme Court nominee, the president inextricably linked the individual — and
his family — to the sweep of tradition. In their attire, there was nothing too informal; there was nothing immodest. There was only the feeling that, in the desire to
be appropriate and respectful of history, the children had been costumed in it.

Exploring the Text
1. Do you think Robin Givhan makes a convincing argument? Explain why or
why not.
2. Look at the photo of the Roberts family. Do you agree that they are “costumed in
[history],” or are they just “appropriate and respectful of history” (para. 9)? Explain
your answer.
3. What is the effect of the many proper names, including the names of products,
that Givhan uses throughout the piece?
4. Who is Givhan’s audience? What assumptions about audience bolster her argument? What are the ways in which Givhan shows she’s open to other points of view?
5. How would you describe the tone of Givhan’s piece? In what ways do you think her
tone is a response to her audience and the subject matter?
6. What’s your opinion on the subject of the flip-flop-wearing lacrosse team (para. 7)?
What do you think they should have worn?
7. Consider the word appropriately in paragraph 7. Why do you think it is italicized?
What do the italics add to the connotations of the word?

Watching TV Makes You Smarter
Steven Johnson
Steven Berlin Johnson (b. 1968) writes about science, technology, and personal
experience. in addition to the best-selling Everything Bad Is Good for You (2005),
Johnson has written The Ghost Map (2006), The Invention of Air (2008), and
Where Good Ideas Come From (2010). He is a columnist at Discover magazine
and a contributing editor at Wired magazine. The following excerpt from Everything Bad Is Good for You appeared in the New York Times Magazine in 2005.

The Sleeper Curve
Scientist A: Has he asked for anything special?
Scientist B: Yes, this morning for breakfast . . . he requested something
called “wheat germ, organic honey and tiger’s milk.”

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 827

6/18/12 3:13 PM

828

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

Scientist A: Oh, yes. Those were the charmed substances that some years
ago were felt to contain life-preserving properties.
Scientist B: You mean there was no deep fat? No steak or cream pies or . . .
hot fudge?
Scientist A: Those were thought to be unhealthy.
— from Woody Allen’s Sleeper

On Jan. 24, the Fox network showed an episode of its hit drama 24, the real-time
thriller known for its cliffhanger tension and often-gruesome violence. Over the
preceding weeks, a number of public controversies had erupted around 24, mostly
focused on its portrait of Muslim terrorists and its penchant for torture scenes.
The episode that was shown on the 24th only fanned the flames higher: in one
scene, a terrorist enlists a hit man to kill his child for not fully supporting the
jihadist cause; in another scene, the secretary of defense authorizes the torture of
his son to uncover evidence of a terrorist plot.
But the explicit violence and the post-911 terrorist anxiety are not the only
elements of 24 that would have been unthinkable on prime-time network television 20 years ago. Alongside the notable change in content lies an equally notable
change in form. During its 44 minutes — a real-time hour, minus 16 minutes for
commercials — the episode connects the lives of 21 distinct characters, each with
a clearly defined “story arc,” as the Hollywood jargon has it: a defined personality
with motivations and obstacles and specific relationships with other characters.
Nine primary narrative threads wind their way through those 44 minutes, each
drawing extensively upon events and information revealed in earlier episodes.
Draw a map of all those intersecting plots and personalities, and you get structure
that — where formal complexity is concerned — more closely resembles Middlemarch than a hit TV drama of years past like Bonanza.
For decades, we’ve worked under the assumption that mass culture follows a
path declining steadily toward lowest-common-denominator standards, presumably because the “masses” want dumb, simple pleasures and big media companies
try to give the masses what they want. But as that 24 episode suggests, the exact
opposite is happening: the culture is getting more cognitively demanding, not
less. To make sense of an episode of 24, you have to integrate far more information than you would have a few decades ago watching a comparable show. Beneath
the violence and the ethnic stereotypes, another trend appears: to keep up with
entertainment like 24, you have to pay attention, make inferences, track shifting social relationships. This is what I call the Sleeper Curve: the most debased
forms of mass diversion — video games and violent television dramas and juvenile sitcoms — turn out to be nutritional after all.
I believe that the Sleeper Curve is the single most important new force altering the mental development of young people today, and I believe it is largely a
force for good: enhancing our cognitive faculties, not dumbing them down. And
yet you almost never hear this story in popular accounts of today’s media. Instead,

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 828

5

6/18/12 3:13 PM

JoHNSoN • WATCHiNg Tv MAKeS You SMArTer

829

you hear dire tales of addiction, violence, mindless escapism. It’s assumed that
shows that promote smoking or gratuitous violence are bad for us, while those
that thunder against teen pregnancy or intolerance have a positive role in society.
Judged by that morality-play standard, the story of popular culture over the past
50 years — if not 500 — is a story of decline: the morals of the stories have grown
darker and more ambiguous, and the antiheroes have multiplied.
The usual counterargument here is that what media have lost in moral clarity, they have gained in realism. The real world doesn’t come in nicely packaged
public-service announcements, and we’re better off with entertainment like The
Sopranos that reflects our fallen state with all its ethical ambiguity. I happen to be
sympathetic to that argument, but it’s not the one I want to make here. I think
there is another way to assess the social virtue of pop culture, one that looks at
media as a kind of cognitive workout, not as a series of life lessons. There may
indeed be more “negative messages” in the mediasphere today. But that’s not the
only way to evaluate whether our television shows or video games are having a
positive impact. Just as important — if not more important — is the kind of
thinking you have to do to make sense of a cultural experience. That is where the
Sleeper Curve becomes visible.

Televised Intelligence
Consider the cognitive demands that televised narratives place on their viewers.
With many shows that we associate with “quality” entertainment — The Mary
Tyler Moore Show, Murphy Brown, Frasier — the intelligence arrives fully formed
in the words and actions of the characters on-screen. They say witty things to one
another and avoid lapsing into tired sitcom clichés, and we smile along in our
living rooms, enjoying the company of these smart people. But assuming we’re
bright enough to understand the sentences they’re saying, there’s no intellectual
labor involved in enjoying the show as a viewer. You no more challenge your
mind by watching these intelligent shows than you challenge your body watching
Monday Night Football. The intellectual work is happening on-screen, not off.
But another kind of televised intelligence is on the rise. Think of the cognitive benefits conventionally ascribed to reading: attention, patience, retention, the
parsing of narrative threads. Over the last half-century, programming on TV has
increased the demands it places on precisely these mental faculties. This growing
complexity involves three primary elements: multiple threading, flashing arrows
and social networks.
According to television lore, the age of multiple threads began with the
arrival in 1981 of Hill Street Blues, the Steven Bochco police drama invariably
praised for its “gritty realism.” Watch an episode of Hill Street Blues side by side
with any major drama from the preceding decades — Starsky and Hutch, for
instance, or Dragnet — and the structural transformation will jump out at you.
The earlier shows follow one or two lead characters, adhere to a single dominant

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 829

6/18/12 3:13 PM

830

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

plot and reach a decisive conclusion at the end of the episode. Draw an outline of
the narrative threads in almost every Dragnet episode, and it will be a single line:
from the initial crime scene, through the investigation, to the eventual cracking
of the case. A typical Starsky and Hutch episode offers only the slightest variation
on this linear formula: the introduction of a comic subplot that usually appears
only at the tail ends of the episode, creating a structure that looks like the graph
below. The vertical axis represents the number of individual threads, and the
horizontal axis is time.
DRAGNET (ANY EPISODE)

S TA R S K Y A N D H U T C H ( A N Y E P I S O D E )

A Hill Street Blues episode complicates the picture in a number of profound
ways. The narrative weaves together a collection of distinct strands — sometimes
as many as 10, though at least half of the threads involve only a few quick scenes
scattered through the episode. The number of primary characters —and not just
bit parts — swells significantly. And the episode has fuzzy borders: picking up one
or two threads from previous episodes at the outset and leaving one or two
threads open at the end. Charted graphically, an average episode looks like this:

10

HILL STREET BLUES (EPISODE 85)

Critics generally cite Hill Street Blues as the beginning of “serious drama”
narrative in the television medium — differentiating the series from the singleepisode dramatic programs from the 50’s, which were Broadway plays performed
in front of a camera. But the Hill Street innovations weren’t all that original;
they’d long played a defining role in popular television, just not during the evening hours. The structure of a Hill Street episode — and indeed of all the critically
acclaimed dramas that followed, from thirtysomething to Six Feet Under — is the
structure of a soap opera. Hill Street Blues might have sparked a new golden age
of television drama during its seven-year run, but it did so by using a few crucial
tricks that Guiding Light and General Hospital mastered long before.
Bochco’s genius with Hill Street was to marry complex narrative structure
with complex subject matter. Dallas had already shown that the extended, interwoven threads of the soap-opera genre could survive the weeklong interruptions of a prime-time show, but the actual content of Dallas was fluff. (The most

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 830

6/18/12 3:13 PM

JoHNSoN • WATCHiNg Tv MAKeS You SMArTer

831

probing issue it addressed was the question, now folkloric, of who shot J.R.) All in
the Family and Rhoda showed that you could tackle complex social issues, but
they did their tackling in the comfort of the sitcom living room. Hill Street had
richly drawn characters confronting difficult social issues and a narrative structure to match.
Since Hill Street appeared, the multi-threaded drama has become the most
widespread fictional genre on prime time: St. Elsewhere, L.A. Law, thirtysomething, Twin Peaks, N.Y.P.D. Blue, E.R., The West Wing, Alias, Lost. (The only prominent holdouts in drama are shows like Law and Order that have essentially
updated the venerable Dragnet format and thus remained anchored to a single
narrative line.) Since the early 80’s, however, there has been a noticeable increase
in narrative complexity in these dramas. The most ambitious show on TV to date,
The Sopranos, routinely follows up to a dozen distinct threads over the course of
an episode, with more than 20 recurring characters. An episode from late in the
first season looks like this:
THE SOPRANOS (EPISODE 8)

The total number of active threads equals the multiple plots of Hill Street, but
here each thread is more substantial. The show doesn’t offer a clear distinction
between dominant and minor plots; each story line carries its weight in the mix.
The episode also displays a chordal mode of storytelling entirely absent from Hill
Street: a single scene in The Sopranos will often connect to three different threads
at the same time, layering one plot atop another. And every single thread in this
Sopranos episode builds on events from previous episodes and continues on
through the rest of the season and beyond.
Put those charts together, and you have a portrait of the Sleeper Curve rising
over the past 30 years of popular television. In a sense, this is as much a map of
cognitive changes in the popular mind as it is a map of on-screen developments,
as if the media titans decided to condition our brains to follow ever-larger numbers of simultaneous threads. Before Hill Street, the conventional wisdom among
television execs was that audiences wouldn’t be comfortable following more than
three plots in a single episode, and indeed, the Hill Street pilot, which was shown
in January 1981, brought complaints from viewers that the show was too complicated. Fast-forward two decades, and shows like The Sopranos engage their audiences with narratives that make Hill Street look like Three’s Company. Audiences
happily embrace that complexity because they’ve been trained by two decades of
multi-threaded dramas.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 831

15

6/18/12 3:13 PM

832

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

Multi-threading is the most celebrated structural feature of the modern television drama, and it certainly deserves some of the honor that has been doled out
to it. And yet multi-threading is only part of the story.

The Case for Confusion
Shortly after the arrival of the first-generation slasher movies — Halloween, Friday the 13th — Paramount released a mock-slasher flick called Student Bodies,
parodying the genre just as the Scream series would do 15 years later. In one scene,
the obligatory nubile teenage baby sitter hears a noise outside a suburban house;
she opens the door to investigate, finds nothing and then goes back inside. As the
door shuts behind her, the camera swoops in on the doorknob, and we see that
she has left the door unlocked. The camera pulls back and then swoops down
again for emphasis. And then a flashing arrow appears on the screen, with text
that helpfully explains: “Unlocked!”
That flashing arrow is parody, of course, but it’s merely an exaggerated version of a device popular stories use all the time. When a sci-fi script inserts into
some advanced lab a nonscientist who keeps asking the science geeks to explain
what they’re doing with that particle accelerator, that’s a flashing arrow that gives
the audience precisely the information it needs in order to make sense of the
ensuing plot. (“Whatever you do, don’t spill water on it, or you’ll set off a massive
explosion!”) These hints serve as a kind of narrative hand-holding. Implicitly,
they say to the audience, “We realize you have no idea what a particle accelerator
is, but here’s the deal: all you need to know is that it’s a big fancy thing that
explodes when wet.” They focus the mind on relevant details: “Don’t worry about
whether the baby sitter is going to break up with her boyfriend. Worry about that
guy lurking in the bushes.” They reduce the amount of analytic work you need to
do to make sense of a story. All you have to do is follow the arrows.
By this standard, popular television has never been harder to follow. If narrative threads have experienced a population explosion over the past 20 years, flashing arrows have grown correspondingly scarce. Watching our pinnacle of early
80’s TV drama, Hill Street Blues, we find there’s an informational wholeness to
each scene that differs markedly from what you see on shows like The West Wing
or The Sopranos or Alias or E.R.
Hill Street has ambiguities about future events: Will a convicted killer be executed? Will Furillo marry Joyce Davenport? Will Renko find it in himself to bust
a favorite singer for cocaine possession? But the present-tense of each scene
explains itself to the viewer with little ambiguity. There’s an open question or a
mystery driving each of these stories — how will it all turn out? — but there’s
no mystery about the immediate activity on the screen. A contemporary drama
like The West Wing, on the other hand, constantly embeds mysteries into the
present-tense events: you see characters performing actions or discussing events
about which crucial information has been deliberately withheld. Anyone who has

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 832

20

6/18/12 3:13 PM

JoHNSoN • WATCHiNg Tv MAKeS You SMArTer

833

watched more than a handful of The West Wing episodes closely will know the
feeling: scene after scene refers to some clearly crucial but unexplained piece of
information, and after the sixth reference, you’ll find yourself wishing you could
rewind the tape to figure out what they’re talking about, assuming you’ve missed
something. And then you realize that you’re supposed to be confused. The open
question posed by these sequences is not “How will this turn out in the end?” The
question is “What’s happening right now?”
The deliberate lack of hand-holding extends down to the microlevel of dialogue as well. Popular entertainment that addresses technical issues — whether
they are the intricacies of passing legislation, or of performing a heart bypass,
or of operating a particle accelerator — conventionally switches between two
modes of information in dialogue: texture and substance. Texture is all the arcane
verbiage provided to convince the viewer that they’re watching Actual Doctors at
Work; substance is the material planted amid the background texture that the
viewer needs to make sense of the plot.
Conventionally, narratives demarcate the line between texture and substance
by inserting cues that flag or translate the important data. There’s an unintentionally comical moment in the 2004 blockbuster The Day After Tomorrow in
which the beleaguered climatologist (played by Dennis Quaid) announces his
theory about the imminent arrival of a new ice age to a gathering of government
officials. In his speech, he warns that “we have hit a critical desalinization point!”
At this moment, the writer-director Roland Emmerich — a master of brazen
arrow-flashing — has an official follow with the obliging remark: “It would
explain what’s driving this extreme weather.” They might as well have had a flashing “Unlocked!” arrow on the screen.
The dialogue on shows like The West Wing and E.R., on the other hand,
doesn’t talk down to its audiences. It rushes by, the words accelerating in sync
with the high-speed tracking shots that glide through the corridors and operating
rooms. The characters talk faster in these shows, but the truly remarkable thing
about the dialogue is not purely a matter of speed; it’s the willingness to immerse
the audience in information that most viewers won’t understand. Here’s a typical
scene from E.R.:
[Weaver and Wright push a gurney containing a 16-year-old girl. Her
parents, Janna and Frank Mikami, follow close behind. Carter and
Lucy fall in.]
Weaver: 16-year-old, unconscious, history of biliary atresia.
Carter: Hepatic coma?
Weaver: Looks like it.
Mr. Mikami: She was doing fine until six months ago.
Carter: What medication is she on?
Mrs. Mikami: Ampicillin, tobramycin, vitamins A, D and K.
Lucy: Skin’s jaundiced.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 833

6/18/12 3:13 PM

834

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

Weaver: Same with the sclera. Breath smells sweet.
Carter: Fetor hepaticus?
Weaver: Yep.
Lucy: What’s that?
Weaver: Her liver’s shut down. Let’s dip a urine. [To Carter] Guys, it’s
getting a little crowded in here, why don’t you deal with the parents? Start
lactulose, 30 cc’s per NG.
Carter: We’re giving medicine to clean her blood.
Weaver: Blood in the urine, two-plus.
Carter: The liver failure is causing her blood not to clot.
Mrs. Mikami: Oh, God. . . .
Carter: Is she on the transplant list?
Mr. Mikami: She’s been Status 2a for six months, but they haven’t been
able to find her a match.
Carter: Why? What’s her blood type?
Mr. Mikami: AB.
[This hits Carter like a lightning bolt. Lucy gets it, too. They share a look.]
There are flashing arrows here, of course — “The liver failure is causing her
blood not to clot” — but the ratio of medical jargon to layperson translation is
remarkably high. From a purely narrative point of view, the decisive line arrives at
the very end: “AB.” The 16-year-old’s blood type connects her to an earlier plot line,
involving a cerebral-hemorrhage victim who — after being dramatically revived in
one of the opening scenes — ends up brain-dead. Far earlier, before the liver-failure
scene above, Carter briefly discusses harvesting the hemorrhage victim’s organs
for transplants, and another doctor makes a passing reference to his blood type
being the rare AB (thus making him an unlikely donor). The twist here revolves
around a statistically unlikely event happening at the E.R. — an otherwise perfect
liver donor showing up just in time to donate his liver to a recipient with the same
rare blood type. But the show reveals this twist with remarkable subtlety. To make
sense of that last “AB” line — and the look of disbelief on Carter’s and Lucy’s
faces — you have to recall a passing remark uttered earlier regarding a character
who belongs to a completely different thread. Shows like E.R. may have more
blood and guts than popular TV had a generation ago, but when it comes to storytelling, they possess a quality that can only be described as subtlety and discretion.

25

Even Bad TV Is Better
Skeptics might argue that I have stacked the deck here by focusing on relatively
highbrow titles like The Sopranos or The West Wing, when in fact the most significant change in the last five years of narrative entertainment involves reality
TV. Does the contemporary pop cultural landscape look quite as promising if the
representative show is Joe Millionaire instead of The West Wing?

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 834

6/18/12 3:13 PM

JoHNSoN • WATCHiNg Tv MAKeS You SMArTer

835

I think it does, but to answer that question properly, you have to avoid the
tendency to sentimentalize the past. When people talk about the golden age of
television in the early 70’s — invoking shows like The Mary Tyler Moore Show and
All in the Family — they forget to mention how awful most television programming was during much of that decade. If you’re going to look at pop culture
trends, you have to compare apples to apples, or in this case, lemons to lemons.
The relevant comparison is not between Joe Millionaire and MASH; it’s
between Joe Millionaire and The Newlywed Game, or between Survivor and The
Love Boat.
What you see when you make these head-to-head comparisons is that a rising tide of complexity has been lifting programming at the bottom of the quality
spectrum and at the top. The Sopranos is several times more demanding of its
audiences than Hill Street was, and Joe Millionaire has made comparable advances
over Battle of the Network Stars. This is the ultimate test of the Sleeper Curve
theory: even the junk has improved.
If early television took its cues from the stage, today’s reality programming is
reliably structured like a video game: a series of competitive tests, growing more
challenging over time. Many reality shows borrow a subtler device from gaming culture as well: the rules aren’t fully established at the outset. You learn as
you play.
On a show like Survivor or The Apprentice, the participants — and the audience — know the general objective of the series, but each episode involves new
challenges that haven’t been ordained in advance. The final round of the first
season of The Apprentice, for instance, threw a monkey wrench into the strategy
that governed the play up to that point, when Trump announced that the two
remaining apprentices would have to assemble and manage a team of subordinates who had already been fired in earlier episodes of the show. All of a sudden
the overarching objective of the game — do anything to avoid being fired —
presented a potential conflict to the remaining two contenders: the structure of
the final round favored the survivor who had maintained the best relationships
with his comrades. Suddenly, it wasn’t enough just to have clawed your way to the
top; you had to have made friends while clawing. The original Joe Millionaire
went so far as to undermine the most fundamental convention of all — that the
show’s creators don’t openly lie to the contestants about the prizes — by inducing
a construction worker to pose as a man of means while 20 women competed for
his attention.
Reality programming borrowed another key ingredient from games: the
intellectual labor of probing the system’s rules for weak spots and opportunities.
As each show discloses its conventions, and each participant reveals his or her
personality traits and background, the intrigue in watching comes from figuring
out how the participants should best navigate the environment that has been created for them. The pleasure in these shows comes not from watching other people
being humiliated on national television; it comes from depositing other people in

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 835

30

6/18/12 3:13 PM

836

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

a complex, high-pressure environment where no established strategies exist and
watching them find their bearings. That’s why the water-cooler conversation
about these shows invariably tracks in on the strategy displayed on the previous
night’s episode: Why did Kwame pick Omarosa in that final round? What devious
strategy is Richard Hatch concocting now?
When we watch these shows, the part of our brain that monitors the emotional lives of the people around us — the part that tracks subtle shifts in intonation and gesture and facial expression — scrutinizes the action on the screen,
looking for clues. We trust certain characters implicitly and vote others off the
island in a heartbeat. Traditional narrative shows also trigger emotional connections to the characters, but those connections don’t have the same participatory
effect, because traditional narratives aren’t explicitly about strategy. The phrase
“Monday-morning quarterbacking” describes the engaged feeling that spectators
have in relation to games as opposed to stories. We absorb stories, but we secondguess games. Reality programming has brought that second-guessing to prime
time, only the game in question revolves around social dexterity rather than the
physical kind.

The Rewards of Smart Culture
The quickest way to appreciate the Sleeper Curve’s cognitive training is to sit
down and watch a few hours of hit programming from the late 70’s on Nick at
Nite or the SOAPnet channel or on DVD. The modern viewer who watches a
show like Dallas today will be bored by the content — not just because the show
is less salacious than today’s soap operas (which it is by a small margin) but also
because the show contains far less information in each scene, despite the fact that
its soap-opera structure made it one of the most complicated narratives on television in its prime. With Dallas, the modern viewer doesn’t have to think to make
sense of what’s going on, and not having to think is boring. Many recent hit
shows — 24, Survivor, The Sopranos, Alias, Lost, The Simpsons, E.R. — take the
opposite approach, layering each scene with a thick network of affiliations. You
have to focus to follow the plot, and in focusing you’re exercising the parts of your
brain that map social networks, that fill in missing information, that connect
multiple narrative threads.
Of course, the entertainment industry isn’t increasing the cognitive complexity of its products for charitable reasons. The Sleeper Curve exists because there’s
money to be made by making culture smarter. The economics of television syndication and DVD sales mean that there’s a tremendous financial pressure to
make programs that can be watched multiple times, revealing new nuances and
shadings on the third viewing. Meanwhile, the Web has created a forum for annotation and commentary that allows more complicated shows to prosper, thanks
to the fan sites where each episode of shows like Lost or Alias is dissected with an
intensity usually reserved for Talmud scholars. Finally, interactive games have
trained a new generation of media consumers to probe complex environments

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 836

6/18/12 3:13 PM

JoHNSoN • WATCHiNg Tv MAKeS You SMArTer

837

and to think on their feet, and that gamer audience has now come to expect the
same challenges from their television shows. In the end, the Sleeper Curve tells us
something about the human mind. It may be drawn toward the sensational where
content is concerned — sex does sell, after all. But the mind also likes to be challenged; there’s real pleasure to be found in solving puzzles, detecting patterns or
unpacking a complex narrative system.
In pointing out some of the ways that popular culture has improved our
minds, I am not arguing that parents should stop paying attention to the way
their children amuse themselves. What I am arguing for is a change in the criteria
we use to determine what really is cognitive junk food and what is genuinely
nourishing. Instead of a show’s violent or tawdry content, instead of wardrobe
malfunctions or the F-word, the true test should be whether a given show engages
or sedates the mind. Is it a single thread strung together with predictable punch
lines every 30 seconds? Or does it map a complex social network? Is your onscreen character running around shooting everything in sight, or is she trying to
solve problems and manage resources? If your kids want to watch reality TV,
encourage them to watch Survivor over Fear Factor. If they want to watch a mystery show, encourage 24 over Law and Order. If they want to play a violent game,
encourage Grand Theft Auto over Quake. Indeed, it might be just as helpful to
have a rating system that used mental labor and not obscenity and violence as its
classification scheme for the world of mass culture.
Kids and grown-ups each can learn from their increasingly shared obsessions. Too often we imagine the blurring of kid and grown-up cultures as a series
of violations: the 9-year-olds who have to have nipple broaches explained to them
thanks to Janet Jackson; the middle-aged guy who can’t wait to get home to his
Xbox. But this demographic blur has a commendable side that we don’t acknowledge enough. The kids are forced to think like grown-ups: analyzing complex
social networks, managing resources, tracking subtle narrative intertwinings, recognizing long-term patterns. The grown-ups, in turn, get to learn from the kids:
decoding each new technological wave, parsing the interfaces and discovering the
intellectual rewards of play. Parents should see this as an opportunity, not a crisis.
Smart culture is no longer something you force your kids to ingest, like green
vegetables. It’s something you share.

35

Exploring the Text
1. What audience is Steven Johnson addressing? How can you tell? How does he
establish ethos?
2. How would you describe the tone of Johnson’s piece? Why might it be particularly
well suited to his subject matter?
3. Johnson calls his theory — that the “most debased forms of mass diversion” (para.
4) turn out to be good for us, after all — the “Sleeper Curve,” after a scene in a
Woody Allen movie. How does using one form of popular culture to examine

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 837

6/18/12 3:13 PM

838

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

another form affect Johnson’s argument? Find other examples of Johnson connecting different forms of popular culture to help develop his argument.
4. How do the charts accompanying the essay illustrate Johnson’s points? How
important is it to know the television programs to which the charts refer? Do the
charts provide sufficient evidence that viewers are “cognitively engaged”? What
other evidence might Johnson have used?
5. In the section “Televised Intelligence,” Johnson equates the intellectual demands
of television with those ascribed to reading. Do multiple threading, flashing
arrows, and social networks match up with attention, patience, retention, and the
need to follow several narrative threads? What qualities do they have in common?
What are their differences?
6. Examine the ways that Johnson provides counterarguments and responds to them.
7. What economic explanation does Johnson offer for why television has become
more intellectually demanding? What are the reasons that you watch your favorite
television shows and movies multiple times?
8. Johnson says that “flashing arrows” (the way the audience is given the information
it needs to follow the plot) have grown increasingly scarce as television narratives
have grown more complicated. How does he connect that observation to the relationship between texture and substance (para. 21)? Based on your own television
watching, do you agree or disagree? Explain your answer.
9. Create a chart that illustrates the “active threads” in a show you watch. How does
it compare to the charts Johnson uses? How do your findings support or challenge
Johnson’s argument?

Celebrity Bodies
Daniel Harris
Cultural critic daniel Harris (b. 1957) is the author of The Rise and Fall of Gay
Culture (1999), Cute, Quaint, Hungry and Romantic: The Aesthetics of Consumerism (2001), A Memoir of No One in Particular (2002), and Diary of a Drag Queen
(2005). His work has appeared in Harper’s, Newsday, the New York Times Magazine, the Los Angeles Times, and the Nation, among other publications. His work
was anthologized in The Best American Essays 1993. The essay presented here
appeared in Southwest Review in 2008.

J

ust months after the fatal heart attacks of two Uruguayan fashion models,
one of whom collapsed within seconds after stepping off the runway, having eaten nothing but lettuce leaves in the months before her death, Titanic star
Kate Winslet announced that she is suing Grazia magazine for slander. The British tabloid accused her of undergoing a crash diet at a fat farm in Santa Monica,

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 838

6/18/12 3:13 PM

HArriS • CeLeBriTY BodieS

839

a claim that the 5'8", 119–130-pound actress categorically denies, and with good
reason, since she is by most estimates, despite her well-founded reputation of
having one of the healthier appetites in Hollywood, already between fifteen and
twenty pounds underweight. She is famous for banning fashion magazines from
her house lest her seven-year-old daughter fall prey to their anorexic aesthetic, a
sentiment with which her countryman, the 5'9", 120-pound Mischa Barton, herself anywhere from twenty to forty pounds underweight, heartily agrees, stating
that “the unhealthy look should be abandoned” and “it’s wrong to try to stifle
womanly curves.” The rail-thin actress has, however, done a remarkable job in
quelling her own and is considered by some to look sickly and malnourished, a
charge she dismisses, summing up her philosophy of dieting in the reassuring
assertion that “I don’t not eat anything.”
Others are more candid. Kate Bosworth was recently spotted at an expensive
Hollywood restaurant openly dining on cigarettes, bottled water, and — the main
course — a wedge of iceberg lettuce, a repast as frugal as former model Cleo
Glyde’s green grape diet: three for breakfast, two for snacks, and six for binges.
The typical American woman is 5'4", weighs 140 pounds, and wears a size 14; the
typical fashion model is seven inches taller, twenty-three pounds lighter, and
twelve to fourteen sizes smaller. In an MSN photo essay about the fluctuating
weights of Hollywood actors, an alarming shot of Men in Black star Lara Flynn
Boyle is captioned with the snide but accurate comment “the jewelry she was
wearing weighed more than she did,” while a sickly photo of Selma Blair shows
the Legally Blonde star looking “so slim she could seek cover behind the nearest
swizzle stick.” Teri Hatcher continues to flaunt the gams of a sub-Saharan famine
victim while Calista Flockhart shocked the nation at the 1998 Emmys by wearing
a backless gown that turned her spindly frame into a ghoulish anatomy lesson, an
annotated diagram of frail scapulae and jutting vertebrae.
Few men are aroused by these stylishly accessorized carcasses, but their lack
of sex appeal is what makes the new Hollywood aesthetic unique. It has been
almost entirely detached from the biological function of beauty, that of attracting
males. It is a man-made aesthetic, or, rather, a woman-made aesthetic, since the
desire of men for voluptuous childbearing hips and pendulous breasts seems all
but irrelevant to its look. Feminists have long complained that the so-called
“beauty myth” consists entirely of male lust, of men looking at women as potential sex objects, subservient to their selfish demands. In fact, however, Hollywood
is about women looking at women, not as sex objects, as a means for fulfilling the
species’s genetic mission, but as clothes hangers, as display mannequins for product lines. Men and their needs are entirely beside the point, which is why the
aesthetic is so sterile, so sexless, because it has freed the female body from male
desire, liberated it from its biological status as an organ of sex, which has given
way to the commercial view of it as a wearer of commodities, a pretty face stuck
on a stick. In many respects, the recent marriage of anorexia and glamour represents the final dehumanization of women who were once reduced to their bodies,

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 839

6/18/12 3:13 PM

840

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

objectified as tools for propagation, but have now been deprived of their corporeality altogether. A vision of the female body dictated by male desire would be
far healthier and more attractive than one dictated by the imperatives of the
closet, by manufacturers whose primary concern is showing off their goods to the
best effect.
How much influence does this aesthetic have on the general public? Such
well-known personalities as the withered Nicole Richie or the cadaverous Victoria “Posh” Beckham, a.k.a. “Skeletal Spice,” are often cited as the chief culprits
behind the endemic of eating disorders among the young but the fact remains
that, while as many as one hundred thousand teenage girls suffer from excessive
dieting, two out of three Americans are overweight and an estimated sixty million, or 20 percent of the population, are obese. Are Hollywood and the fashion
world responsible for our ever-increasing girth or is the effect of our obsession
with what many have dubbed “the rich and famished” as open to debate as the
influence of television violence and the Xbox on actual crime statistics? Does
Lindsay Lohan’s waspish waistline make us skip meals and induce vomiting just
as Mortal Kombat presumably makes us pick up assault rifles and open fire? How
direct is the impact of Hollywood on our bodies, as direct as the Daily Mirror
recently suggested when it ran a photograph of the emaciated Keira Knightley
next to the headline “If Pictures Like This One of Keira Carried a Health Warning, My Darling Daughter Might Have Lived”? If many adolescents seek “thinspiration” from such desiccated waifs as Jessica Alba, who has admitted to being
on a diet since age twelve, or Elisa Donovan, who dwindled to a mere 90 pounds
after eating nothing but coffee, water, and toast for two years, the majority of
Americans seem to be following the lead of reformed foodaholic Tom Arnold
who, until he began taking the diet aid Xenical, regularly splurged on McDonald’s
and then hid his half-dozen Big Macs and Quarter Pounders from his equally
gluttonous wife Roseanne, not out of shame, but because he didn’t want to share.
What is dangerous about the influence of popular culture on our state of
physical health is not how slavishly we imitate the stars, attempting to acquire
Hilary Swank’s lats, Jennifer Lopez’s glutes, and Beyoncé’s quads, but how little
they affect us at all, how they have turned us into quiescent spectators who worship an unattainable ideal so remote from our daily affairs that its exemplars
seem to belong to another species. Celebrities are like athletes, a class of surrogates who live vigorous, aerobic lives while we develop diabetes and arteriosclerosis on our sofas. Hollywood didn’t create fat, anxious Americans; fat, anxious
Americans created Hollywood, a vision of humanity that bears little resemblance
to the typical dissipated physique, sagging from too many processed foods and
sedentary hours watching lithe beauties cavort in haute couture. Fantasy worlds,
like those inhabited by celebrities, are never fashioned in the image of the dreamer.
The dreamer imagines an existence as unlike his own as possible and is content to
admire this world from afar, not as a possible destination but as a wonderland
all the more enticing the more unapproachable and exclusionary. Our fantasies

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 840

5

6/18/12 3:13 PM

HArriS • CeLeBriTY BodieS

841

engender a paralyzing awe that instills in us despair, a sense of hopelessness about
maintaining our bodies, about achieving the buff perfections of stars spoon-fed
by studio dieticians who force them to nibble on rice cakes and celery sticks and
submit to grueling regimens of Pilates and kickboxing. In fact, we would almost
certainly be healthier if we did imitate Hollywood, if we did work out and diet as
compulsively as they do, if, like supermodel Dayle Haddon, we performed leg lifts
while washing the dishes, side bends while standing in line at Starbucks, and
thigh resistance exercises in the elevators of our four-star hotels.
We blame pop culture for turning us into diet-crazed bulimics, but how can
celebrities be “role models,” however derelict, when almost no one seems to imitate them, when we get fatter even as they get skinnier, exercise less even as they
train like triathletes? Granted, we are preoccupied with celebrities, follow the evolution of their hair styles, take tours past the gates of their estates, make wild
surmises about their sexual preferences, but obsession does not necessarily, or
even usually, entail imitation. This does not keep us, however, from penalizing
them with an unjust double standard, insisting that, in the name of public
hygiene, they maintain scrupulously healthy diets, drink abstemiously, engage in
unerringly faithful relations with their spouses, and indignantly turn down film
roles in which they are asked to participate in such iniquitous activities as smoking. Never before have we demanded that popular culture be as virtuous as we
have in the last forty years, that our stars, in the mistaken belief that they manufacture the moral templates of our lives, beat their breasts in remorse and enroll
in rehab every time they fail a breathalyzer test, stumble on the red carpet, or
light a cigarette in public. The anti-tobacco Web site Smokingsides.com provides
exhaustive documentation of celebrated nicotine abusers; in its lengthy dossier
on Nicole Kidman, for example, it cites no less than seventy-eight instances in
which the actress was observed puffing away in full view of her fans, in particular
at the infamous press conference at Cannes in 2003 in which, in an image broadcast around the world, she bummed a cigarette from a fellow actor, a faux pas that
provoked such a vicious international backlash that an Australian senator threatened to slap parental advisories on films that depicted nicotine consumption
favorably. We ourselves smoke like chimneys, drink like fish, swear like troopers,
and copulate like rabbits, but those in Hollywood are expected to behave with
unglamorous rectitude lest their misconduct deprave their malleable fans. We
have moralized popular culture into one long tedious sermon, created a parallel
universe far more chaste, more decorous, more modest and seemly than the one
in which most of us live.
In the distant past, actors and artists occupied a seedy if alluring demimonde,
a realm of license and nonconformity that flourished on the fringes of respectable society. Far from being role models, they were black sheep, bohemians high
on cocaine and drunk on absinthe. Now, by contrast, we expect them to be the
pillars of our society, moral leaders who scold us for the errors of our ways, elder statesmen who draft into the roles of goodwill ambassadors for the United

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 841

6/18/12 3:13 PM

842

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

Nations, environmentalists, and spokesmen for such causes as gingivitis, erectile
dysfunction, and irritable bowel syndrome. A paucity of conventional heroes has
led to the invention of an implausible new set of mentors — a NASCAR mom, like
race car driver Shawna Robinson, who feels that, behind the wheel of her soupedup Chevrolet Monte Carlo, she is able “to reach a lot of people,” or even a golfer,
such as Tiger Woods, whom Rolemodel.net singles out as an inspirational figure,
a champion who triumphed over racial prejudice on the links and transformed
his sport from a senile pastime for retirees in madras pants into “a vehicle . . . to
influence people.” Celebrities are rapidly filling the roles that priests, politicians,
and wealthy philanthropists once served, perhaps because, as the church is rocked
by molestation scandals and the government seems less and less capable of
addressing the difficulties of our times, we are transferring moral authority to the
only public servants that remain: pop singers, Hollywood stars, and the casts of
our favorite sitcoms.
We admire them and yet at the same time distrust them. We are always ill at
ease with beautiful people who, through no special effort of their own, get better
jobs, more friends, and sexier lovers, but it is seldom that we encounter them in
groups as large as we do on the idyllic Wisteria Lane in Desperate Housewives,
a latter-day Peyton Place in which the entire cast — gardeners, pharmacists,
plumbers, cable repairman — is gorgeous. Beautiful people in real life are scattered randomly throughout the population and it is statistically impossible that
they should ever constitute more than a tiny, unthreatening minority. And yet
with the international dissemination of American popular culture, they have triumphed over the statistical odds and done something they could never have done
before the twentieth century: they have overcome their geographic dispersal,
gravitated together, and emerged as a power elite, a physical aristocracy whose
seat of government is one major U.S. city where they migrate at the invitation of
directors, producers, talent scouts, and casting agents who scour the globe in
search of the perfect photogenic face. For the first time in history, our daily lives
are filled with images of a real live übermensch, a master race that flaunts the
unfair privileges accorded to those whose talents are often little more than cheek
bones and good genes. There have always been aristocracies, privileged classes
whose social prestige derived from their material wealth or pedigree, but there
has never been a Brahmin caste whose sole justification for power was its physical
appeal. This unelected coalition of the sexually charismatic may not, like an
actual government, regulate our daily affairs in any literal sense, but it does exercise autocratic authority over our imaginations, making us capitulate psychologically if not politically.
We seek to contain the influence of this new master race, to alleviate the sense
of belittlement we experience from living in the shadow of its inconceivable affluence and glamour. Western culture affords us many ways of denigrating the beautiful, branding them stupid, egotistic, lonely, and unhappy, and our constant,
self-abasing surveillance of their every move, our prurient eavesdropping on

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 842

6/18/12 3:13 PM

HArriS • CeLeBriTY BodieS

843

their private lives, from their sex tapes to the messages they leave on each other’s
answering machines, may itself be a method of diminishing their psychological
power. Much as Louis XIV used Versailles as a glittering cage to imprison restive
nobles, so we have surrounded our idols with an impregnable phalanx of flashbulbs, herding them together in Hollywood, forcing them to live in a kind of
internment camp, albeit one with all the amenities of a spa. The paparazzi, in
turn, have become our watch dogs who never let them out of our sight, staking
out their gyms, grocery stores, and nightclubs where they are forced to submit to
our mean-spirited and yet, at the same time, obsequious espionage. We think of
fame as a form of homage, the adulation we lavish on the gifted, but it may contain a large measure of resentment and vengefulness as well. Living in the limelight, exposed to the scrutiny of anonymous multitudes, may be a method of
punishment, a concerted campaign of ostracism, a discriminatory act that forces
celebrities to live apart from us, immured in a gulag of tanning salons, acupuncture clinics, and trendy boutiques. Obviously, we are barred from entering their
world, but so in many ways are they from ours.
Beauty is not democratic. It is unjust, distributed inequitably according to
the luck of the draw. Our obsession with Hollywood celebrates this injustice, the
irrationality with which fortune bestows its gifts. People cannot simply crash the
gates and appropriate the privileges of the genetically blessed, creating faces different from “the one [they] rode in on,” as one blogger said of Nicole Kidman’s
suspiciously chiseled chin. When someone attempts to gain illegal entrance into
the pantheon of the chosen few, manipulating Mother Nature through plastic
surgery, we are both outraged and amused, angered that the inequalities we at
once adore and fear are in fact phantasmal, and, at the same time, relieved that
beauty is really just a con game, something we can control after all, an illusion
fabricated through liposuction, collagen injections, and breast augmentations.
Actors who submit to the knife are like athletes who inject steroids, fakes who
should be disqualified from the race, interlopers who buy their way into the public’s heart, who purchase their looks from any of the sixty-eight plastic surgeons
in Beverly Hills, a number that translates into one surgeon for every 497 residents
and compares astonishingly with the city’s thirty-six pediatricians.
We are therefore thrilled when what Joan Rivers calls her “Simonizing,” Dolly
Parton her “fender work,” and Demi Moore her “furniture” rearrangement goes
hideously awry, as in the case of Tara Reid’s left breast, which, mangled and misshapen, popped out of her dress at P-Diddy’s thirty-fifth birthday party (“instead
of a circle,” Reid said of this scarred and lopsided protuberance, “it turned out to
be a large square”); Sharon Osborne’s tummy tuck, which chopped off so much
loose skin as a result of her gastric bypass that they had to create a new belly button; or Stevie Nicks’s silicone implants, which caused such pain that, after their
removal, she stored them in her freezer to remind herself of “the agony.” “Scalpel
slaves” — or “polysurgical patients,” as they are known to industry insiders — are
the butt of scathing Internet mockery: Mary Tyler Moore, whom doctors have

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 843

10

6/18/12 3:13 PM

844

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

now placed on “an unofficial plastic surgery blacklist” and whose mouth has been
stretched like taffy into a perpetual grin; model Alicia Douvall who, after her silicone implants ruptured, installed valves to pump saline solution in and out so she
can vary the size of her breasts as the occasion warrants; or, the poster child of
sloppy work, Michael Jackson, who may have had as many as thirty to forty rhinoplasties, including one that grafted cartilage from his ear to keep his nose from
sinking back into his nasal cavity, leaving a gaping chasm in the middle of his
face. If we are to believe in the beauty elite, to worship its exclusivity, its insuperable remoteness, we must be convinced that our idols acquired their physical
assets the old-fashioned way, from Mom and Dad, not from Robert Rey, M.D.,
a.k.a. “Dr. 90210,” perhaps the most famous plastic surgeon in the world. Our
admiration of celebrities is much like our belief in God, and when our faith is
tested by clear evidence of inauthenticity, by imposters who achieve illegal access
to the inner sanctum through procedures we are increasingly able to spot, having
become, as one reporter called it, “surgically literate,” we are furious and vindictive. We mutiny against such swindlers in our gossip columns and Internet bulletin boards where we laugh hysterically when Britney Spears checks into a
hospital for knee surgery and emerges several days later, according to many
reports, two cup sizes larger or when Hollywood is stricken with crippling shortages of Botox just before the Academy Awards, which one Beverly Hills surgeon
refers to as “tax season.”
Our relationship with celebrities is so pathological in part because they are
an absent presence in our lives: while they are physically absent and rarely seen in
person, we are nonetheless nearer to their bodies, through close-ups, nude scenes,
and simulated sex, than we are to anyone outside of our immediate families. We
rarely examine even our lovers as meticulously as the Web site TMZ.com did in a
recent exposé entitled “Heinous Extremities,” an unsparing collection of photographs of celebrities’ gnarly hands and stunted feet, appalling shots of Iman’s
twisted toes spilling painfully out of her stilettos and Jenna Jameson’s arthritic
claws clutching a soft drink can. In “Basic Instinct,” Sharon Stone uncrosses her legs
during a notorious police interrogation scene and gives us a clear shot of her pantyless crotch, bringing us closer to her genitalia than many men venture to those of
their wives and girlfriends. The psychological mechanism of our obsession with
celebrities lies in this deceptive intimacy, in the paradox that they are both present and absent, within reach and hidden behind wrought-iron gates, flashing their
crotches at us in our living rooms and cowering behind ballistic-grade steel doors
and closed-circuit surveillance systems. The camera is a tease, simulating an intimacy we do not have, a familiarity that incites us to narrow the physical distance
that divides us from the stars, to eliminate the mediation of the lens, and press
ourselves against them, flesh to flesh. Those who stalk celebrities, like the woman
who left cookies in David Letterman’s foyer and camped out on his tennis courts,
or the man who slashes his wrists outside of the ABC studios where Andrea Evans
was filming an episode of One Life to Live, are really just our ambassadors, envoys

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 844

6/18/12 3:13 PM

HArriS • CeLeBriTY BodieS

845

we send to do our investigative work for us, berserk enthusiasts whose actions are
psychotic manifestations of a very normal impulse to ascertain the physical reality of bodies we know almost as well as our own, if only secondhand.
Not only do celebrities occupy a different space than their fans, they occupy
a different, nonconsecutive time. They do not change as we do, gradually, imperceptibly. They exist only in photographs and films, outside of the passage of time,
the chronology of their bodies scrambled by random encounters with images
from various periods in their lives, one from the zenith of their careers, proudly
cradling their Oscars, another decades later, unemployed has-beens, as in the
notorious pair of photographs that many newspapers published side by side
when Greta Garbo died in 1990 — on the left, the young starlet in her twenties,
untouchably beautiful; on the right, an aged crone with straggly white hair hobbling out of a health clinic just weeks before her death at the age of eighty-four.
The descent of celebrities into infirmity, obesity, or even the terminal stages of an
illness is telescoped by the very medium that at once celebrates their youth and
beauty and, over time, renders them grotesque. Unlike the bodies of our friends
and family, whom we see every day and who therefore do not age in any measurable way, stars seem to change in fits and starts. One minute, 5'4", 120-pound
Janet Jackson has a six-pack and buns of steel, and the next she’s 180 pounds
wearing sweatpants and a baseball cap, a wardrobe malfunction far more troubling than that which occurred during so-called “Titgate” at the 2004 Super Bowl.
Similarly, a famous photograph of her brother shows him when he is ten years
old, sporting a huge Afro and an infectious smile, while his mug shot, taken some
thirty-five years later after his arrest for child molestation, features the unforgettable image of a bleached mask, a macabre caricature of Caucasian features, a
heartbreaking disavowal of his own blackness. Reruns and DVDs fast-forward
the careers of the stars, allowing us to see them starting out fresh, exhilarated by
their success, and then, with one flick of the remote control, sinking into the
decrepitude of old age. We are shocked by the essay film and photography inadvertently write on physical dissolution, by the way they document the remorseless
changes, the ebbing vitality, that celebrities take such unavailing pains to arrest.
Art is long, life short, but in the case of Hollywood celebrities, art — their careers,
their beauty — is short and life long — for most, too long.

Exploring the Text
1. How does the first paragraph of Daniel Harris’s essay set up the reader’s expectations? How are those expectations met? How are they upset?
2. How does Harris use examples to establish his credibility? How do his examples
show his consideration of his audience?
3. Harris makes a few arguments here. What do you think is his primary argument?
His secondary arguments? How does he bring them together?

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 845

6/18/12 3:13 PM

846

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

4. What are some of the rhetorical strategies Harris uses to develop his argument?
Find examples of strategies such as hyperbole, opposition, figurative language,
and colloquialisms, and discuss their effects.
5. Look closely at Harris’s topic sentences. What do you see as their strengths? Do
you see any weaknesses? If so, identify them. How do the topic sentences set up
each paragraph? What patterns can you see in the way Harris structures them?
6. How would you characterize Harris’s tone? His attitude toward his subject matter?
7. In paragraph 7 Harris cites the Web site Rolemodel.net, whose mission statement
says that it aims to inspire “the next generation towards an outward focus,” as having named Tiger Woods an “inspirational figure.” Rolemodel.net has now removed
Tiger Woods as a role model, but not without a long explanation by its creator,
Lamar Brantley. In what ways does the example of Tiger Woods still work for
Harris? In what ways doesn’t it?
8. Harris considers the way Americans relate to celebrities as being “pathological in
part because they are an absent presence in our lives” (para. 12). What do you
think about this paradox? Support, challenge, or qualify Harris’s assertion.
9. What does Harris consider the effect of our fascination with celebrities on our
daily lives? What point does he make about its effect on the dissemination of
American culture throughout the world?

My Zombie, Myself
Why Modern Life Feels Rather Undead

Chuck Klosterman
Chuck Klosterman was born in Minnesota in 1972 and grew up in North dakota.
He has written for Spin magazine, GQ, the New York Times Magazine, and the
Washington Post. A regularly featured columnist in Esquire, he is also a consulting
editor on grantland.com, a Web site for long-form writing on sports and popular
culture. He is the author of several essay collections, including Sex, Drugs, and
Cocoa Puffs (2003) and Eating the Dinosaur (2009), and two novels, Downtown
Owl (2008), and The Visible Man (2011). The following essay appeared in the
op-ed section of the New York Times in 2010.

Z

ombies are a value stock. They are wordless and oozing and brain dead,
but they’re an ever-expanding market with no glass ceiling. Zombies are
a target-rich environment, literally and figuratively. The more you fill them with
bullets, the more interesting they become. Roughly 5.3 million people watched
the first episode of The Walking Dead on AMC, a stunning 83 percent more than
the 2.9 million who watched the Season 4 premiere of Mad Men. This means

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 846

6/18/12 3:13 PM

KLoSTerMAN • MY ZoMBie, MYSeLf

847

there are at least 2.4 million cable-ready Americans who might prefer watching
Christina Hendricks if she were an animated corpse.
Statistically and aesthetically that dissonance seems perverse. But it probably
shouldn’t. Mainstream interest in zombies has steadily risen over the past 40
years. Zombies are a commodity that has advanced slowly and without major
evolution, much like the staggering creatures George Romero popularized in the
1968 film Night of the Living Dead. What makes that measured amplification
curious is the inherent limitations of the zombie itself: You can’t add much depth
to a creature who can’t talk, doesn’t think and whose only motive is the consumption of flesh. You can’t humanize a zombie, unless you make it less zombie-esque.
There are slow zombies, and there are fast zombies — that’s pretty much the spectrum of zombie diversity. It’s not that zombies are changing to fit the world’s
condition; it’s that the condition of the world seems more like a zombie offensive.
Something about zombies is becoming more intriguing to us. And I think I know
what that something is.
Zombies are just so easy to kill.
When we think critically about monsters, we tend to classify them as personifications of what we fear. Frankenstein’s monster illustrated our trepidation
about untethered science; Godzilla was spawned from the fear of the atomic age;
werewolves feed into an instinctual panic over predation and man’s detachment
from nature. Vampires and zombies share an imbedded anxiety about disease. It’s
easy to project a symbolic relationship between zombies and rabies (or zombies
and the pitfalls of consumerism), just as it’s easy to project a symbolic relationship between vampirism and AIDS (or vampirism and the loss of purity). From
a creative standpoint these fear projections are narrative linchpins; they turn
creatures into ideas, and that’s the point.
But what if the audience infers an entirely different metaphor?
What if contemporary people are less interested in seeing depictions of their
unconscious fears and more attracted to allegories of how their day-to-day existence feels? That would explain why so many people watched that first episode of
The Walking Dead: They knew they would be able to relate to it.
A lot of modern life is exactly like slaughtering zombies.

5

Y
If there’s one thing we all understand about zombie killing, it’s that the act is
uncomplicated: You blast one in the brain from point-blank range (preferably
with a shotgun). That’s Step 1. Step 2 is doing the same thing to the next zombie
that takes its place. Step 3 is identical to Step 2, and Step 4 isn’t any different from
Step 3. Repeat this process until (a) you perish, or (b) you run out of zombies.
That’s really the only viable strategy.
Every zombie war is a war of attrition. It’s always a numbers game. And it’s
more repetitive than complex. In other words, zombie killing is philosophically
similar to reading and deleting 400 work e-mails on a Monday morning or filling

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 847

6/18/12 3:13 PM

848

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

out paperwork that only generates more paperwork, or following Twitter gossip
out of obligation, or performing tedious tasks in which the only true risk is being
consumed by the avalanche. The principal downside to any zombie attack is that
the zombies will never stop coming; the principal downside to life is that you will
never be finished with whatever it is you do.
The Internet reminds us of this every day.
Here’s a passage from a youngish writer named Alice Gregory, taken from a
recent essay on Gary Shteyngart’s dystopic novel Super Sad True Love Story in the
literary journal n+1: “It’s hard not to think ‘death drive’ every time I go on the
Internet,” she writes. “Opening Safari is an actively destructive decision. I am asking that consciousness be taken away from me.”
Ms. Gregory’s self-directed fear is thematically similar to how the zombie
brain is described by Max Brooks, author of the fictional oral history World War
Z and its accompanying self-help manual, The Zombie Survival Guide: “Imagine
a computer programmed to execute one function. This function cannot be
paused, modified or erased. No new data can be stored. No new commands can
be installed. This computer will perform that one function, over and over, until
its power source eventually shuts down.”
This is our collective fear projection: that we will be consumed. Zombies are
like the Internet and the media and every conversation we don’t want to have. All
of it comes at us endlessly (and thoughtlessly), and — if we surrender — we will be
overtaken and absorbed. Yet this war is manageable, if not necessarily winnable.
As long as we keep deleting whatever’s directly in front of us, we survive. We live to
eliminate the zombies of tomorrow. We are able to remain human, at least for the
time being. Our enemy is relentless and colossal, but also uncreative and stupid.
Battling zombies is like battling anything . . . or everything.

10

Y
Because of the “Twilight” series it’s easy to manufacture an argument in which
vampires are merely replacing zombies as the monster of the moment, a designation that is supposed to matter for metaphorical, nonmonstrous reasons. But that
kind of thinking is deceptive. The recent five-year spike in vampire interest is only
about the multiplatform success of “Twilight,” a brand that isn’t about vampirism
anyway. It’s mostly about nostalgia for teenage chastity, the attractiveness of its
film cast and the fact that contemporary fiction consumers tend to prefer long
serialized novels that can be read rapidly. But this has still created a domino effect.
The 2008 Swedish vampire film Let the Right One In was fantastic, but it probably
wouldn’t have been remade in the United States if “Twilight” had never existed.
The Gates was an overt attempt by ABC to tap into the housebound, preteen
“Twilight” audience; HBO’s True Blood is a camp reaction to Robert Pattinson’s
flat earnestness.
The difference with zombies, of course, is that it’s possible to like a specific
vampire temporarily, which isn’t really an option with the undead. Characters like Mr. Pattinson’s Edward Cullen in “Twilight” and Anne Rice’s Lestat de

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 848

15

6/18/12 3:13 PM

KLoSTerMAN • MY ZoMBie, MYSeLf

849

Lioncourt, and even boring old Count Dracula can be multidimensional and
erotic; it’s possible to learn who they are and who they once were. Vampire love
can be singular. Zombie love, however, is always communal. If you dig zombies,
you dig the entire zombie concept. It’s never personal. You’re interested in what
zombies signify, you like the way they move, and you understand what’s required
to stop them. And this is a reassuring attraction, because those aspects don’t really
shift. They’ve become shared archetypal knowledge.
A few days before Halloween I was in upstate New York with three other
people, and we somehow ended up at the Barn of Terror, outside a town called
Lake Katrine. Entering the barn was mildly disturbing, although probably not as
scary as going into an actual abandoned barn that didn’t charge $20 and doesn’t
own its own domain name. Regardless, the best part was when we exited the terror barn and were promptly herded onto a school bus, which took us to a cornfield about a quarter of a mile away. The field was filled with amateur actors, some
playing military personnel and others what they called the infected. We were told
to run through the moonlit corn maze if we wanted to live; as we ran, armed
soldiers yelled contradictory instructions while hissing zombies emerged from the
corny darkness. It was designed to be fun, and it was. But just before we immersed
ourselves in the corn, one of my companions sardonically critiqued the reality of
our predicament.
“I know this is supposed to be scary,” he said. “But I’m pretty confident about
my ability to deal with a zombie apocalypse. I feel strangely informed about what
to do in this kind of scenario.”
I could not disagree. At this point who isn’t? We all know how this goes: If
you awake from a coma, and you don’t immediately see a member of the hospital
staff, assume a zombie takeover has transpired during your incapacitation. Don’t
travel at night and keep your drapes closed. Don’t let zombies spit on you. If you
knock a zombie down, direct a second bullet into its brain stem. But above all, do
not assume that the war is over, because it never is. The zombies you kill today
will merely be replaced by the zombies of tomorrow. But you can do this, my
friend. It’s disenchanting, but it’s not difficult. Keep your finger on the trigger.
Continue the termination. Don’t stop believing. Don’t stop deleting. Return your
voice mails and nod your agreements. This is the zombies’ world, and we just live
in it. But we can live better.

Exploring the Text
1. Describe the tone of Chuck Klosterman’s essay. How does the tone suit the essay’s
purpose?
2. How does Klosterman establish ethos? What effect does his tone have on his credibility?
3. In paragraph 4, Klosterman suggests that monsters personify our fears. What are
other reasons that vampires, werewolves, and zombies might be so intriguing?

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 849

6/18/12 3:13 PM

850

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

4. What is Klosterman’s central argument? What kind of evidence does he use to
develop it?
5. Paragraphs 3, 5, 7, 10, and 14 are one sentence each. What else do they have in
common? Explain why they are or are not effective.
6. Why do you think Klosterman uses imperative sentences in the essay’s last paragraph?

Emily Dickinson and Elvis Presley
in Heaven
Hans Ostrom
Hans ostrom (b. 1954) grew up in Sierra City, California. His grandfather, a
Swedish immigrant, worked in gold mines in the Sierra Nevada range. ostrom,
distinguished Professor of english at the university of Puget Sound, teaches composition, creative writing, rhetoric, and literature and is codirector of African American studies. He is the author of Langston Hughes: A Study of the Short Fiction
(1993) and A Langston Hughes Encyclopedia (2001). ostrom’s articles, poems, and
short stories have appeared in a variety of magazines and journals. He is also the
author of the novels Three to Get Ready (1991) and Honoring Juanita (2010), as
well as two poetry collections, Subjects Apprehended (2000) and The Coast Starlight: Collected Poems, 1976–2006 (2006).

They call each other E. Elvis picks
wildflowers near the river and brings
them to Emily. She explains half-rhymes to him.
In heaven Emily wears her hair long, sports
Levis and western blouses with rhinestones.
Elvis is lean again, wears baggy trousers

5

and T-shirts, a letterman’s jacket from Tupelo High.
They take long walks and often hold hands.
She prefers they remain just friends. Forever.
Emily’s poems now contain naugahyde, Cadillacs,
Electricity, jets, TV, Little Richard and Richard
Nixon. The rock-a-billy rhythm makes her smile.
Elvis likes himself with style. This afternoon
he will play guitar and sing “I Taste a Liquor
Never Brewed” to the tune of “Love Me Tender.”

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 850

10

15

6/18/12 3:13 PM

WArHoL • MYTHS

851

Emily will clap and harmonize. Alone
in their cabins later, they’ll listen to the river
and nap. They will not think of Amherst
or Las Vegas. They know why God made them
roommates. It’s because America
was their hometown. It’s because

20

God is a thing
without feathers. It’s because
God wears blue suede shoes.

Exploring the Text
1. What does Hans Ostrom’s pairing of Elvis Presley and Emily Dickinson suggest
about the poem’s idea of heaven?
2. The poem depends somewhat on the reader’s familiarity with the works of
Dickinson and Presley. Look up the references you don’t recognize — such as
Dickinson’s poems “I taste a liquor never brewed” and “Hope is the thing with
feathers,” Presley’s song “Love Me Tender,” Little Richard, Amherst, and naugahyde. Then reconsider Ostrom’s poem with all the blanks filled in.
3. What is the intention and effect of the period after “friends” in line 9?
4. In nearly every stanza, Ostrom uses enjambment — a stylistic device in which one
line ends without a pause and continues into the next line for its meaning. What is
the effect?
5. In the last two stanzas, Ostrom says God made Presley and Dickinson roommates
for three reasons. What do these reasons suggest about the importance of pop
culture in America?

Myths
Andy Warhol
Born in Pittsburgh, Andy Warhol (1928–1987) was an American artist who was
as well known for his persona as he was for his work. He created paintings, prints,
and films and was a leading figure in the pop art movement. Warhol is famous for
his silkscreens and paintings of American manufactured products such as Campbell’s Soup and Coca-Cola, as well as American celebrities such as elizabeth
Taylor and Marilyn Monroe. The painting presented here is part of the emily fisher
Landau Collection, which was bequeathed to New York City’s Whitney Museum.
The ten figures in the painting, from left to right, are Superman, Santa Claus,
Howdy doody, greta garbo, Mickey Mouse, uncle Sam, Aunt Jemima, dracula,
the Wicked Witch, and Warhol himself.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 851

6/18/12 3:13 PM

852

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

source: Copyright © 2011 The Andy Warhol foundation for the visual Arts, inc./Artists rights Society (ArS),

New York. Collection of emily fisher Landau, New York, Andy Warhol, 1928–1987. Myths, 1981, Synthetic
polymer and screenprint ink on canvas, 100 x 100 in. (254 x 254 cm); 102 x 102 x 3 in. (259.1 x 259.1 x
7.6 cm). Promised gift of the fisher Landau Center for Art to Whitney Museum of American Art, New York;
promised gift of the fisher Landau Center for Art, P.2010.340

Exploring the Text
1. What do the strips of images remind you of? What might Andy Warhol have
wanted the viewer to see in them?
2. The images in this piece were printed in black, in a process called silkscreening,
onto a silver-painted canvas. The images were still shots from movies, and Warhol
and his assistants printed them in an almost mechanical repetition. As they
worked, however, they varied the pressure in squeezing the ink, sometimes allowing the screen to become clogged. Thus, no two images of the characters are exactly

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 852

6/18/12 3:13 PM

TANSeY • THe iNNoCeNT eYe TeST

853

the same. What statement does Warhol make about these pop culture icons with
the variations in clarity? What patterns do you see? Why might he have used a silver background?
3. The title of the work is Myths, a name Warhol gave to many of his works depicting
celebrities and icons. What is he saying here about myths and mythmaking? Where
do the myths come from? Who creates them?
4. Uncle Sam is nearly at the center of the work. What might Warhol be saying about
that American icon? Consider the figures on either side of Uncle Sam: a cartoon
character and an image that is considered a racial stereotype.
5. Look carefully at the image of Warhol at the far right. Characterize him through
his image here and through his role as “speaker” in this work. Hint: he portrays
himself doubly — in one perspective as “The Shadow,” a popular radio crime
fighter from the 1930s, and in another perspective looking straight out at the
viewer.
6. Warhol is credited with saying, “Art is what you can get away with.” Using this
work and other Warhols with which you are familiar, support, challenge, or qualify
that assertion.

The Innocent Eye Test
Mark Tansey
A well-known New York City artist, Mark Tansey was born in California in 1949,
the son of two art historians. His work has been described as surrealistic and postmodern; his subject matter is often ironic. He uses photographic images from popular culture, academia, and art history, relocating and recombining them in order
to comment on humanity. The Innocent Eye Test (1981), a painting that hangs in
New York’s Metropolitan Museum of Art, comments on the relationship between
the artist and the viewer, an important concern of Tansey’s. The image shows a
cow examining Young Bull, a 1647 oil painting by Paulus Potter that hangs in the
Mauritshuis in The Hague. in the background is one of Monet’s Haystack paintings
from the early 1890s.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 853

6/18/12 3:13 PM

854

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

Exploring the Text
1. Who or what is being tested in The Innocent Eye Test? What does the painting say
about art criticism? How do the details complicate the answer to who is testing
whom?
2. Identify and analyze the visual and historical information in this painting.
3. Visual art can be analyzed through the rhetorical triangle (see Chapter 1). Consider the painting, the artist, and the audience separately, and then analyze the
relationships among these three elements.
4. A hallmark of postmodern art is the appropriation — quoting or borrowing — of
other art. What has Mark Tansey borrowed in this painting? What is the relationship between the old and the new? How does the appropriation create a conversation between the artist and the viewer? Between the past and the present?
5. American novelist William S. Burroughs (1914–1997) is credited with noting that
there is no such thing as an innocent bystander. Does Tansey’s painting make the
same point, or does it refute it? Explain your response.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 854

6/18/12 3:13 PM

Conversation
Exporting American Pop Culture
The following seven documents comment directly or indirectly on the effects of
exporting American pop culture to the rest of the world.

Sources
1. Thomas L. Friedman, The Revolution Is U.S.
2. Heather Havrilesky, Besieged by “Friends”
3. Deirdre Straughan, Cultural Hegemony: Who’s Dominating Whom?
4. Kwame Anthony Appiah, from The Case for Contamination
5. Josef Joffe, The Perils of Soft Power
6. Joseph S. Nye Jr., The U.S. Can Reclaim “Smart Power”
7. Hassan Ammar, Slovakian Soccer Fan at 2010 World Cup in South Africa
(photo)
After you have read, studied, and synthesized these pieces, enter the conversation
by responding to one of the prompts on page 874.

1. The Revolution Is U.S.
Thomas L. Friedman
This reading is from journalist Thomas L. friedman’s 2000 book, The Lexus
and the Olive Tree.

I believe in the five gas stations theory of the world.
That’s right: I believe you can reduce the world’s economies today to basically
five different gas stations. First there is the Japanese gas station. Gas is $5 a gallon.
Four men in uniforms and white gloves, with lifetime employment contracts,
wait on you. They pump your gas. They change your oil. They wash your windows, and they wave at you with a friendly smile as you drive away in peace.
Second is the American gas station. Gas costs only $1 a gallon, but you pump it
yourself. You wash your own windows. You fill your own tires. And when you
drive around the corner four homeless people try to steal your hubcaps. Third is
the Western European gas station. Gas there also costs $5 a gallon. There is only
one man on duty. He grudgingly pumps your gas and unsmilingly changes your
oil, reminding you all the time that his union contract says he only has to pump
gas and change oil. He doesn’t do windows. He works only thirty-five hours a
week, with ninety minutes off each day for lunch, during which time the gas

855

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 855

6/18/12 3:13 PM

856

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

station is closed. He also has six weeks’ vacation every summer in the south of
France. Across the street, his two brothers and uncle, who have not worked in ten
years because their state unemployment insurance pays more than their last job,
are playing boccie ball. Fourth is the developing-country gas station. Fifteen
people work there and they are all cousins. When you drive in, no one pays any
attention to you because they are all too busy talking to each other. Gas is only
35 cents a gallon because it is subsidized by the government, but only one of the
six pumps actually works. The others are broken and they are waiting for the
replacement parts to be flown in from Europe. The gas station is rather run-down
because the absentee owner lives in Zurich and takes all the profits out of the
country. The owner doesn’t know that half his employees actually sleep in the
repair shop at night and use the car wash equipment to shower. Most of the customers at the developing-country gas station either drive the latest-model Mercedes or a motor scooter — nothing in between. The place is always busy, though,
because so many people stop in to use the air pump to fill their bicycle tires. Lastly
there is the communist gas station. Gas there is only 50 cents a gallon — but there
is none, because the four guys working there have sold it all on the black market
for $5 a gallon. Just one of the four guys who is employed at the communist gas
station is actually there. The other three are working at second jobs in the underground economy and only come around once a week to collect their paychecks.
What is going on in the world today, in the very broadest sense, is that
through the process of globalization everyone is being forced toward America’s
gas station. If you are not an American and don’t know how to pump your own
gas, I suggest you learn. With the end of the Cold War, globalization is globalizing Anglo-American-style capitalism and the Golden Straitjacket. It is globalizing
American culture and cultural icons. It is globalizing the best of America and the
worst of America. It is globalizing the American Revolution and it is globalizing
the American gas station.
But not everyone likes the American gas station and what it stands for, and
you can understand why. Embedded in the Japanese, Western European, and
communist gas stations are social contracts very different from the American
one, as well as very different attitudes about how markets should operate and be
controlled. The Europeans and the Japanese believe in the state exercising power
over the people and over markets, while Americans tend to believe more in
empowering the people and letting markets be as free as possible to sort out who
wins and who loses.
Because the Japanese, Western Europeans, and communists are uncomfortable with totally unfettered markets and the unequal benefits and punishments
they distribute, their gas stations are designed to cushion such inequalities and
equalize rewards. Their gas stations also pay more attention to the distinctive
traditions and value preferences of their communities. The Western Europeans
do this by employing fewer people, but paying them higher wages and collecting
higher taxes to generously support the unemployed and to underwrite a goody bag

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 856

5

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CoNverSATioN

857

of other welfare-state handouts. The Japanese do it by paying people a little less
but guaranteeing them lifetime employment, and then protecting those lifetime
jobs and benefits by restricting foreign competitors from entering the Japanese
market. The American gas station, by contrast, is a much more efficient place to
drive through. The customer is king; the gas station has no social function; its
only purpose is to provide the most gas at the cheapest price. If that can be done
with no employees at all — well, all the better. A flexible labor market will find
them work somewhere else. Too cruel, you say? Maybe so. But, ready or not,
this is the model that the rest of the world is increasingly being pressured to
emulate.
America is blamed for this because, in so many ways, globilization is us — or
is at least perceived that way by a lot of the world. The three democratizations
were mostly nurtured in America. The Golden Straitjacket was made in America
and Great Britain. The Electronic Herd is led by American Wall Street bulls. The
most powerful agent pressuring other countries to open their markets for free
trade and free investment is Uncle Sam, and America’s global armed forces keep
these markets and sea lanes open for this era of globalization, just as the British
navy did for the era of globalization in the nineteenth century. Joseph Nye Jr.,
dean of the Harvard University Kennedy School, summarized this reality well
when he noted: “In its recent incarnation, globalization can be traced in part back
to American strategy after World War II and the desire to create an open international economy to forestall another depression and to balance Soviet power
and contain communism. The institutional framework and political pressures for
opening markets were a product of American power and policy. But they were
reinforced by developments in the technology of transportation and communications which made it increasingly costly for states to turn away from global market forces.” In other words, even within the Cold War system America was hard at
work building out a global economy for its own economic and strategic reasons.
As a result, when the information revolution, and the three democratizations,
came together at the end of the 1980s, there was a power structure already in
place that was very receptive to these trends and technologies and greatly
enhanced their spread around the world. As noted earlier, it was this combination
of American power and strategic interests, combined with the made-in-America
information revolution, that really made this second era of globalization possible,
and gave it its distinctly American face.
Today, globalization often wears Mickey Mouse ears, eats Big Macs, drinks
Coke or Pepsi, and does its computing on an IBM PC, using Windows 98, with an
Intel Pentium II processor, and a network link from Cisco Systems. Therefore,
while the distinction between what is globalization and what is Americanization
may be clear to most Americans, it is not — unfortunately — to many others
around the world. In most societies people cannot distinguish anymore among
American power, American exports, American cultural assaults, American cultural exports, and plain vanilla globalization. They are now all wrapped into one.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 857

6/18/12 3:13 PM

858

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

I am not advocating that globalization should be Americanization — but pointing out that that is how it is perceived in many quarters. No wonder the Japanese
newspaper Nihon Keizai Shimbun carried a headline on June 4, 1999, about a
conference in Tokyo on globalization that referred to the phenomenon as “The
American-Instigated Globalization.” When many people in the developing world
look out into this globalization system what they see first is a recruiting poster
that reads: Uncle Sam wants you (for the Electronic Herd).
Martin Indyk, the former U.S. ambassador to Israel, told me a story that illustrates this point perfectly. As ambassador, he was called upon to open the first
McDonald’s in Jerusalem. I asked him what he said on the occasion of McDonald’s opening in that holy city, and he said, “Fast food for a fast nation.” But the
best part, he told me later, was that McDonald’s gave him a colorful baseball hat
with the McDonald’s logo on it to wear as he was invited to eat the first ceremonial Big Mac in Jerusalem’s first McDonald’s — with Israeli television filming
every bite for the evening news. The restaurant was packed with young Israelis
eager to be on hand for this historic event. While Ambassador Indyk was preparing to eat Jerusalem’s first official Big Mac, a young Israeli teenager worked his
way through the crowd and walked up to him. The teenager was carrying his own
McDonald’s hat and he handed it to Ambassador Indyk with a pen and asked,
“Are you the ambassador? Can I have your autograph?”
Somewhat sheepishly, Ambassador Indyk replied, “Sure. I’ve never been
asked for my autograph before.”
As Ambassador Indyk took the hat and prepared to sign his name on the bill,
the teenager said to him, “Wow, what’s it like to be the ambassador from McDonald’s, going around the world opening McDonald’s restaurants everywhere?”
Stunned, Ambassador Indyk looked at the Israeli youth and said, “No, no. I’m
the American ambassador — not the ambassador from McDonald’s!”
The Israeli youth looked totally crestfallen. Ambassador Indyk described
what happened next: “I said to him, ‘Does this mean you don’t want my autograph?’ And the kid said, no, I don’t want your autograph, and he took his hat
back and walked away.”
No wonder that the love-hate relationship that has long existed between
America and the rest of the world seems to be taking on an even sharper edge
these days. For some people Americanization-globalization feels more than ever
like a highly attractive, empowering, incredibly tempting pathway to rising living
standards. For many others, though, this Americanization-globalization can
breed a deep sense of envy and resentment toward the United States — envy
because America seems so much better at riding this tiger and resentment because
Americanization-globalization so often feels like the United States whipping
everyone else to speed up, Web up, downsize, standardize, and march to America’s cultural tunes into the Fast World. While I am sure there are still more lovers
of America than haters out there, this [essay] is about the haters. It is about the
other backlash against globalization — the rising resentment of the United States

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 858

10

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CoNverSATioN

859

that has been triggered as we move into a globalization system that is so heavily
influenced today by American icons, markets, and military might.
As the historian Ronald Steel once pointed out: “It was never the Soviet
Union but the United States itself that is the true revolutionary power. We believe
that our institutions must confine all others to the ash heap of history. We lead an
economic system that has effectively buried every other form of production and
distribution — leaving great wealth and sometimes great ruin in its wake. The
cultural messages we transmit through Hollywood and McDonald’s go out across
the world to capture and also undermine other societies. Unlike more traditional
conquerors, we are not content merely to subdue others: We insist that they be
like us. And of course for their own good. We are the world’s most relentless proselytizers. The world must be democratic. It must be capitalistic. It must be tied
into the subversive messages of the World Wide Web. No wonder many feel
threatened by what we represent.”
The classic American self-portrait is Grant Wood’s American Gothic, the
straitlaced couple, pitchfork in hand, expressions controlled, stoically standing
watch outside the barn. But to the rest of the world, American Gothic is actually
two twentysomething American software engineers who come into your country
wearing long hair, beads, and sandals, with rings in their noses and paint on their
toes. They kick down your front door, overturn everything in the house, stick a
Big Mac in your mouth, fill your kids’ heads with ideas you’ve never had or can’t
understand, slam a cable box onto your television, lock the channel to MTV, plug
an Internet connection into your computer, and tell you: “Download or die.”
That’s us. We Americans are the apostles of the Fast World, the enemies of
tradition, the prophets of the free market, and the high priests of high tech. We
want “enlargement” of both our values and our Pizza Huts. We want the world to
follow our lead and become democratic, capitalistic, with a Web site in every pot,
a Pepsi on every lip, Microsoft Windows in every computer and most of all —
most of all — with everyone, everywhere, pumping their own gas.

15

Questions
1. How does Thomas Friedman use the “five gas stations theory of the world” (para. 1)
to show the implicit values of five different cultures?
2. How does Friedman differentiate between globalization and Americanization?
3. What is the purpose of the anecdote about the U.S. ambassador to Israel at the
opening of a new McDonald’s?
4. Why does Friedman think that the “love-hate relationship” between America and
the rest of the world has taken on an “even sharper edge” (para. 13)?

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 859

6/18/12 3:13 PM

860

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

2. Besieged by “Friends”
Heather Havrilesky
Critic Heather Havrilesky posted this piece on Salon.com in 2003, as a review
of a documentary entitled Hollywood in the Muslim World.

It must be tough living in the Middle East, what with all the dust and the camels
and the angry terrorists running around, looking for stuff to blow up. I bet it’s
hard to get your coffee in the morning, with all those terrorists shouting that the
line is too long, or threatening to level the joint because they specifically said
“soy” or “no foam” and the little drummer boy behind the counter didn’t hear
them right the first time.
Despite the fact that most Arabs on the big screen have several sticks of dynamite packed into their BVDs, most of us aren’t stupid enough to think that the
Muslim world is filled with Wile E. Coyotes in robes. Still, when kids grow up
watching True Lies, The Siege and Rules of Engagement, in which even a one-legged
Yemeni girl totes a machine gun, it’s not too hard to see how their perspectives get
twisted beyond recognition. In his documentary “Hollywood in the Muslim
World” Charles C. Stuart discovers a well of anger and frustration in the Middle
East over American depictions of Arabs, anger that some believe stokes the flames
of extremism.
As Stuart points out at the start of his film, by the year 2000, Arab television
had grown into a half-billion dollar a year industry. With 100 satellite channels,
Arab governments can no longer control the content of every broadcast. These
days, people in Cairo, Egypt; Beirut, Lebanon; and Qatar are familiar with shows
like Friends, Sex and the City and Will & Grace, as well as countless American
movies. Two months before the war with Iraq began, Stuart visited the Middle
East and talked with citizens in Egypt, Iraq, Lebanon and Qatar about the influence of Hollywood and American pop culture in the Middle East.
Many of those interviewed resented the pervasive influence of Hollywood,
claiming that such “cultural pollution” is a threat to Muslim identity. One filmmaker in Beirut expressed regret at the way kids in Lebanon grow up with so
many American influences. “I feel that Lebanon has lost part of its identity by
imitating or having all the American things here. This winter I didn’t go to any
Starbucks cafe, I don’t like Dunkin Donuts. . . . But the marketing of all these
things is done in such a way that it reaches the children. I mean, who goes to
McDonald’s here? The children. Because at the same time, you have a McDonald’s, a ticket to see a Disney film and you have a gadget. It’s a market.”
When Stuart interviewed a bunch of kids about their favorite American
movies, a 19-year-old man interrupted them, fearing that the filmmaker was
exploiting the children. When Stuart asked for the young man’s point of view, he
angrily railed off a list of Hollywood’s stereotypes. “Do you see any camels around
here?” he asked.
Others Stuart interviewed saw the influx of American culture as part of a U.S.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 860

5

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CoNverSATioN

861

campaign to stereotype Arabs. “We know that there is a war, a war of propaganda,
and a media war against the Arabs and the Muslims,” said one network representative.
Whether or not they agreed with the assertion that American stereotypes are
intentionally denigrating, many subjects feel certain that Americanization in the
Muslim world is pushing some Arabs to embrace more extremist beliefs. Or, as
professor Abdullah Schleifer of the American University in Cairo put it, “Radical
fundamentalism is a reaction to radical Westernization or modernization.”
As paranoid, oversensitive or wildly professorial as such remarks might seem,
consider how American stereotypes conveniently mirror our government’s foreign policy at any given time. While mid-century movies about World War II
seem laughably dated in their depiction of psychotically evil Japanese soldiers,
the trauma of Pearl Harbor stoked paranoia and hatred toward Japan in such a
way that prejudices were absolutely taken for granted as holding some grain of
truth. Meanwhile, in early Hollywood movies like The Sheik and Lawrence of Arabia, Arabs were depicted as exotic, wildly sexual beings. By the early ’80s, with the
Iran hostage crisis and rising turmoil in the Middle East, Hollywood’s depictions
of Arabs and Muslims became darker and more foreboding. Today, the trauma of
Sept. 11 enables many to cast a blind eye on the way Hollywood perpetuates
extreme prejudice against Arabs in America and in the Middle East.
Unfortunately, Stuart doesn’t explore such points. As fascinating as it is to
meet the writers of the Arab sitcom Shabab Online, which appears to be a badly
blocked Friends with perpetually grinning actors, or to visit “The Friends Cafe,” a
coffee joint in Beirut modeled after “Central Perk,” most of Stuart’s interviews
don’t move past surface observations and he seems to touch on a wide range of
subjects without delving too deep or pulling the threads together into a cohesive
narrative.
Still, at a time when the “patriotic” view often simply means pervasive xenophobia, it’s valuable to witness the resentment and anger welling up from those
who feel their cultural identity has been taken hostage by Hollywood. And we can
hardly blame them — if we were forced to watch reruns of Shabab Online on every
channel, we’d be angry, too.

10

Questions
1. What assumptions about her audience does Heather Havrilesky make in paragraphs 1 and 2?
2. What stereotypes have you seen in American films that might fuel extremism? Do
you think those stereotypes are more or less prevalent in the years since 9/11?
Explain what you consider to be the sources and effects of those stereotypes.
3. Who does Havrilesky cite as making connections between radical fundamentalism and “the pervasive influence of Hollywood” (para. 4)? What connections do
they comment on?
4. What does Havrilesky think is the most pervasive effect of post-9/11 xenophobia?

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 861

6/18/12 3:13 PM

862

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

3. Cultural Hegemony: Who’s Dominating Whom?
Deirdre Straughan
deirdre Straughan posted this on her blog, Countries Beginning with i, in
2005.

A popular meme in American consciousness is cultural hegemony: the idea that
American culture, as represented in widely exported American movies, TV shows,
fast-food restaurants, and brands, is overwhelming the traditional cultures of
other countries. The fear is that this will eventually result in a sadly homogenized
world in which everyone abandons their own customary foods and entertainments to eat at McDonald’s and listen to hip hop.
This theory seems to be popular on both sides of America’s own cultural
divide. The liberal left worries that we are teaching the rest of the world to be
destructively, mindlessly capitalistic and individualistic. A more conservative viewpoint worries that we are “exporting the wrong picture” of America, an argument
propounded by Martha Bayles of Boston College in a Washington Post editorial.
There are two problems with this theory.
The first is that it’s arrogant. It is true that American popular culture is widely
consumed worldwide. This is not simply because American media companies are
good at selling their products — no one is forcing people to watch American
shows. In many countries, local cinemas and TV stations show American stuff
because their customers want to see it. Some governments work hard to censor
what their people see, for political or religious/cultural reasons (or both). Nonetheless, their citizens often go to great lengths, sometimes breaking the law, to
obtain and consume American media. It’s not being forced on them by those evil
capitalists in Hollywood.
The cultural hegemony argument is also a subtle put-down of other cultures:
it assumes that they are so weak or ignorant that they cannot be trusted to decide
for themselves what they should see and hear. That these people should, “for their
own good,” be protected from invasive American culture, so that their “native”
cultures will be preserved.
(Aside: Preserved for what? As a quaint playground for American tourists
who want the “authentic” experience when they travel in other countries?)
The second problem with the theory of cultural hegemony is that it’s simply
not true. I’ve been in many parts of the world and, while you do see signs of
American/Western culture everywhere, most people value their own cultures
and work actively to preserve them, consuming local media, food, etc. alongside
whatever foreign stuff they like.
India is a great example of a society which needs no special measures to preserve its traditional culture — unlike, say, France (said she mischievously). Indians love TV, and have plenty of it: at least two or three channels for every major
language (of which India has 14 or 15, including English), and at least one each

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 862

5

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CoNverSATioN

863

for Muslims, Christians, Jains, and Sikhs (probably Buddhists as well, though I
didn’t see this), plus one for each of the major branches of Hinduism. In addition
to news and worship, there are channels dedicated to Indian-produced TV series
and movies, and channels of Indian music videos. A few channels show imported
TV, movies, and music, plus CNN International/Asia and BBC World, but these
are vastly outnumbered by local fare — no case to be made there for Western
culture overwhelming India! Which is hardly surprising: India has been absorbing and subsuming foreign cultures for 3000 years.
If there’s any cultural invasion going on, it’s occurring in the opposite direction. A number of Indian directors are doing well in Hollywood, some with films
you can’t tell apart from any other Hollywood product (M. Night Shyamalan),
others bringing Indian or cross-cultural themes to Western audiences (Gurinder
Chadha), and/or adding Indian spice to otherwise Hollywood-standard movies
(Mira Nair’s Vanity Fair).
There’s a growing presence of American brands in India, but that doesn’t
mean that Indians are adapting to American tastes. Reading a women’s magazine
in Mumbai, I saw an ad for a very familiar American brand, Pillsbury. Attempting
to sell devil’s food cake mix in India, you wonder? Nope. The ad was for a rice
flour mix that could be used to make dosas, idlis, and vadas — distinctly south
Indian treats. I’d be surprised if that product ever got to the U.S., and I didn’t see
any ads for Pillsbury brownie mix or refrigerator cookies in India. American
companies, far from trying to foist American tastes on Indians, are studying the
local market and adapting their products accordingly. You don’t get to be a global
brand by expecting everyone to like what Americans like — as most American
multinationals are keenly aware, even if the American general public is not.
So, the next time you get worried about American culture taking over the
world, look around you. If you can’t get to a foreign country to see what’s actually
happening there, just look at your American hometown: how many “ethnic” restaurants do you have? And what is American culture itself, but a rich soup of the
many cultures that Americans originally came from?
It’s not just Americans who buy into the “American cultural behemoth” myth:
UNESCO has recently passed a resolution supporting nations’ rights to set a protected percentage of “local culture” to be shown in cinemas and aired on TV. Several nations have such laws, which Hollywood has been protesting as protectionist.

10

Questions
1. How does Deirdre Straughan define cultural hegemony? What are the two problems she sees with the “theory” of cultural hegemony?
2. How does Straughan use India as an example of a country that has preserved its
heritage? Do you find it convincing? Explain your response.
3. How does Straughan argue that cultural hegemony is going “in the opposite direction” (para. 9)?

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 863

6/18/12 3:13 PM

864

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

4. from The Case for Contamination
Kwame Anthony Appiah
The following is Part 1 of an article that appeared in the New York Times
Magazine in 2006. Appiah is a professor of philosophy at Princeton.

I’m seated, with my mother, on a palace veranda, cooled by a breeze from the
royal garden. Before us, on a dais, is an empty throne, its arms and legs embossed
with polished brass, the back and seat covered in black-and-gold silk. In front of
the steps to the dais, there are two columns of people, mostly men, facing one
another, seated on carved wooden stools, the cloths they wear wrapped around
their chests, leaving their shoulders bare. There is a quiet buzz of conversation.
Outside in the garden, peacocks screech. At last, the blowing of a ram’s horn
announces the arrival of the king of Asante, its tones sounding his honorific,
kotokohene, “porcupine chief.” (Each quill of the porcupine, according to custom,
signifies a warrior ready to kill and to die for the kingdom.) Everyone stands until
the king has settled on the throne. Then, when we sit, a chorus sings songs in
praise of him, which are interspersed with the playing of a flute. It is a Wednesday
festival day in Kumasi, the town in Ghana where I grew up.
Unless you’re one of a few million Ghanaians, this will probably seem a relatively unfamiliar world, perhaps even an exotic one. You might suppose that this
Wednesday festival belongs quaintly to an African past. But before the king
arrived, people were taking calls on cellphones, and among those passing the time
in quiet conversation were a dozen men in suits, representatives of an insurance
company. And the meetings in the office next to the veranda are about contemporary issues: H.I.V./AIDS, the educational needs of 21st-century children, the
teaching of science and technology at the local university. When my turn comes
to be formally presented, the king asks me about Princeton, where I teach. I ask
him when he’ll next be in the States. In a few weeks, he says cheerfully. He’s got a
meeting with the head of the World Bank.
Anywhere you travel in the world — today as always — you can find ceremonies like these, many of them rooted in centuries-old traditions. But you will also
find everywhere — and this is something new — many intimate connections with
places far away: Washington, Moscow, Mexico City, Beijing. Across the street
from us, when we were growing up, there was a large house occupied by a number
of families, among them a vast family of boys; one, about my age, was a good
friend. He lives in London. His brother lives in Japan, where his wife is from. They
have another brother who has been in Spain for a while and a couple more brothers who, last I heard, were in the United States. Some of them still live in Kumasi,
one or two in Accra, Ghana’s capital. Eddie, who lives in Japan, speaks his wife’s
language now. He has to. But he was never very comfortable in English, the language of our government and our schools. When he phones me from time to
time, he prefers to speak Asante-Twi.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 864

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CoNverSATioN

865

Over the years, the royal palace buildings in Kumasi have expanded. When I
was a child, we used to visit the previous king, my great-uncle by marriage, in a
small building that the British had allowed his predecessor to build when he
returned from exile in the Seychelles to a restored but diminished Asante kingship. That building is now a museum, dwarfed by the enormous house next
door — built by his successor, my uncle by marriage — where the current king
lives. Next to it is the suite of offices abutting the veranda where we were sitting,
recently finished by the present king, my uncle’s successor. The British, my mother’s people, conquered Asante at the turn of the 20th century; now, at the turn of
the 21st, the palace feels as it must have felt in the 19th century: a center of power.
The president of Ghana comes from this world, too. He was born across the street
from the palace to a member of the royal Oyoko clan. But he belongs to other
worlds as well: he went to Oxford University; he’s a member of one of the Inns of
Court in London; he’s a Catholic, with a picture of himself greeting the pope in
his sitting room.
What are we to make of this? On Kumasi’s Wednesday festival day, I’ve seen
visitors from England and the United States wince at what they regard as the
intrusion of modernity on timeless, traditional rituals — more evidence, they
think, of a pressure in the modern world toward uniformity. They react like the
assistant on the film set who’s supposed to check that the extras in a sword-andsandals movie aren’t wearing wristwatches. And such purists are not alone. In the
past couple of years, Unesco’s members have spent a great deal of time trying to
hammer out a convention on the “protection and promotion” of cultural diversity. (It was finally approved at the Unesco General Conference in October 2005.)
The drafters worried that “the processes of globalization . . . represent a challenge
for cultural diversity, namely in view of risks of imbalances between rich and
poor countries.” The fear is that the values and images of Western mass culture,
like some invasive weed, are threatening to choke out the world’s native flora.
The contradictions in this argument aren’t hard to find. This same Unesco
document is careful to affirm the importance of the free flow of ideas, the freedom of thought and expression and human rights — values that, we know, will
become universal only if we make them so. What’s really important, then, cultures or people? In a world where Kumasi and New York — and Cairo and Leeds
and Istanbul — are being drawn ever closer together, an ethics of globalization
has proved elusive.
The right approach, I think, starts by taking individuals — not nations, tribes
or “peoples” — as the proper object of moral concern. It doesn’t much matter
what we call such a creed, but in homage to Diogenes, the fourth-century Greek
Cynic and the first philosopher to call himself a “citizen of the world,” we could
call it cosmopolitan. Cosmopolitans take cultural difference seriously, because
they take the choices individual people make seriously. But because cultural difference is not the only thing that concerns them, they suspect that many of globalization’s cultural critics are aiming at the wrong targets.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 865

5

6/18/12 3:13 PM

866

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

Yes, globalization can produce homogeneity. But globalization is also a threat
to homogeneity. You can see this as clearly in Kumasi as anywhere. One thing
Kumasi isn’t — simply because it’s a city — is homogeneous. English, German,
Chinese, Syrian, Lebanese, Burkinabe, Ivorian, Nigerian, Indian: I can find you
families of each description. I can find you Asante people, whose ancestors have
lived in this town for centuries, but also Hausa households that have been around
for centuries, too. There are people there from every region of the country as well,
speaking scores of languages. But if you travel just a little way outside Kumasi —
20 miles, say, in the right direction — and if you drive off the main road down one
of the many potholed side roads of red laterite, you won’t have difficulty finding
villages that are fairly monocultural. The people have mostly been to Kumasi and
seen the big, polyglot, diverse world of the city. Where they live, though, there is
one everyday language (aside from the English in the government schools) and
an agrarian way of life based on some old crops, like yams, and some newer ones,
like cocoa, which arrived in the late 19th century as a product for export. They
may or may not have electricity. (This close to Kumasi, they probably do.) When
people talk of the homogeneity produced by globalization, what they are talking
about is this: Even here, the villagers will have radios (though the language will be
local); you will be able to get a discussion going about Ronaldo, Mike Tyson or
Tupac; and you will probably be able to find a bottle of Guinness or Coca-Cola
(as well as of Star or Club, Ghana’s own fine lagers). But has access to these things
made the place more homogeneous or less? And what can you tell about people’s
souls from the fact that they drink Coca-Cola?
It’s true that the enclaves of homogeneity you find these days — in Asante as
in Pennsylvania — are less distinctive than they were a century ago, but mostly in
good ways. More of them have access to effective medicines. More of them have
access to clean drinking water, and more of them have schools. Where, as is still
too common, they don’t have these things, it’s something not to celebrate but to
deplore. And whatever loss of difference there has been, they are constantly
inventing new forms of difference: new hairstyles, new slang, even, from time to
time, new religions. No one could say that the world’s villages are becoming anything like the same.
So why do people in these places sometimes feel that their identities are
threatened? Because the world, their world, is changing, and some of them don’t
like it. The pull of the global economy — witness those cocoa trees, whose chocolate is eaten all around the world — created some of the life they now live. If
chocolate prices were to collapse again, as they did in the early 1990’s, Asante
farmers might have to find new crops or new forms of livelihood. That prospect
is unsettling for some people (just as it is exciting for others). Missionaries came
a while ago, so many of these villagers will be Christian, even if they have also kept
some of the rites from earlier days. But new Pentecostal messengers are challenging the churches they know and condemning the old rites as idolatrous. Again,
some like it; some don’t.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 866

10

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CoNverSATioN

867

Above all, relationships are changing. When my father was young, a man in a
village would farm some land that a chief had granted him, and his maternal clan
(including his younger brothers) would work it with him. When a new house
needed building, he would organize it. He would also make sure his dependents
were fed and clothed, the children educated, marriages and funerals arranged and
paid for. He could expect to pass the farm and the responsibilities along to the
next generation.
Nowadays, everything is different. Cocoa prices have not kept pace with the
cost of living. Gas prices have made the transportation of the crop more expensive. And there are new possibilities for the young in the towns, in other parts of
the country and in other parts of the world. Once, perhaps, you could have commanded the young ones to stay. Now they have the right to leave — perhaps to
seek work at one of the new data-processing centers down south in the nation’s
capital — and, anyway, you may not make enough to feed and clothe and educate
them all. So the time of the successful farming family is passing, and those who
were settled in that way of life are as sad to see it go as American family farmers
are whose lands are accumulated by giant agribusinesses. We can sympathize
with them. But we cannot force their children to stay in the name of protecting
their authentic culture, and we cannot afford to subsidize indefinitely thousands
of distinct islands of homogeneity that no longer make economic sense.
Nor should we want to. Human variety matters, cosmopolitans think, because
people are entitled to options. What John Stuart Mill said more than a century
ago in “On Liberty” about diversity within a society serves just as well as an argument for variety across the globe: “If it were only that people have diversities of
taste, that is reason enough for not attempting to shape them all after one model.
But different persons also require different conditions for their spiritual development; and can no more exist healthily in the same moral, than all the variety of
plants can exist in the same physical, atmosphere and climate. The same things
which are helps to one person towards the cultivation of his higher nature, are
hindrances to another. . . . Unless there is a corresponding diversity in their
modes of life, they neither obtain their fair share of happiness, nor grow up to the
mental, moral, and aesthetic stature of which their nature is capable.” If we want
to preserve a wide range of human conditions because it allows free people the
best chance to make their own lives, we can’t enforce diversity by trapping people
within differences they long to escape.

Questions
1. What does Kwame Anthony Appiah’s opening anecdote illustrate? How does it
help him develop his argument?
2. What does Appiah think is the right approach to the ethics of globalization?
3. How does Appiah define “cosmopolitanism”? To what principles is the cosmopolitan committed?

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 867

6/18/12 3:13 PM

868

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

4. Read the quote from John Stuart Mill in the last paragraph of this selection. Why
does Appiah use it to characterize the way cosmopolitans think?

5. The Perils of Soft Power
Josef Joffe
The following piece, by german newspaper publisher Josef Joffe, appeared in
the New York Times in 2006.

In recent years, a number of American thinkers, led by Joseph S. Nye Jr. of Harvard, have argued that the United States should rely more on what he calls its “soft
power” — the contagious appeal of its ideas, its culture and its way of life — and
so rely less on the “hard power” of its stealth bombers and aircraft carriers. There
is one problem with this argument: soft power does not necessarily increase the
world’s love for America. It is still power, and it can still make enemies.
America’s soft power isn’t just pop and schlock; its cultural clout is both high
and low. It is grunge and Google, Madonna and MoMA, Hollywood and Harvard. If two-thirds of the movie marquees carry an American title in Europe
(even in France), dominance is even greater when it comes to translated books.
The figure for Germany in 2003 was 419 versus 3,732; that is, for every German
book translated into English, nine English-language books were translated into
German. It used to be the other way around. A hundred years ago, Humboldt
University in Berlin was the model for the rest of the world. Tokyo, Johns Hopkins, Stanford and the University of Chicago were founded in conscious imitation of the German university and its novel fusion of teaching and research.
Today Europe’s universities have lost their luster, and as they talk reform, they talk
American. Indeed, America is one huge global “demonstration effect,” as the sociologists call it. The Soviet Union’s cultural presence in Prague, Budapest and
Warsaw vanished into thin air the moment the last Russian soldier departed.
American culture, however, needs no gun to travel.
There may be little or no relationship between America’s ubiquity and its
actual influence. Hundreds of millions of people around the world wear, listen,
eat, drink, watch and dance American, but they do not identify these accouterments of their daily lives with America. A Yankees cap is the epitome of things
American, but it hardly signifies knowledge of, let alone affection for, the team
from New York or America as such.
The same is true for American films, foods or songs. Of the 250 top-grossing
movies around the world, only four are foreign-made: “The Full Monty” (U.K.),
“Life Is Beautiful” (Italy) and “Spirited Away” and “Howl’s Moving Castle”
(Japan); the rest are American, including a number of co-productions. But these
American products shape images, not sympathies, and there is little, if any, relationship between artifact and affection.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 868

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CoNverSATioN

869

If the relationship is not neutral, it is one of repulsion rather than attraction — the dark side of the “soft power” coin. The European student movement
of the late 1960’s took its cue from the Berkeley free-speech movement of 1964,
the inspiration for all post-1964 Western student revolts. But it quickly turned
anti-American; America was reviled while it was copied.
Now shift forward to the Cannes Film Festival of 2004, where hundreds of
protesters denounced America’s intervention in Iraq until the police dispersed
them. The makers of the movie Shrek 2 had placed large bags of green Shrek ears
along the Croisette, the main drag along the beach. As the demonstrators scattered, many of them put on free Shrek ears. “They were attracted,” noted an
observer in this magazine, “by the ears’ goofiness and sheer recognizability.” And
so the enormous pull of American imagery went hand in hand with the country’s,
or at least its government’s, condemnation.
Between Vietnam and Iraq, America’s cultural presence has expanded into
ubiquity, and so has the resentment of America’s soft power. In some cases, like
the French one, these feelings harden into governmental policy. And so the French
have passed the Toubon law, which prohibits on pain of penalty the use of English
words — make that D.J. into a disque-tourneur. In 1993, the French coaxed the
European Union into adding a “cultural exception” clause to its commercial treaties exempting cultural products, high or low, from normal free-trade rules.
Other European nations impose informal quotas on American TV fare.
Nor is America’s high culture more easily accepted than its pop — at least not
by the cultural elites. A fine example is how the art critics of two distinguished
German newspapers, Süddeutsche Zeitung (leftish) and Frankfurter Allgemeine
Zeitung (centrist), dealt with an exhibit of 200 pieces from the Museum of Modern Art in Berlin in 2004. More than a million visitors stood in line, many for up
to nine hours, to view the objets from across the Atlantic. Yet the fervor of the
hoi polloi mattered little to their betters, whose comments ran the gamut from
contempt to conspiracy.
The opening shots were fired by the Süddeutsche Zeitung of Munich. Without having seen the collection, its critic aimed his volley straight against imperial America. Regurgitating a standard piece of European ressentiment, the
author insinuated that what America has in the way of culture is not haute, and
what is haute is not American. (Or as Adolf Hitler is said to have declared, “A
single Beethoven symphony contains more culture than all that America has ever
created.”)
After World War II, the critic contended, America had wrested “artistic hegemony” from Europe in two sleazy ways. One culprit was “a new abstract school of
painting” — Abstract Expressionism — “that had hyped itself into high heaven.”
The other was American mammon: “Everything still available in old Europe was
bought up.” And this “stolen idea of modern art will now be presented in Berlin.”
Thus were pilferage and grand theft added to the oldest of indictments: America’s
cultural inferiority.
The critic of Frankfurter Allgemeine went one worse. If his colleague claimed

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 869

5

10

6/18/12 3:13 PM

870

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

that America’s art was either hyped or heisted, the man from Frankfurt thundered that MoMA’s Berlin show was a mendacious ploy, indeed, an imperialist
conspiracy. It was done by “concealment” and “censorship” in a game full of
“marked cards,” and its aim was not only to blank out Europe’s greats but also to
suppress their magnificent contribution to American art in the second half of the
20th century. This was an instance of the selective perception that suffuses antiAmericanism or any other “anti-ism,” for the exhibit contained an impressive
number of European works: Matisse, Picasso, Manet, Rousseau, Brancusi and
Mondrian, plus assorted Expressionists and Surrealists.
That did not count. What about contemporary Germans like Beuys, Baselitz
and Kiefer? the critic huffed. But even here, MoMA had done its duty, capping the
progression with Gerhard Richter’s “18 October 1977” cycle, which depicts dead
members of the Baader-Meinhof terrorist gang. That MoMA would display these
German works enraged the feuilletoniste from Frankfurt even more. That particular choice, he fumed, was the final proof of American perfidy. The terrorist
motif was insidiously selected to finger Europe as a “creepy” place, as a messenger
of “bad news.”
There is a moral in this tale of two critics: the curse of soft power. In the
affairs of nations, too much hard power ends up breeding not submission but
resistance. Likewise, great soft power does not bend hearts; it twists minds in
resentment and rage. And the target of Europe’s cultural guardians is not just
America, the Great Seductress. It is also all those “little people,” a million in all,
many of whom showed up in the wee hours to snag an admissions ticket to
MoMA’s Berlin exhibit. By yielding to America-the-beguiling, they committed
cultural treason — and worse: they ignored the stern verdict of their own priesthood. So America’s soft power is not only seductive but also subversive.
Hard power can be defanged by coalitions and alliances. But how do you balance against soft power? No confederation of European universities can dethrone
Harvard and Stanford. Neither can all the subsidies fielded by European governments crack the hegemony of Hollywood. To breach the bastions of American
soft power, the Europeans will first have to imitate, then improve on, the American model. Imitation and leapfrogging is the oldest game in the history of nations.
But competition has barely begun to drive the cultural contest. Europe,
mourning the loss of its centuries-old supremacy, either resorts to insulation (by
quotas and “cultural exception” clauses) or seeks solace in the disparagement of
American culture as vulgar, inauthentic or stolen. If we could consult Dr. Freud,
he would take a deep drag on his cigar and pontificate about inferiority feelings
being compensated by hauteur and denigration.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 870

15

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CoNverSATioN

871

Questions
1. According to Josef Joffe, what is the difference between “soft power” and “hard
power” (para. 1)?
2. What does Joffe think is the “curse of soft power” (para. 13)?
3. How does Joffe think Europeans can “crack the hegemony of Hollywood”
(para. 14)?

6. The U.S. Can Reclaim “Smart Power”
Joseph S. Nye Jr.
The following piece by political scientist Joseph S. Nye Jr. appeared in the
op-ed section of the Los Angeles Times in 2009.

President Obama reminded us Tuesday that “our power grows through its prudent use; our security emanates from the justness of our cause, the force of our
example, the tempering qualities of humility and restraint.” A week ago, in her
confirmation hearings to become Secretary of State, Hillary Rodham Clinton
said: “America cannot solve the most pressing problems on our own, and the
world cannot solve them without America. . . . We must use what has been called
‘smart power,’ the full range of tools at our disposal.”
Smart power is the combination of hard and soft power. Soft power is the
ability to get what you want through attraction rather than coercion or payments.
Opinion polls show a serious decline in American attractiveness in Europe, Latin
America and, most dramatically, the Muslim world.
The resources that produce soft power for a country include its culture (when
it is attractive to others), its values (when they are attractive and not undercut by
inconsistent practices) and policies (when they are seen as inclusive and legitimate).
When poll respondents are asked why they report a decline in American soft
power, they cite American policies more than American culture or values. Because
it is easier for a country to change its policies than its culture, this implies that
Obama will be able to choose policies that could help to recover some of America’s soft power.
Of course, soft power is not the solution to all problems. North Korean dictator Kim Jong Il likes to watch Hollywood movies, but that is unlikely to affect his
nuclear weapons program. And soft power got nowhere in attracting the Taliban
government away from its support for Al Qaeda in the 1990s. That took hard
military power in 2001. But other goals, such as the promotion of democracy and
human rights, are better achieved by soft power.
A little more than a year ago, the bipartisan Center for Strategic and International Studies’ Commission on Smart Power concluded that America’s image

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 871

5

6/18/12 3:13 PM

872

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

and influence had declined in recent years, and that the U.S. had to move from
exporting fear to inspiring optimism and hope.
The commission was not alone in this conclusion. Defense Secretary Robert
M. Gates has called for the U.S. to commit more money and effort to soft-power
tools, including diplomacy, economic assistance and communications, because
the military alone cannot defend U.S. interests. He pointed out that military
spending totals nearly half a trillion dollars annually — excluding Iraq and
Afghanistan — compared with a State Department budget of $36 billion. In his
words: “I am here to make the case for strengthening our capacity to use soft
power and for better integrating it with hard power.”
The Pentagon is the best resourced arm of the government, but there are
limits to what hard power can achieve on its own. Promoting democracy, human
rights and the development of civil society are not best handled with the barrel of
a gun. The effects of the 9/11 terrorist attacks threw America off course. Terrorism is a real threat, but over-responding to the provocations of extremists does us
more damage than the terrorists ever could. Success in the struggle against terrorism means finding a new central premise for U.S. foreign policy to replace the
“war on terror.” A commitment to providing for the global good can provide that
premise.
America can become a smart America — a smart power — by again investing
in global public goods, providing things people and governments of the world
want but have not been able to get in the absence of leadership by the strongest
country. Development, public health and coping with climate change are good
examples. By complementing U.S. military and economic might with greater
investments in soft power, and focusing on global public goods, the U.S. can
rebuild the framework that it needs to tackle tough global challenges.
Style also matters. In 2001, columnist Charles Krauthammer argued for what
he called “a new unilateralism,” which recognized that the United States was the
only superpower and was so strong that it could decide what was right and expect
others to follow because they had little choice. But this style turned out to be
counterproductive. Insensitivity to style and the perception of others can undercut soft-power efforts.
Obama faces a difficult international environment, but previous presidents
have managed to employ hard, soft and smart power in equally difficult contexts.
In 1970, during the Vietnam War, America was viewed as unattractive in many
parts of the world, but with changed policies and the passage of time, the United
States managed to recover its soft power. It can happen again.

10

Questions
1. How does Joseph Nye Jr. define “smart power”?
2. What recommendation does Nye offer President Obama?
3. What “global public goods” (para. 9) does Nye recommend investing in?

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 872

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CoNverSATioN

873

4. What additional recommendations does Nye offer for how the United States can
recover its soft power?

7. Slovakian Soccer Fan at 2010
World Cup in South Africa
Hassan Ammar
This Associated Press photo taken by Hassan Ammar was posted on the New
York Daily News Web site. Taken during the 2010 World Cup in South Africa,
the photo shows a Slovakian fan in a dracula mask blowing on the South
African soccer horn, or vuvuzela.

(See insert for color version.)

Questions
1. How many different cultures can you account for in this photo?
2. Why might this photo have appeared on the Web site of a New York daily newspaper?
3. Do you think the image reinforces or challenges the notion that American pop
culture is a dominant force in the world, supplanting traditional cultures? Explain
your answer.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 873

6/18/12 3:13 PM

874

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

Making Connections
1. What would Kwame Anthony Appiah think of Thomas L. Friedman’s five gas
stations theory? What additional gas station scenarios might he imagine?
Which ones might he eliminate?
2. How might Josef Joffe or Joseph Nye Jr. respond to the problem that Heather
Havrilesky raises about the portrayal of the Muslim world in American media?
3. What would Deirdre Straughan make of the photo of the Slovakian fan in the
Dracula mask? Does it support or challenge her argument? Explain.
4. Friedman says that in “most societies people cannot distinguish anymore
among American power, American exports, American cultural assaults, American cultural exports, and plain vanilla globalization” (para. 7). How would
Josef Joffe suggest distinguishing among them in order to give the United
States the tools to lead?
5. Appiah says, “Yes, globalization can produce homogeneity. But globalization is
also a threat to homogeneity” (para. 8). How might Friedman respond? What
about Straughan?

Entering the Conversation
As you respond to the following prompts, support your argument with references to
at least three sources in this Conversation on Exporting American Pop Culture. For
help using sources, see Chapter 4.

1. Write an essay explaining why the export of American culture has either a
positive or a negative effect on the cultures and societies that adopt it.
2. Access to the Internet is spreading throughout the world. What do you think
America’s role is in this medium? Write an essay in which you imagine the
future of the Internet and its effects on “cosmopolitanism.” Refer to at least
three sources as you consider the effects of the possible spread of American
popular culture through the Internet.
3. In the foreword to Amusing Ourselves to Death, media critic Neil Postman
(1931–2003) suggests that the vision of Aldous Huxley’s Brave New World
(1932) turned out to be more terrifyingly true than the vision George Orwell
created in 1984 (1949):
What Orwell feared were those who would ban books. What Huxley feared was that
there would be no reason to ban a book, for there would be no one who wanted to
read one. Orwell feared those who would deprive us of information. Huxley feared

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 874

6/18/12 3:13 PM

STudeNT WriTiNg

875

those who would give us so much that we would be reduced to passivity and egoism.
Orwell feared that the truth would be concealed from us. Huxley feared the truth
would be drowned in a sea of irrelevance. Orwell feared we would become a captive
culture. Huxley feared we would become a trivial culture, preoccupied with some
equivalent of the feelies, the orgy porgy, and the centrifugal bumblepuppy. As
Huxley remarked in Brave New World Revisited, the civil libertarians and rationalists
who are ever on the alert to oppose tyranny “failed to take into account man’s almost
infinite appetite for distractions.” In 1984, Huxley added, people are controlled by
inflicting pain. In Brave New World, they are controlled by inflicting pleasure. In
short, Orwell feared that what we hate will ruin us. Huxley feared that what we love
will ruin us.

Write an essay explaining the extent to which you believe the export of American popular culture has proven Postman right or wrong. Refer to at least three
sources.
4. Using the arguments and evidence in this Conversation, answer the following
question in an essay: Should countries adopt policies that limit cultural imperialism in order to preserve cultures?

Student Writing
Rhetorical Analysis: Analyzing Satire
The following prompt asks students to comment on an article in the Onion, a
satirical online magazine.
The following is a mock feature article from the Onion, a publication devoted to
humor and satire. Read the piece carefully. Then write an essay in which you analyze
the strategies used in the article to satirize common ideas about art and the Renaissance.

Four or Five Guys Pretty Much
Carry Whole Renaissance
The Onion

Following 1,000 years of cultural decline and societal collapse known as the
Dark Ages, the 15th century brought forth the Renaissance, an unprecedented resurgence in learning and the arts, which four or five guys pretty
much just strapped onto their backs and carried the whole way.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 875

6/18/12 3:13 PM

876

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

“Our research indicates that da Vinci, Michelangelo, Shakespeare, and
Galileo basically hoisted the entire intellectual transformation of mankind
onto their shoulders while everyone else just sat around being superstitious
nimrods,” said Sue Viero of the Correr Museum of Art in Venice, Italy.
“Here’s da Vinci busting his ass to paint such masterpieces as The Last Supper and the Mona Lisa, while some loser like Albrecht Dürer is doing these
dinky little woodcuts that are basically worthless.
“And how pathetic is it that Masaccio wasted so much time churning
out his frescoes that barely revolutionized linear perspective or naturalism
at all, when without Michelangelo’s David, we wouldn’t even have a Renaissance to begin with?” Viero added. “Honestly, it’s not even friggin’ close.”
According to modern thought on the era, contributors to the Renaissance can be broken into two distinct groups: the brilliant few who, day in
and day out, were thrusting society out of the depths of darkness and into
the light of learning; and the rest of the so-called artists, mathematicians,
and scientists, who were mostly all phoning it in.
Among those considered by historians not to have pulled their weight
are Sandro Botticelli, Hugo van der Goes, Titian, and Italian humanist and
total hanger-on Pico della Mirandola.
“So, Pico’s most famous philosophical work was Oration on the Dignity
of Man,” scoffed Harvard philosophy professor Richard Nostrand. “I mean,
come on. Compare that to Thomas More’s Utopia for — actually, you know
what? Don’t bother. Because you can’t.”
While some claim the three-century-long movement would not have
been possible without the contributions of lesser-known sculptors and
thinkers, most scholars said they would challenge anyone to name an image
by Jan van Eyck or Francesco Guicciardini that’s more iconic than, say,
Donatello’s Mary Magdalene.
“It’s a no-brainer, really,” cultural anthropologist Diane Messinick said.
“Mediocre talents like the playwright George Peele or renowned court
painter Federico Brandani were pretty much the equivalent of the guy at
work who brews a fresh pot of coffee while you’re busy making sure there’s
still a company to come back to after everyone gets back from goddamn
Christmas break.”

Rhetorical Analysis
Camille LeMeur
The title of this mock feature article from the Onion, “Four or Five Guys Pretty
Much Carry Whole Renaissance,” speaks for itself. It’s outrageous. But just in case such

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 876

6/18/12 3:13 PM

STudeNT WriTiNg

877

an absurd claim wasn’t enough to tip us off on the fact that this article is, indeed,
a satire, the author uses other means to convey the idea. A series of historical
inaccuracies, added to the fact that the article pokes fun at even the most renowned
artists, satirizes common ideas about the Renaissance and ultimately condemns the
readers’ ignorance.
This article is based on a plethora of historical inaccuracies, ranging from
sweeping generalizations to erroneous details. It starts off by stating that the Middle
Ages were a time of “cultural decline and societal collapse,” which is a specious argument.
Medieval schools of art or universities, like those we now know as Oxford and Cambridge,
were clear precursors of the Renaissance. The article then states that all artists were
“superstitious nimrods.” Again, this is false. Putting aside the derogatory substitution of
“religious” for “superstitious,” the fact is that not all artists were imbued with religion.
Raphael Sanzio, for instance, was an atheist, which was quite a revolutionary (not to
mention worthy of persecution) notion for his time. Far from acting like “nimrods,”
these artists innovated and challenged social standards. The article then goes on to
say that Masaccio “barely revolutionized linear perspective,” when Masaccio was the
first artist to use linear perspective in painting. Of course, he didn’t revolutionize the
technique in the sense that he introduced it. Likewise, Pico della Mirandola, one of
the most sought-after philosophers of his time, is called a “hanger-on,” a parasite, as
if he hadn’t been supported by Lorenzo de’ Medici, one of the most significant patrons
in the history of Italy. Through this deliberate accumulation of mistakes, the article
satirizes common ideas about the Renaissance. Packing all of these stereotypes into a
few neat paragraphs leads the readers to realize the absurdity of their oversimplified
opinions.
Still, it’s possible that ignorant people reading an article satirizing their
ignorance may not detect the irony. This is why the article, in addition to making
intentional historical errors, also pokes fun at the most renowned artists. The artists we
supposedly owe the whole Renaissance to seemed to be making a huge physical effort.
They “strapped onto their backs and carried the whole way,” “hoisted (. . .) onto their
shoulders,” “[thrust] society,” “pulled their weight.” All of these metaphors suggest manual
labor, physical effort, and a peasant’s life rather than an intellectual’s. This is a subtle
way of ridiculing the “four or five” artists the article puts on a pedestal. See, I know Da
Vinci conceptualized an Ornithopter, but I have yet to see him build it, let alone fly it.
Here, the discrepancy between intellectualism and physical labor highlights the satire.
One artist, Donatello, is specifically mocked. We see this because two pseudo-experts
contradict themselves. While one debases Dürer’s “dinky little woodcuts,” another praises
Donatello’s Mary Magdalene, an equally drab-looking statue that is no less sculpted in
wood. This paradox is another not-so-subtle hint to the readers. Who knows? If they
can’t figure out that the article is historically inaccurate, maybe they’ll catch on to the
fact that artists weren’t peasants, or maybe even that the article is mocking the very
people it is glorifying.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 877

6/18/12 3:13 PM

878

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

And ultimately, the article’s goal is to criticize the readers’ lack of knowledge.
This is most obvious in the tone of the article. The disparity between the register we
expect to find and the one the speaker uses is what first strikes us as readers. One
wouldn’t expect a curator to say that an artist “[isn’t] even friggin’ close,” or that he’s
“phoning it in,” and especially not in a scholarly article. Simplistic adverbs like “basically”
and “pretty much” are repeated to show that the article is merely making things easier
for its readers. This language discredits the contents of the article. In this way, the
article denounces its readers’ ignorance. You believe Renaissance stereotypes? Well, so do
we! In fact, we’re rounding this up for you and summarizing it in the most basic of terms
so we’re sure you’ll understand. When using a term like “loser,” the article is flat-out
saying that its readers can’t understand terms a bit more intricate than colloquial jargon.
The fact that the readers are being addressed in this way is the final indication of satire.
This article satirizes common ideas about the Renaissance by giving deliberately
inaccurate historical facts, and by mocking the very artists it praises. Above all, it does
this to criticize its readers’ ignorance. They are addressed as possibly dim-witted creatures
in the hopes that, when faced with a satire of their beliefs, they become aware of how
ignorant and ridiculous these beliefs are.

Questions
1. What are this essay’s strengths? Explain.
2. How would you characterize Camille’s tone? Do you think it’s appropriate for the
subject? Explain your reasons.
3. This essay is written in the third person. How would the use of I have strengthened
or weakened the essay?
4. How did the use of independent research help Camille develop her argument?

Grammar as Rhetoric and Style
Modifiers
A modifier may be a one-word adverb or adjective; a phrase, such as a prepositional phrase or a participial phrase; or a clause, such as an adjective clause. At its
best, a modifier describes, focuses, or qualifies the nouns, pronouns, and verbs it
modifies. But when a writer overuses or incorrectly uses modifiers, the result may
be verbose or even flowery writing.
Here is how David Denby describes the “most hated young woman in America” in “High-School Confidential: Notes on Teen Movies”:
a blonde — well, sometimes a redhead or a brunette, but usually a blonde. She has big
hair flipped into a swirl of gold at one side of her face or arrayed in a sultry mane. . . .

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 878

6/18/12 3:13 PM

grAMMAr AS rHeToriC ANd STYLe

879

She’s tall and slender, with a waist as supple as a willow, but she’s dressed in awful,
spangled taste.

These sentences include single-word adjectives (sultry, tall, slender, supple, awful,
spangled), a participle followed by two prepositional phrases ( flipped into a swirl
of gold), and several other prepositional phrases (at one side of her face; in a sultry
mane; with a waist . . . ; in awful, spangled taste). When we call attention to all of
them like this, the modification may seem heavy, but in the passage itself, all the
modifiers do not amount to overkill because Denby paces them.
Let’s look more closely at another Denby sentence with a participial phrase as
a modifier:
Sprawling and dull in class, he comes alive in the halls and in the cafeteria.

Here Denby has essentially combined two sentences: “He is sprawling and dull in
class. He comes alive in the halls and in the cafeteria.” The result is a smoother,
single sentence that focuses on the difference between the subject’s behavior in
and out of class.
In Chuck Klosterman’s “My Zombie, Myself: Why Modern Life Feels Rather
Undead,” the author uses key single-word adverbs to create his distinctive voice.
Look at Rather in the title, for example. Look also at this passage:
In other words, zombie killing is philosophically similar to reading and deleting 400
work e-mails on a Monday morning or filling out paperwork that only generates
more paperwork, or following Twitter gossip out of obligation, or performing tedious
tasks in which the only true risk is being consumed by the avalanche.

The juxtaposition of philosophically and zombie killing is a good example of
how Klosterman comments on an aspect of modern life through popular culture.
The mock seriousness is a hallmark of his style.

Rhetorical and Stylistic Strategy
Modifiers can enliven, focus, and qualify ideas. The placement of modifiers can
add to or detract from these effects. Note the following example by Denby.
Physically awkward, she walks like a seal crossing a beach, and is prone to drop her
books and dither in terror when she stands before a handsome boy.

The modifiers that describe the girl gather steam, and finally, in a prepositional
phrase at the end of the sentence, they contrast her with the handsome boy. Note
the different effect if the handsome boy comes into the sentence before the awkward girl drops her books and dithers:
When she stands before the handsome boy, physically awkward, she walks like a seal
crossing a beach, and is prone to drop her books and dither in terror.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 879

6/18/12 3:13 PM

880

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

Announcing the handsome boy early in the sentence undercuts the contrast
between the girl and the boy that Denby wants to stress.
In the accompanying panel from page 140 in Scott McCloud’s comic-book
guide to reading comic books, note how the modifiers reinforce the changes
in our reading habits that occur as we age. Note also the progression in the
drawings: the very young boy in the first frame grows into the older man by the
third; the narrator shows up in the fourth to finish his commentary. In addition to the drawings, McCloud has the advantage of the text’s graphic flexibility: little punctuation besides dashes, and boldface and italics to stress certain
words.

The first frame begins the progression with the modifier as children and
describes picture books as having pictures galore. The second begins with then,
showing time moving on, stressing text with more and minimizing pictures with
occasional. The third places us finally as grown-ups, and our books have no pictures at all. Quite a switch from galore! In the last frame, McCloud’s qualifier
perhaps suggests further ruin in the future: sadly . . . no books at all.
Consider the effect of the modifier now in this sentence from Mark Twain:
We are conforming in the other way, now, because it is another case of everybody.

The placement of now in the middle of the sentence reinforces the other way and
reminds us that Twain is making a point about the mercurial nature of public
opinion.

Cautions
Studying how accomplished writers use modifiers helps us understand how to
use them effectively. Following are some cautions to keep in mind when using
modifiers in your own writing.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 880

6/18/12 3:13 PM

grAMMAr AS rHeToriC ANd STYLe

881

1. Do not use too many modifiers. David Denby gives a clear visual image of
the evil high school cheerleader by using a variety of modifiers. However,
less experienced writers may overwrite by including too many adjectives,
as shown in the following example:
The bright yellow compact car with the pun-laden, out-of-state vanity plates
was like beautiful, warm sunshine on the gray, dreary Tuesday afternoon.

2. Do not rely on adjectives when strong verbs are more effective. Instead of
writing, “Elani walked with a confident and quick stride,” perhaps say,
“Elani strutted” or “Elani strode.”
3. Beware of adding too many qualifiers. Be especially careful about really and
very.
• “Troy felt really sad” might be expressed as “Troy felt discouraged” or
“despondent.” Or it might simply be stated as “Troy felt sad.”
• Similarly, “The mockingbird’s song is very beautiful” is probably just
as well stated as “The mockingbird’s song is beautiful” or, introducing
a strong verb, as “The mockingbird serenades.”
You need not avoid qualifiers altogether, but if you find yourself using
them over and over, it’s time to check whether they’re really very effective.

• ExERCiSE 1 •
Rewrite each of the following sentences to make the modifiers more effective.
1. Dolores offered a rather unique view of the situation.
2. I had difficulty understanding my teacher because he talked so quickly
and softly.
3. Michael was so very excited about the beginning of lacrosse season that
he could barely sleep.
4. Susan talked with self-assurance about movies she hadn’t even seen.
5. The skyline was amazing on the beautiful evening.

• ExERCiSE 2 •
Discuss the following passage from Daniel Harris’s “Celebrity Bodies.”
Focus on the writer’s use of modifiers. Look carefully at the adjectives Harris uses to describe our fascination with celebrity. Look also at the qualifiers
he uses — albeit, in turn, yet, at the same time — and consider how they suit
the purpose of the essay.
Western culture affords us many ways of denigrating the beautiful,
branding them stupid, egotistic, lonely, and unhappy, and our constant,

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 881

6/18/12 3:13 PM

882

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

self-abasing surveillance of their every move, our prurient eavesdropping on their private lives, from their sex tapes to the messages they
leave on each other’s answering machines, may itself be a method of
diminishing their psychological power. Much as Louis XIV used Versailles
as a glittering cage to imprison restive nobles, so we have surrounded
our idols with an impregnable phalanx of flashbulbs, herding them
together in Hollywood, forcing them to live in a kind of internment camp,
albeit one with all the amenities of a spa. The paparazzi, in turn, have
become our watch dogs who never let them out of our sight, staking out their gyms, grocery stores, and nightclubs where they are forced
to submit to our mean-spirited and yet, at the same time, obsequious
espionage.

• ExERCiSE 3 •
Identify the modifiers, both words and phrases, in the following paragraph
from “An Image a Little Too Carefully Coordinated” by Robin Givhan. Are
the modifiers effective, or are they excessive? Cite specific examples to support your view.
There they were — John, Jane, Josie and Jack — standing with the president and before the entire country. The nominee was in a sober suit with
the expected white shirt and red tie. His wife and children stood before the
cameras, groomed and glossy in pastel hues — like a trio of Easter eggs, a
handful of Jelly Bellies, three little Necco wafers. There was tow-headed
Jack — having freed himself from the controlling grip of his mother —
enjoying a moment in the spotlight dressed in a seersucker suit with short
pants and saddle shoes. His sister, Josie, was half-hidden behind her mother’s skirt. Her blond pageboy glistened. And she was wearing a yellow
dress with a crisp white collar, lace-trimmed anklets and black patentleather Mary Janes.

• ExERCiSE 4 •
Most of the modifiers have been removed from the following passage from
“Hip Hop Planet” by James McBride.
Not since the advent of jazz in the 1930s has an American music exploded
across the world with force. Not since the Beatles invaded America and
Elvis packed up his shoes has a music crashed against the world with outrage. The culture of song, graffiti, and dance, known as hip hop, has ripped
music from its moorings in society it has permeated.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 882

6/18/12 3:13 PM

grAMMAr AS rHeToriC ANd STYLe

883

• Read the paragraph aloud, and listen to its cadence (the combination of the text’s rhythm with the rise and fall in the inflection of the
speaker’s voice).
• Add the following modifiers: blue, overwhelming, suede, swing, such,
defiant, popular, every, collectively. Use them to improve the paragraph’s effectiveness.
• Compare your version to the original (see para. 7, p. 789).
• Discuss the rhetorical effect of the modifiers in this passage.

• ExERCiSE 5 •
Following are examples of authors’ skillful use of modifiers, both single
words and phrases. In each, identify the modifier or modifiers, and discuss
the effect they create. Then write a sentence or passage of your own, emulating the writer’s technique.
1. . . . I realize to my horror that rap — music seemingly without melody,
sensibility, instruments, verse, or harmony, music with no beginning, end,
or middle, music that doesn’t even seem to be music — rules the world.
— James McBride
2. He’s usually a football player, muscular but dumb, with a face like a
beer mug and only two ways of speaking — in a conspiratorial whisper,
to a friend; or in a drill sergeant’s sudden bellow.
— David Denby
3. Broadly speaking, there are none but corn-pone opinions. And broadly
speaking, corn-pone stands for self-approval.
— Mark Twain
4. Outside in the garden, peacocks screech.
— Kwame Anthony Appiah
5. The difference with zombies, of course, is that it’s possible to like a specific vampire temporarily, which isn’t really an option with the undead.
— Chuck Klosterman
6. On Jan. 24, the Fox network showed an episode of its hit drama 24, the
real-time thriller known for its cliffhanger tension and often-gruesome
violence.
— Steven Johnson
7. The ad was for a rice flour mix that could be used to make dosas, idlis,
and vadas — distinctly south Indian treats.
— Deirdre Straughan

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 883

6/18/12 3:13 PM

884

CHAPTer 11 • PoPuLAr CuLTure

Suggestions for Writing
Popular Culture
Now that you have examined a number of readings and other texts that focus on
popular culture, explore one dimension of the topic by synthesizing your own
ideas and the texts. You might want to do more research or use readings from
other classes as you prepare for the following projects.
1. Read this statement by Daniel Harris from “Celebrity Bodies,” and write an
essay in which you support, challenge, or qualify his assertion that we would
be better off trying to be like the celebrities we admire.
Our fantasies engender a paralyzing awe that instills in us despair, a sense of hopelessness about maintaining our bodies, about achieving the buff perfections of
stars spoon-fed by studio dieticians who force them to nibble on rice cakes and
celery sticks and submit to grueling regimens of Pilates and kickboxing. In fact,
we would almost certainly be healthier if we did imitate Hollywood, if we did
work out and diet as compulsively as they do, if, like supermodel Dayle Haddon,
we performed leg lifts while washing the dishes, side bends while standing in
line at Starbucks, and thigh resistance exercises in the elevators of our four-star
hotels.

2. In a paper entitled “Moral Pluck: Ethics in Popular Culture,” Columbia Law
School professor William H. Simon writes about the portrayal of lawyers in
film and television. He notes:
While elite moralism is strongly authoritarian and categorical, popular culture
exalts a quality that might be called Moral Pluck — a combination of resourcefulness and transgression in the service of basic but informal values.

Consider the portrayals of professionals — in law, in medicine, in education —
in popular culture. Do you agree with Simon that the ethics of popular culture
are sometimes in conflict with traditional ethics? Write an essay defending
your position on this question.
3. Each of the following statements addresses the subject of media. Select one
that interests you, and write an essay that defends or challenges its assertion.
To support your argument, refer to your own experience with media and to
the selections in this chapter.
The one function TV news performs very well is that when there is no news, we
give it to you with the same emphasis as if there were.
— David Brinkley, American TV network news anchor
Whoever controls the media — the images — controls the culture.
— Allen Ginsberg, poet

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 884

6/18/12 3:13 PM

SuggeSTioNS for WriTiNg

885

If you want to use television to teach somebody something, you have first to teach
somebody how to use television.
— Umberto Eco, philosopher
Visual chaos is not good for anyone. Billboard companies should not be allowed
to sell what they don’t own — our field of vision and our civic pride.
— Meg Maguire, president, Scenic America

4. In his essay “High-School Confidential: Notes on Teen Movies” (p. 819),
David Denby suggests that the teen movies from the turn of this century
reflect the secret wishes — and geekiness — of their screenwriters and directors. Watch a movie about teens from an earlier time — Rebel without a Cause
(1955) or Splendor in the Grass (1961), for example — and discuss what the
film said about the filmmakers of the era.
5. In “Corn-Pone Opinions,” Mark Twain distinguishes between fashion and
standards. Is it the same as the difference, discussed on page 787, between
what was once considered popular culture and high culture? Write about what
you see as the difference between fashion and standards.
6. Write an essay in which you apply Steven Johnson’s arguments about television (p. 827) to another form of popular culture, such as video games,
movies, or music.
7. “Hip Hop Planet” by James McBride (p. 788) refers to several different genres
of popular music. Listen to an assortment of songs by the artists mentioned
in his piece. Make a CD of the music, and write some liner notes in which you
explain why you chose the songs and how you decided on the order in which
they appear.
8. Consider a pairing in which one medium has been adapted into a new
one — books and video games made into movies, or movies made into live
theater, for example. Write about how the remake was changed to suit the
new medium and how the new medium honors the old.
9. Write a sermon using “Emily Dickinson and Elvis Presley in Heaven” (p. 850)
as a starting point.
10. Write a review of a concert, album, movie, or graphic novel. Keep in mind
that reviews are arguments either applauding artists, criticizing them, or both.

11_SHE_67650_Ch11_787_886.indd 885

6/18/12 3:13 PM

this page left intentionally blank

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 36

6/18/12 3:09 PM

12
The Environment
What is our responsibility to the natural environment?

T

hroughout history we have tried to conquer the wilderness, tame the
jungles, and master the elements, and we are still trying to conquer space.
But are nature and humankind necessarily in conflict? We created civilization to
protect us from the undesirable features of the outdoors and, to some degree,
from harm. But now our experience of the natural world is so mediated that
many of us know it only as it is presented on television or online. Has our relationship with nature changed so drastically that nature now exists within civilization, as contemporary naturalist Bill McKibben suggests? Do we now contain
nature rather than being contained by it? How does our perspective on Ralph
Waldo Emerson’s classic essay “Nature” change now that nature is threatened?
Can we balance human progress and economic well-being with environmental
protection?
In recent years, humankind’s attitude toward the natural world has changed.
Before Rachel Carson and others began to alert us to the dangers of pollution,
most people simply didn’t think about the environment. And looking back over
the last half century, it is hard to imagine what may be in store for us over the next
fifty years. Are we yet to see the consequences of what we have already done to
alter the environment?
Once the environment becomes something we have to protect, our fundamental relationship with our world changes. We’re still dwarfed by the awesome
power of nature, but if we are creating conditions that may change nature itself,
whether through pollution, development of open land, or global warming, then
we need to consider our responsibility. Can we do enough right now to protect
our world? Are we at risk of becoming an endangered species?
The selections in this chapter consider the environment from many perspectives. As you read, consider your responsibility to the natural world. What might
we expect from it, and what might it expect from us?

887

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 887

6/18/12 3:13 PM

from Silent Spring
Rachel Carson
Rachel Carson (1907–1964) was educated at Johns Hopkins University and conducted research at the Marine Biological Laboratory in
Woods Hole, Massachusetts. She worked as a biologist for the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service and served as chief editor of publications
from 1947 to 1952. She wrote many books and articles about the
sea, including Under the Sea-Wind (1941); The Sea around Us
(1951), which won a National Book Award; and The Edge of the Sea
(1955). Carson was among the first scientists to raise environmental
issues for the general public, and her views and insights have greatly influenced
the environmental movement. The readings that follow — “A Fable for Tomorrow”
and “The Obligation to Endure” — are the first two chapters of Silent Spring
(1962), a book that “changed the course of history,” according to former vice
president Al Gore. It led to John F. Kennedy’s presidential commission on the environment, as well as the banning of the use of the poison DDT in agriculture.

I. A Fable for Tomorrow
There was once a town in the heart of America where all life seemed to live in
harmony with its surroundings. The town lay in the midst of a checkerboard of
prosperous farms, with fields of grain and hillsides of orchards where, in spring,
white clouds of bloom drifted above the green fields. In autumn, oak and maple
and birch set up a blaze of color that flamed and flickered across a backdrop of
pines. Then foxes barked in the hills and deer silently crossed the fields, half hidden in the mists of the fall mornings.
Along the roads, laurel, viburnum and alder, great ferns and wildflowers
delighted the traveler’s eye through much of the year. Even in winter the roadsides were places of beauty, where countless birds came to feed on the berries and
on the seed heads of the dried weeds rising above the snow. The countryside was,
in fact, famous for the abundance and variety of its bird life, and when the flood
of migrants was pouring through in spring and fall people traveled from great
distances to observe them. Others came to fish the streams, which flowed clear
and cold out of the hills and contained shady pools where trout lay. So it had been
from the days many years ago when the first settlers raised their houses, sank their
wells, and built their barns.
Then a strange blight crept over the area and everything began to change.
Some evil spell had settled on the community: mysterious maladies swept the
flocks of chickens; the cattle and sheep sickened and died. Everywhere was a
shadow of death. The farmers spoke of much illness among their families. In the

888

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 888

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CARSON • SILENT SpRING

889

town the doctors had become more and more puzzled by new kinds of sickness
appearing among their patients. There had been several sudden and unexplained
deaths, not only among adults but even among children, who would be stricken
suddenly while at play and die within a few hours.
There was a strange stillness. The birds, for example — where had they gone?
Many people spoke of them, puzzled and disturbed. The feeding stations in the
backyards were deserted. The few birds seen anywhere were moribund; they
trembled violently and could not fly. It was a spring without voices. On the mornings that had once throbbed with the dawn chorus of robins, catbirds, doves, jays,
wrens, and scores of other bird voices there was now no sound; only silence lay
over the fields and woods and marsh.
On the farms the hens brooded, but no chicks hatched. The farmers complained that they were unable to raise any pigs — the litters were small and the
young survived only a few days. The apple trees were coming into bloom but no
bees droned among the blossoms, so there was no pollination and there would be
no fruit.
The roadsides, once so attractive, were now lined with browned and withered
vegetation as though swept by fire. These, too, were silent, deserted by all living
things. Even the streams were now lifeless. Anglers no longer visited them, for all
the fish had died.
In the gutters under the eaves and between the shingles of the roofs, white
granular powder still showed a few patches; some weeks before it had fallen like
snow upon the roofs and the lawns, the fields and streams.
No witchcraft, no enemy action had silenced the rebirth of new life in this
stricken world. The people had done it themselves.
This town does not actually exist, but it might easily have a thousand counterparts in America or elsewhere in the world. I know of no community that has
experienced all the misfortunes I describe. Yet every one of these disasters has
actually happened somewhere, and many real communities have already suffered
a substantial number of them. A grim specter has crept upon us almost unnoticed, and this imagined tragedy may easily become a stark reality we all shall
know.
What has already silenced the voices of spring in countless towns in America?
This book is an attempt to explain.

5

10

II. The Obligation to Endure
The history of life on earth has been a history of interaction between living things
and their surroundings. To a large extent, the physical form and the habits of the
earth’s vegetation and its animal life have been molded by the environment. Considering the whole span of earthly time, the opposite effect, in which life actually
modifies its surroundings, has been relatively slight. Only within the moment of

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 889

6/18/12 3:13 PM

890

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

time represented by the present century has one species — man — acquired significant power to alter the nature of his world.
During the past quarter century this power has not only increased to one of
disturbing magnitude but it has changed in character. The most alarming of all
man’s assaults upon the environment is the contamination of air, earth, rivers,
and sea with dangerous and even lethal materials. This pollution is for the most
part irrecoverable; the chain of evil it initiates not only in the world that must
support life but in living tissues is for the most part irreversible. In this now universal contamination of the environment, chemicals are the sinister and littlerecognized partners of radiation in changing the very nature of the world — the
very nature of its life. Strontium 90, released through nuclear explosions into the
air, comes to earth in rain or drifts down as fallout, lodges in soil, enters into
the grass or corn or wheat grown there, and in time takes up its abode in the
bones of a human being, there to remain until his death. Similarly, chemicals
sprayed on croplands or forests or gardens lie long in soil, entering into living
organisms, passing from one to another in a chain of poisoning and death. Or
they pass mysteriously by underground streams until they emerge and, through
the alchemy of air and sunlight, combine into new forms that kill vegetation,
sicken cattle, and work unknown harm on those who drink from once pure wells.
As Albert Schweitzer1 has said, “Man can hardly even recognize the devils of his
own creation.”
It took hundreds of millions of years to produce the life that now inhabits the
earth — eons of time in which that developing and evolving and diversifying life
reached a state of adjustment and balance with its surroundings. The environment, rigorously shaping and directing the life it supported, contained elements
that were hostile as well as supporting. Certain rocks gave out dangerous radiation; even within the light of the sun, from which all life draws its energy, there
were short-wave radiations with power to injure. Given time — time not in years
but in millennia — life adjusts, and a balance has been reached. For time is the
essential ingredient; but in the modern world there is no time.
The rapidity of change and the speed with which new situations are created
follow the impetuous and heedless pace of man rather than the deliberate pace of
nature. Radiation is no longer merely the background radiation of rocks, the
bombardment of cosmic rays, the ultraviolet of the sun that have existed before
there was any life on earth; radiation is now the unnatural creation of man’s tampering with the atom. The chemicals to which life is asked to make its adjustment
are no longer merely the calcium and silica and copper and all the rest of the
minerals washed out of the rocks and carried in rivers to the sea; they are the
synthetic creations of man’s inventive mind, brewed in his laboratories, and having no counterparts in nature.
1Albert Schweitzer (1875–1965), a French philosopher, musician, and medical missionary,
spent much of his life in Africa. He won the 1952 Nobel Peace Prize. — Eds.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 890

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CARSON • SILENT SpRING

891

To adjust to these chemicals would require time on the scale that is nature’s;
it would require not merely the years of a man’s life but the life of generations.
And even this, were it by some miracle possible, would be futile, for the new
chemicals come from our laboratories in an endless stream; almost five hundred
annually find their way into actual use in the United States alone. The figure is
staggering and its implications are not easily grasped — 500 new chemicals to
which the bodies of men and animals are required somehow to adapt each year,
chemicals totally outside the limits of biologic experience.
Among them are many that are used in man’s war against nature. Since the
mid-1940s over 200 basic chemicals have been created for use in killing insects,
weeds, rodents, and other organisms described in the modern vernacular as
“pests”; and they are sold under several thousand different brand names.
These sprays, dusts, and aerosols are now applied almost universally to farms,
gardens, forests, and homes — nonselective chemicals that have the power to kill
every insect, the “good” and the “bad,” to still the song of birds and the leaping of
fish in the streams, to coat the leaves with a deadly film, and to linger on in soil —
all this though the intended target may be only a few weeds or insects. Can anyone believe it is possible to lay down such a barrage of poisons on the surface of
the earth without making it unfit for all life? They should not be called “insecticides,” but “biocides.”
The whole process of spraying seems caught up in an endless spiral. Since
DDT was released for civilian use, a process of escalation has been going on in
which ever more toxic materials must be found. This has happened because
insects, in a triumphant vindication of Darwin’s principle of the survival of the
fittest, have evolved super races immune to the particular insecticide used, hence
a deadlier one has always to be developed — and then a deadlier one than that. It
has happened also because, for reasons to be described later, destructive insects
often undergo a “flareback,” or resurgence, after spraying, in numbers greater
than before. Thus the chemical war is never won, and all life is caught in its violent crossfire.
Along with the possibility of the extinction of mankind by nuclear war, the
central problem of our age has therefore become the contamination of man’s total
environment with such substances of incredible potential for harm — substances
that accumulate in the tissues of plants and animals and even penetrate the germ
cells to shatter or alter the very material of heredity upon which the shape of the
future depends.
Some would-be architects of our future look toward a time when it will be
possible to alter the human germ plasm by design. But we may easily be doing so
now by inadvertence, for many chemicals, like radiation, bring about gene mutations. It is ironic to think that man might determine his own future by something
so seemingly trivial as the choice of an insect spray.
All this has been risked — for what? Future historians may well be amazed by
our distorted sense of proportion. How could intelligent beings seek to control a

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 891

15

20

6/18/12 3:13 PM

892

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

few unwanted species by a method that contaminated the entire environment
and brought the threat of disease and death even to their own kind? Yet this is
precisely what we have done. We have done it, moreover, for reasons that collapse
the moment we examine them. We are told that the enormous and expanding use
of pesticides is necessary to maintain farm production. Yet is our real problem
not one of overproduction? Our farms, despite measures to remove acreages from
production and to pay farmers not to produce, have yielded such a staggering
excess of crops that the American taxpayer in 1962 is paying out more than one
billion dollars a year as the total carrying cost of the surplus-food storage program. And is the situation helped when one branch of the Agriculture Department tries to reduce production while another states, as it did in 1958, “It is
believed generally that reduction of crop acreages under provisions of the Soil
Bank will stimulate interest in use of chemicals to obtain maximum production
on the land retained in crops.”
All this is not to say there is no insect problem and no need of control. I am
saying, rather, that control must be geared to realities, not to mythical situations,
and that the methods employed must be such that they do not destroy us along
with the insects.
The problem whose attempted solution has brought such a train of disaster in its
wake is an accompaniment of our modern way of life. Long before the age of
man, insects inhabited the earth — a group of extraordinarily varied and adaptable beings. Over the course of time since man’s advent, a small percentage of the
more than half a million species of insects have come into conflict with human
welfare in two principal ways: as competitors for the food supply and as carriers
of human disease.
Disease-carrying insects become important where human beings are crowded
together, especially under conditions where sanitation is poor, as in time of natural disaster or war or in situations of extreme poverty and deprivation. Then
control of some sort becomes necessary. It is a sobering fact, however, as we shall
presently see, that the method of massive chemical control has had only limited
success, and also threatens to worsen the very conditions it is intended to curb.
Under primitive agricultural conditions the farmer had few insect problems.
These arose with the intensification of agriculture — the devotion of immense
acreages to a single crop. Such a system set the stage for explosive increases in
specific insect populations. Single-crop farming does not take advantage of the
principles by which nature works; it is agriculture as an engineer might conceive
it to be. Nature has introduced great variety into the landscape, but man has displayed a passion for simplifying it. Thus he undoes the built-in checks and balances by which nature holds the species within bounds. One important natural
check is a limit on the amount of suitable habitat for each species. Obviously
then, an insect that lives on wheat can build up its population to much higher
levels on a farm devoted to wheat than on one in which wheat is intermingled
with other crops to which the insect is not adapted.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 892

25

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CARSON • SILENT SpRING

893

The same thing happens in other situations. A generation or more ago, the
towns of large areas of the United States lined their streets with the noble elm
tree. Now the beauty they hopefully created is threatened with complete destruction as disease sweeps through the elms, carried by a beetle that would have only
limited chance to build up large populations and to spread from tree to tree if the
elms were only occasional trees in a richly diversified planting.
Another factor in the modern insect problem is one that must be viewed
against a background of geologic and human history: the spreading of thousands
of different kinds of organisms from their native homes to invade new territories.
This worldwide migration has been studied and graphically described by the
British ecologist Charles Elton in his recent book The Ecology of Invasions. During
the Cretaceous Period, some hundred million years ago, flooding seas cut many
land bridges between continents and living things found themselves confined in
what Elton calls “colossal separate nature reserves.” There, isolated from others of
their kind, they developed many new species. When some of the land masses were
joined again, about 15 million years ago, these species began to move out into
new territories — a movement that is not only still in progress but is now receiving considerable assistance from man.
The importation of plants is the primary agent in the modern spread of species, for animals have almost invariably gone along with the plants, quarantine
being a comparatively recent and not completely effective innovation. The United
States Office of Plant Introduction alone has introduced almost 200,000 species
and varieties of plants from all over the world. Nearly half of the 180 or so major
insect enemies of plants in the United States are accidental imports from abroad,
and most of them have come as hitchhikers on plants.
In new territory, out of reach of the restraining hand of the natural enemies
that kept down its numbers in its native land, an invading plant or animal is able
to become enormously abundant. Thus it is no accident that our most troublesome
insects are introduced species.
These invasions, both the naturally occurring and those dependent on
human assistance, are likely to continue indefinitely. Quarantine and massive
chemical campaigns are only extremely expensive ways of buying time. We are
faced, according to Dr. Elton, “with a life-and-death need not just to find new
technological means of suppressing this plant or that animal”; instead we need
the basic knowledge of animal populations and their relations to their surroundings that will “promote an even balance and damp down the explosive power of
outbreaks and new invasions.”
Much of the necessary knowledge is now available but we do not use it. We
train ecologists in our universities and even employ them in our governmental
agencies but we seldom take their advice. We allow the chemical death rain to fall
as though there were no alternative, whereas in fact there are many, and our ingenuity could soon discover many more if given opportunity.
Have we fallen into a mesmerized state that makes us accept as inevitable that
which is inferior or detrimental, as though having lost the will or the vision to

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 893

30

6/18/12 3:13 PM

894

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

demand that which is good? Such thinking, in the words of the ecologist Paul
Shepard, “idealizes life with only its head out of water, inches above the limits of
toleration of the corruption of its own environment. . . . Why should we tolerate
a diet of weak poisons, a home in insipid surroundings, a circle of acquaintances
who are not quite our enemies, the noise of motors with just enough relief to
prevent insanity? Who would want to live in a world which is just not quite fatal?”
Yet such a world is pressed upon us. The crusade to create a chemically sterile, insect-free world seems to have engendered a fanatic zeal on the part of many
specialists and most of the so-called control agencies. On every hand there is
evidence that those engaged in spraying operations exercise a ruthless power.
“The regulatory entomologists . . . function as prosecutor, judge and jury, tax
assessor and collector and sheriff to enforce their own orders,” said Connecticut
entomologist Neely Turner. The most flagrant abuses go unchecked in both state
and federal agencies.
It is not my contention that chemical insecticides must never be used. I do
contend that we have put poisonous and biologically potent chemicals indiscriminately into the hands of persons largely or wholly ignorant of their potentials for
harm. We have subjected enormous numbers of people to contact with these poisons, without their consent and often without their knowledge. If the Bill of
Rights contains no guarantee that a citizen shall be secure against lethal poisons
distributed either by private individuals or by public officials, it is surely only
because our forefathers, despite their considerable wisdom and foresight, could
conceive of no such problem.
I contend, furthermore, that we have allowed these chemicals to be used with
little or no advance investigation of their effect on soil, water, wildlife, and man
himself. Future generations are unlikely to condone our lack of prudent concern
for the integrity of the natural world that supports all life.
There is still very limited awareness of the nature of the threat. This is an era
of specialists, each of whom sees his own problem and is unaware of or intolerant
of the larger frame into which it fits. It is also an era dominated by industry, in
which the right to make a dollar at whatever cost is seldom challenged. When the
public protests, confronted with some obvious evidence of damaging results of
pesticide applications, it is fed little tranquilizing pills of half truth. We urgently
need an end to these false assurances, to the sugar coating of unpalatable facts. It
is the public that is being asked to assume the risks that the insect controllers
calculate. The public must decide whether it wishes to continue on the present
road, and it can do so only when in full possession of the facts. In the words of
Jean Rostand,2 “The obligation to endure gives us the right to know.”

35

2Jean Rostand (1894–1977), a French biologist, science writer, and philosopher, spoke against
nuclear proliferation. — Eds.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 894

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CARSON • SILENT SpRING

895

Questions for Discussion
1. Why does Rachel Carson begin with “There was once a town . . . ,” as though she
were writing a fairy tale? Is this a fairy tale of sorts? How does Carson present the
town in paragraphs 1 and 2?
2. Carson claims in paragraph 12 that “[t]he most alarming of . . . assaults upon the
environment is the contamination of air, earth, rivers, and sea with dangerous and
even lethal materials.” Is contamination still the most alarming assault on the environment, or has another problem taken its place? Explain your response.
3. In paragraph 16, Carson claims that humankind is engaged in a “war against
nature” and describes the targets of that war. Do you agree that targeting certain
things for destruction (or at least control) means we are at war with nature? Can
we be at war with something that is not our intended target? Explain.
4. Carson says the products used to kill bugs should be called “biocides” instead of
“insecticides” (para. 17). Why? What is the difference?
5. What has changed since Carson wrote Silent Spring? Has the natural environment improved? Has it declined? Since Carson’s time, have we become more concerned with the effect we have on nature — or less concerned? Explain your
response.
6. What does Jean Rostand mean by our “obligation to endure” (para. 36)? How is
our “right to know” related to this obligation?

Questions on Rhetoric and Style
1. Why does Carson begin “A Fable for Tomorrow” with imagery rather than exposition? What is the effect?
2. How do Carson’s tone, style, and purpose change in paragraphs 9 and 10? Why do
they change? How does Carson’s voice change from “A Fable for Tomorrow” to
“The Obligation to Endure”? How does the difference serve the writer’s rhetorical
purpose?
3. Why does Carson call the insect problem a “train of disaster” (para. 23)? What is
the effect of this metaphor?
4. How does Carson appeal to authority in paragraph 27? Where else in the selection
does she appeal to authority? What is the effect of her use of statistics in paragraph 28?
5. What are the “agencies” to which Carson refers (para. 33)? Why are they reduced
to “so-called control agencies”?
6. Why doesn’t Carson mention her “contention” until she is nearly finished with the
piece? Is her argument inductive or deductive? How do you know? Also, why does
she tell the reader what her “contentions” aren’t before stating what they are? What
response from her readers might she anticipate at this point in their reading?
7. Carson says that the public “is fed little tranquilizing pills of half truth” when it
contests the use of pesticides (para. 36). Why is this metaphor effective?

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 895

6/18/12 3:13 PM

896

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

8. What do you think Carson’s purpose was in ending the final paragraph (and the
chapter) with someone else’s words?

Suggestions for Writing
1. In imitation of Rachel Carson, write an update of “A Fable for Tomorrow.”
2. In paragraph 19, Carson says, “Along with the possibility of the extinction of mankind by nuclear war, the central problem of our age has therefore become the
contamination of man’s total environment.” Write an essay in which you defend,
challenge, or qualify the validity of this statement.
3. Carson writes in paragraph 35, “Future generations are unlikely to condone our
lack of prudent concern for the integrity of the natural world that supports all
life.” As a member of one of the generations after Carson’s, write a letter to her, to
someone of her generation, or to a polluter of today. In the letter, identify and
explain your response to Carson’s statement.
4. Carson concludes with the words of French biologist and philosopher Jean Rostand:
“The obligation to endure gives us the right to know.” Write an essay that defends
or challenges Rostand’s claim as it relates to our relationship to the natural world
today.
5. Carson writes in paragraph 34, “If the Bill of Rights contains no guarantee that a
citizen shall be secure against lethal poisons distributed either by private individuals or by public officials, it is surely only because our forefathers, despite their
considerable wisdom and foresight, could conceive of no such problem.” Imagine
that the framers of the Constitution were here today, and write an essay explaining
how they might use the Constitution to protect the environment.
6. Considering that Silent Spring was written fifty years ago, should we be optimistic or pessimistic in our attitude toward the preservation of the natural world? As
you answer this question, consider what has changed since Carson’s time in our
approach toward the environment.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 896

6/18/12 3:13 PM

from Nature
Ralph Waldo Emerson
Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803–1882), perhaps best known for his
essay “Self-Reliance,” was one of America’s most influential thinkers
and writers. After graduating from Harvard Divinity School, he followed nine generations of his family into the ministry but practiced for
only a few years. Known as a great orator, Emerson made his living
as a popular lecturer on a wide range of topics. From 1821 to 1826,
he taught in city and country schools and later served on a number of
school boards, including the Concord School Committee and the
Board of Overseers of Harvard College. Central to Emerson’s thought is recognizing the spiritual relationship between humans and the natural world. In 1836, he
and other like-minded intellectuals, including Henry David Thoreau, founded the
Transcendental Club, and that same year he published his influential essay
“Nature,” the first three chapters of which are included here.

I. Nature
To go into solitude, a man needs to retire as much from his chamber as from
society. I am not solitary whilst I read and write, though nobody is with me. But
if a man would be alone, let him look at the stars. The rays that come from those
heavenly worlds, will separate between him and what he touches. One might
think the atmosphere was made transparent with this design, to give man, in the
heavenly bodies, the perpetual presence of the sublime. Seen in the streets of cities, how great they are! If the stars should appear one night in a thousand years,
how would men believe and adore; and preserve for many generations the
remembrance of the city of God which had been shown! But every night come
out these envoys of beauty, and light the universe with their admonishing smile.
The stars awaken a certain reverence, because though always present, they are
inaccessible; but all natural objects make a kindred impression, when the mind is
open to their influence. Nature never wears a mean appearance. Neither does the
wisest man extort her secret, and lose his curiosity by finding out all her perfection. Nature never became a toy to a wise spirit. The flowers, the animals, the
mountains, reflected the wisdom of his best hour, as much as they had delighted
the simplicity of his childhood.
When we speak of nature in this manner, we have a distinct but most poetical
sense in the mind. We mean the integrity of impression made by manifold natural objects. It is this which distinguishes the stick of timber of the wood-cutter,
from the tree of the poet. The charming landscape which I saw this morning, is
indubitably made up of some twenty or thirty farms. Miller owns this field, Locke

897

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 897

6/18/12 3:13 PM

898

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

that, and Manning the woodland beyond. But none of them owns the landscape.
There is a property in the horizon which no man has but he whose eye can integrate all the parts, that is, the poet. This is the best part of these men’s farms, yet
to this their warranty-deeds give no title.
To speak truly, few adult persons can see nature. Most persons do not see the
sun. At least they have a very superficial seeing. The sun illuminates only the eye
of the man, but shines into the eye and the heart of the child. The lover of nature
is he whose inward and outward senses are still truly adjusted to each other; who
has retained the spirit of infancy even into the era of manhood. His intercourse
with heaven and earth, becomes part of his daily food. In the presence of nature,
a wild delight runs through the man, in spite of real sorrows. Nature says, — he is
my creature, and maugre1 all his impertinent griefs, he shall be glad with me. Not
the sun or the summer alone, but every hour and season yields its tribute of
delight; for every hour and change corresponds to and authorizes a different state
of the mind, from breathless noon to grimmest midnight. Nature is a setting that
fits equally well a comic or a mourning piece. In good health, the air is a cordial
of incredible virtue. Crossing a bare common, in snow puddles, at twilight, under
a clouded sky, without having in my thoughts any occurrence of special good
fortune, I have enjoyed a perfect exhilaration. I am glad to the brink of fear. In the
woods too, a man casts off his years, as the snake his slough, and at what period
soever of life, is always a child. In the woods, is perpetual youth. Within these
plantations of God, a decorum and sanctity reign, a perennial festival is dressed,
and the guest sees not how he should tire of them in a thousand years. In the
woods, we return to reason and faith. There I feel that nothing can befall me
in life, — no disgrace, no calamity, (leaving me my eyes,) which nature cannot
repair. Standing on the bare ground, — my head bathed by the blithe air, and
uplifted into infinite space, — all mean egotism vanishes. I become a transparent
eye-ball; I am nothing; I see all; the currents of the Universal Being circulate
through me; I am part or particle of God. The name of the nearest friend sounds
then foreign and accidental: to be brothers, to be acquaintances, — master or servant, is then a trifle and a disturbance. I am the lover of uncontained and immortal beauty. In the wilderness, I find something more dear and connate2 than in
streets or villages. In the tranquil landscape, and especially in the distant line of
the horizon, man beholds somewhat as beautiful as his own nature.
The greatest delight which the fields and woods minister, is the suggestion of
an occult relation between man and the vegetable. I am not alone and unacknowledged. They nod to me, and I to them. The waving of the boughs in the
storm, is new to me and old. It takes me by surprise, and yet is not unknown. Its
effect is like that of a higher thought or a better emotion coming over me, when I
deemed I was thinking justly or doing right.

5

1Despite. — Eds.
2Sympathetic. — Eds.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 898

6/18/12 3:13 PM

EMERSON • NATURE

899

Yet it is certain that the power to produce this delight, does not reside in
nature, but in man, or in a harmony of both. It is necessary to use these pleasures
with great temperance. For, nature is not always tricked in holiday attire, but the
same scene which yesterday breathed perfume and glittered as for the frolic of the
nymphs, is overspread with melancholy today. Nature always wears the colors of
the spirit. To a man laboring under calamity, the heat of his own fire hath sadness
in it. Then, there is a kind of contempt of the landscape felt by him who has just
lost by death a dear friend. The sky is less grand as it shuts down over less worth
in the population.

II. Commodity
Whoever considers the final cause of the world, will discern a multitude of uses
that enter as parts into that result. They all admit of being thrown into one of the
following classes; Commodity; Beauty; Language; and Discipline.
Under the general name of Commodity, I rank all those advantages which
our senses owe to nature. This, of course, is a benefit which is temporary and
mediate, not ultimate, like its service to the soul. Yet although low, it is perfect in
its kind, and is the only use of nature which all men apprehend. The misery of
man appears like childish petulance, when we explore the steady and prodigal
provision that has been made for his support and delight on this green ball which
floats him through the heavens. What angels invented these splendid ornaments,
these rich conveniences, this ocean of air above, this ocean of water beneath, this
firmament of earth between? this zodiac of lights, this tent of dropping clouds,
this striped coat of climates, this fourfold year? Beasts, fire, water, stones, and
corn serve him. The field is at once his floor, his work-yard, his play-ground, his
garden, and his bed.
“More servants wait on man
Than he ’ll take notice of.” — 3

Nature, in its ministry to man, is not only the material, but is also the process
and the result. All the parts incessantly work into each other’s hands for the profit
of man. The wind sows the seed; the sun evaporates the sea; the wind blows the
vapor to the field; the ice, on the other side of the planet, condenses rain on this;
the rain feeds the plant; the plant feeds the animal; and thus the endless circulations of the divine charity nourish man.
The useful arts are reproductions or new combinations by the wit of man, of
the same natural benefactors. He no longer waits for favoring gales, but by means
of steam, he realizes the fable of Æolus’s bag, and carries the two and thirty winds
in the boiler of his boat. To diminish friction, he paves the road with iron bars,

10

3The quotation is from Man by English poet George Herbert (1593–1633). — Eds.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 899

6/18/12 3:13 PM

900

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

and, mounting a coach with a ship-load of men, animals, and merchandise
behind him, he darts through the country, from town to town, like an eagle or a
swallow through the air. By the aggregate of these aids, how is the face of the
world changed, from the era of Noah to that of Napoleon! The private poor man
hath cities, ships, canals, bridges, built for him. He goes to the post-office, and the
human race run on his errands; to the book-shop, and the human race read and
write of all that happens, for him; to the court-house, and nations repair his
wrongs. He sets his house upon the road, and the human race go forth every
morning, and shovel out the snow, and cut a path for him.
But there is no need of specifying particulars in this class of uses. The catalogue is endless, and the examples so obvious, that I shall leave them to the reader’s reflection, with the general remark, that this mercenary benefit is one which
has respect to a farther good. A man is fed, not that he may be fed, but that he may
work.

III. Beauty
A nobler want of man is served by nature, namely, the love of Beauty.
The ancient Greeks called the world kosmo,4 beauty. Such is the constitution of all things, or such the plastic power of the human eye, that the primary
forms, as the sky, the mountain, the tree, the animal, give us a delight in and for
themselves; a pleasure arising from outline, color, motion, and grouping. This
seems partly owing to the eye itself. The eye is the best of artists. By the mutual
action of its structure and of the laws of light, perspective is produced, which
integrates every mass of objects, of what character soever, into a well colored and
shaded globe, so that where the particular objects are mean and unaffecting, the
landscape which they compose, is round and symmetrical. And as the eye is the
best composer, so light is the first of painters. There is no object so foul that
intense light will not make beautiful. And the stimulus it affords to the sense, and
a sort of infinitude which it hath, like space and time, make all matter gay. Even
the corpse has its own beauty. But besides this general grace diffused over nature,
almost all the individual forms are agreeable to the eye, as is proved by our endless imitations of some of them, as the acorn, the grape, the pine-cone, the wheatear, the egg, the wings and forms of most birds, the lion’s claw, the serpent, the
butterfly, sea-shells, flames, clouds, buds, leaves, and the forms of many trees, as
the palm.
For better consideration, we may distribute the aspects of Beauty in a threefold manner.
1. First, the simple perception of natural forms is a delight. The influence of
the forms and actions in nature, is so needful to man, that, in its lowest functions,

15

4Cosmos, Greek for “universe” or “order.” Emerson is equating order with beauty. — Eds.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 900

6/18/12 3:13 PM

EMERSON • NATURE

901

it seems to lie on the confines of commodity and beauty. To the body and mind
which have been cramped by noxious work or company, nature is medicinal and
restores their tone. The tradesman, the attorney comes out of the din and craft of
the street, and sees the sky and the woods, and is a man again. In their eternal
calm, he finds himself. The health of the eye seems to demand a horizon. We are
never tired, so long as we can see far enough.
But in other hours, Nature satisfies by its loveliness, and without any mixture
of corporeal benefit. I see the spectacle of morning from the hill-top over against
my house, from day-break to sun-rise, with emotions which an angel might share.
The long slender bars of cloud float like fishes in the sea of crimson light. From
the earth, as a shore, I look out into that silent sea. I seem to partake its rapid
transformations: the active enchantment reaches my dust, and I dilate and conspire with the morning wind. How does Nature deify us with a few and cheap elements! Give me health and a day, and I will make the pomp of emperors ridiculous.
The dawn is my Assyria; the sun-set and moon-rise my Paphos,5 and unimaginable realms of faerie; broad noon shall be my England of the senses and the
understanding; the night shall be my Germany of mystic philosophy and dreams.
Not less excellent, except for our less susceptibility in the afternoon, was the
charm, last evening, of a January sunset. The western clouds divided and subdivided themselves into pink flakes modulated with tints of unspeakable softness;
and the air had so much life and sweetness, that it was a pain to come within
doors. What was it that nature would say? Was there no meaning in the live repose
of the valley behind the mill, and which Homer or Shakspeare could not re-form
for me in words? The leafless trees become spires of flame in the sunset, with the
blue east for their back-ground, and the stars of the dead calices of flowers, and
every withered stem and stubble rimed with frost, contribute something to the
mute music.
The inhabitants of cities suppose that the country landscape is pleasant only
half the year. I please myself with the graces of the winter scenery, and believe that
we are as much touched by it as by the genial influences of summer. To the attentive eye, each moment of the year has its own beauty, and in the same field, it
beholds, every hour, a picture which was never seen before, and which shall never
be seen again. The heavens change every moment, and reflect their glory or gloom
on the plains beneath. The state of the crop in the surrounding farms alters the
expression of the earth from week to week. The succession of native plants in the
pastures and roadsides, which makes the silent clock by which time tells the summer hours, will make even the divisions of the day sensible to a keen observer.
The tribes of birds and insects, like the plants punctual to their time, follow each
other, and the year has room for all. By water-courses, the variety is greater. In
July, the blue pontederia or pickerel-weed blooms in large beds in the shallow
5City in Cyprus. At its height, in the ninth century b.c.e., the Assyrian empire controlled much
of the Middle East, including Cyprus. — Eds.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 901

6/18/12 3:13 PM

902

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

parts of our pleasant river, and swarms with yellow butterflies in continual
motion. Art cannot rival this pomp of purple and gold. Indeed the river is a perpetual gala, and boasts each month a new ornament.
But this beauty of Nature which is seen and felt as beauty, is the least part.
The shows of day, the dewy morning, the rainbow, mountains, orchards in blossom, stars, moonlight, shadows in still water, and the like, if too eagerly hunted,
become shows merely, and mock us with their unreality. Go out of the house to
see the moon, and ’t is mere tinsel; it will not please as when its light shines upon
your necessary journey. The beauty that shimmers in the yellow afternoons of
October, who ever could clutch it? Go forth to find it, and it is gone: ’t is only a
mirage as you look from the windows of diligence.
2. The presence of a higher, namely, of the spiritual element is essential to its
perfection. The high and divine beauty which can be loved without effeminacy, is
that which is found in combination with the human will. Beauty is the mark God
sets upon virtue. Every natural action is graceful. Every heroic act is also decent,
and causes the place and the bystanders to shine. We are taught by great actions
that the universe is the property of every individual in it. Every rational creature
has all nature for his dowry and estate. It is his, if he will. He may divest himself
of it; he may creep into a corner, and abdicate his kingdom, as most men do, but
he is entitled to the world by his constitution. In proportion to the energy of his
thought and will, he takes up the world into himself. “All those things for which
men plough, build, or sail, obey virtue;” said Sallust.6 “The winds and waves,” said
Gibbon,7 “are always on the side of the ablest navigators.” So are the sun and
moon and all the stars of heaven. When a noble act is done — perchance in a
scene of great natural beauty; when Leonidas and his three hundred martyrs consume one day in dying, and the sun and moon come each and look at them once
in the steep defile of Thermopylæ; when Arnold Winkelried, in the high Alps,
under the shadow of the avalanche, gathers in his side a sheaf of Austrian spears
to break the line for his comrades, are not these heroes entitled to add the beauty
of the scene to the beauty of the deed? When the bark of Columbus nears the
shore of America; — before it, the beach lined with savages, fleeing out of all their
huts of cane; the sea behind; and the purple mountains of the Indian Archipelago
around, can we separate the man from the living picture? Does not the New
World clothe his form with her palm-groves and savannahs as fit drapery? Ever
does natural beauty steal in like air, and envelope great actions. When Sir Harry
Vane was dragged up the Tower-hill, sitting on a sled, to suffer death, as the champion of the English laws, one of the multitude cried out to him, “You never sate
on so glorious a seat.” Charles II, to intimidate the citizens of London, caused the
patriot Lord Russel to be drawn in an open coach, through the principal streets

20

6Sallust (86–34 b.c.e.), Roman historian. — Eds.
7Edward Gibbon (1737–1794), English historian and author of The History of the Decline and

Fall of the Roman Empire. — Eds.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 902

6/18/12 3:13 PM

EMERSON • NATURE

903

of the city, on his way to the scaffold. “But,” his biographer says, “the multitude
imagined they saw liberty and virtue sitting by his side.” In private places, among
sordid objects, an act of truth or heroism seems at once to draw to itself the sky
as its temple, the sun as its candle. Nature stretcheth out her arms to embrace
man, only let his thoughts be of equal greatness. Willingly does she follow his
steps with the rose and the violet, and bend her lines of grandeur and grace to the
decoration of her darling child. Only let his thoughts be of equal scope, and the
frame will suit the picture. A virtuous man is in unison with her works, and
makes the central figure of the visible sphere. Homer, Pindar, Socrates, Phocion,
associate themselves fitly in our memory with the geography and climate of
Greece. The visible heavens and earth sympathize with Jesus. And in common
life, whosoever has seen a person of powerful character and happy genius, will
have remarked how easily he took all things along with him, — the persons, the
opinions, and the day, and nature became ancillary to a man.
3. There is still another aspect under which the beauty of the world may be
viewed, namely, as it becomes an object of the intellect. Beside the relation of
things to virtue, they have a relation to thought. The intellect searches out the
absolute order of things as they stand in the mind of God, and without the colors
of affection. The intellectual and the active powers seem to succeed each other,
and the exclusive activity of the one, generates the exclusive activity of the other.
There is something unfriendly in each to the other, but they are like the alternate
periods of feeding and working in animals; each prepares and will be followed by
the other. Therefore does beauty, which, in relation to actions, as we have seen,
comes unsought, and comes because it is unsought, remain for the apprehension
and pursuit of the intellect; and then again, in its turn, of the active power. Nothing divine dies. All good is eternally reproductive. The beauty of nature reforms
itself in the mind, and not for barren contemplation, but for new creation.
All men are in some degree impressed by the face of the world; some men
even to delight. This love of beauty is Taste. Others have the same love in such
excess, that, not content with admiring, they seek to embody it in new forms. The
creation of beauty is Art.
The production of a work of art throws a light upon the mystery of humanity. A work of art is an abstract or epitome of the world. It is the result or expression of nature, in miniature. For, although the works of nature are innumerable
and all different, the result or the expression of them all is similar and single.
Nature is a sea of forms radically alike and even unique. A leaf, a sun-beam, a
landscape, the ocean, make an analogous impression on the mind. What is common to them all, — that perfectness and harmony, is beauty. The standard of
beauty is the entire circuit of natural forms, — the totality of nature; which the
Italians expressed by defining beauty “il piu nell’ uno.”8 Nothing is quite beautiful

8Italian, “the many in one.” — Eds.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 903

6/18/12 3:13 PM

904

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

alone: nothing but is beautiful in the whole. A single object is only so far beautiful
as it suggests this universal grace. The poet, the painter, the sculptor, the musician, the architect, seek each to concentrate this radiance of the world on one
point, and each in his several work to satisfy the love of beauty which stimulates
him to produce. Thus is Art, a nature passed through the alembic9 of man. Thus
in art, does nature work through the will of a man filled with the beauty of her
first works.
The world thus exists to the soul to satisfy the desire of beauty. This element
I call an ultimate end. No reason can be asked or given why the soul seeks beauty.
Beauty, in its largest and profoundest sense, is one expression for the universe.
God is the all-fair. Truth, and goodness, and beauty, are but different faces of the
same All. But beauty in nature is not ultimate. It is the herald of inward and eternal beauty, and is not alone a solid and satisfactory good. It must stand as a part,
and not as yet the last or highest expression of the final cause of Nature.

Questions for Discussion
1. Explain Ralph Waldo Emerson’s attitude toward nature in paragraphs 1 and 2.
2. In paragraph 4, Emerson writes, “I become a transparent eye-ball; I am nothing; I
see all; the currents of the Universal Being circulate through me; I am part or
particle of God.” From those words, how would you describe Emerson’s mental
state here, and what has brought it about?
3. In paragraph 6, Emerson says, “Nature always wears the colors of the spirit.” What
does he mean? Do you agree? In paragraph 4, Emerson says, “Crossing a bare common, in snow puddles, at twilight, under a clouded sky . . . I have enjoyed a perfect
exhilaration.” Does this contradict his statement in paragraph 6? Explain how the
relationship that Emerson describes between humans and nature works.
4. In paragraphs 7–9, what does Emerson suggest about the human condition?
5. In paragraph 10, what is Emerson’s attitude toward the “useful arts” — what people
now call technology? Would Emerson have the same attitude today? Why or
why not?
6. In Part III of the selection, Emerson says that in regard to nature, loving its beauty
is a nobler response than using it as a commodity. Do you agree or disagree?
Explain why.
7. In paragraph 20, Emerson writes, “Nature stretcheth out her arms to embrace
man, only let his thoughts be of equal greatness.” What does he mean? What does
this statement imply about the relationship between nature and humankind?

9A device that purifies or refines. — Eds.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 904

6/18/12 3:13 PM

EMERSON • NATURE

905

Questions on Rhetoric and Style
1. What is the effect of the comparisons (including figurative language) and distinctions that Emerson makes in paragraphs 1 and 2? In the conclusion to the first
paragraph, Emerson says the stars give an “admonishing smile.” What does he
mean by this phrase? How does Emerson characterize nature? What is the purpose
of this characterization?
2. Identify the juxtapositions in paragraph 4. What is their effect? Is there a relationship among the juxtapositions that suggests a larger point? Explain.
3. In paragraph 8, Emerson speaks of “this green ball which floats him through the
heavens.” What is the effect of this metaphor? How does the repetition in the rest
of the paragraph (“this ocean of air above, this ocean of water beneath, this . . .
this . . .”) contribute to this effect?
4. What three aspects of the beauty of nature does Emerson delineate in Part III?
How does he use simile and metaphor to develop the first aspect? How do the
rhetorical questions in paragraph 20 serve to develop the second aspect?
5. What is the relationship between paragraphs 18 and 19? What is the effect of the
paradox that concludes paragraph 19?
6. In paragraph 21, what distinction does Emerson make between “barren contemplation” and “new creation”?
7. How does Emerson unite truth, goodness, and beauty in the final paragraph? Why
is this a fitting conclusion for this section?

Suggestions for Writing
1. Write an essay in which you support, challenge, or qualify Emerson’s main idea in
Part I.
2. In Part II, Emerson presents an optimistic view of the “useful arts.” In the voice of
a modern-day environmentalist such as Rachel Carson (p. 888), discuss whether
his view holds true today.
3. Write a letter to Emerson describing an experience you have had with nature.
Explain how it was similar to or different from the experience he describes in
Part II.
4. Select a powerful, challenging, or thought-provoking statement from Emerson —
such as “The production of a work of art throws a light upon the mystery of
humanity. A work of art is an abstract or epitome of the world” (para. 23). Write
an essay that supports, qualifies, or refutes its assertion. Use evidence from your
reading, as well as your own knowledge and experience, to defend your position.
5. Read the poem “Thanatopsis” by William Cullen Bryant, a contemporary of
Emerson’s, and write an essay comparing it with Emerson’s essay “Nature.”

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 905

6/18/12 3:13 PM

from The Land Ethic
Aldo Leopold
Aldo Leopold was born in Iowa in 1887. He attended the Sheffield Scientific School
at Yale and subsequently enrolled in the Yale forestry school, the first graduate
school of forestry in the United States. Graduating with a master’s degree in 1909,
he joined the U.S. Forest Service and stayed with that agency in various research
and management positions until 1933, when he took a position at the University
of Wisconsin. Throughout his life, Leopold was at the forefront of the conservation
movement; many people acknowledge him as the father of wildlife conservation in
America. He was also an internationally respected scientist who wrote over 350
articles, mostly on scientific and policy matters. In addition, he was an advisor on
conservation to the United Nations. He died of a heart attack in 1948 while fighting a fire on a neighbor’s farm. Leopold is best known for his book A Sand County
Almanac (1949), which includes the chapter excerpted here, “The Land Ethic.”

W

hen god-like Odysseus returned from the wars in Troy, he hanged all
on one rope a dozen slave-girls of his household whom he suspected
of misbehavior during his absence.
This hanging involved no question of propriety. The girls were property. The
disposal of property was then, as now, a matter of expediency, not of right and
wrong.
Concepts of right and wrong were not lacking from Odysseus’ Greece: witness the fidelity of his wife through the long years before at last his black-prowed
galleys clove the wine-dark seas for home. The ethical structure of that day covered wives, but had not yet been extended to human chattels. During the three
thousand years which have since elapsed, ethical criteria have been extended to
many fields of conduct, with corresponding shrinkages in those judged by expediency only.

The Ethical Sequence
This extension of ethics, so far studied only by philosophers, is actually a process
in ecological evolution. Its sequences may be described in ecological as well as in
philosophical terms. An ethic, ecologically, is a limitation on freedom of action in
the struggle for existence. An ethic, philosophically, is a differentiation of social
from anti-social conduct. These are two definitions of one thing. The thing has its
origin in the tendency of interdependent individuals or groups to evolve modes
of co-operation. The ecologist calls these symbioses. Politics and economics are
advanced symbioses in which the original free-for-all competition has been
replaced, in part, by co-operative mechanisms with an ethical content.

906

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 906

6/18/12 3:13 PM

LEOpOLD • THE LAND ETHIC

907

The complexity of co-operative mechanisms has increased with population
density, and with the efficiency of tools. It was simpler, for example, to define the
anti-social uses of sticks and stones in the days of the mastodons than of bullets
and billboards in the age of motors.
The first ethics dealt with the relation between individuals; the Mosaic Decalogue1 is an example. Later accretions dealt with the relation between the individual and society. The Golden Rule tries to integrate the individual to society;
democracy to integrate social organization to the individual.
There is as yet no ethic dealing with man’s relation to land and to the animals
and plants which grow upon it. Land, like Odysseus’ slave-girls, is still property.
The land relation is still strictly economic, entailing privileges but not obligations.
The extension of ethics to this third element in human environment is, if I
read the evidence correctly, an evolutionary possibility and an ecological necessity. It is the third step in a sequence. The first two have already been taken. Individual thinkers since the days of Ezekiel and Isaiah have asserted that the
despoliation of land is not only inexpedient but wrong. Society, however, has not
yet affirmed their belief. I regard the present conservation movement as the
embryo of such an affirmation.
An ethic may be regarded as a mode of guidance for meeting ecological situations so new or intricate, or involving such deferred reactions, that the path of
social expediency is not discernible to the average individual. Animal instincts
are modes of guidance for the individual in meeting such situations. Ethics are
possibly a kind of community instinct in-the-making.

5

The Community Concept
All ethics so far evolved rest upon a single premise: that the individual is a member of a community of interdependent parts. His instincts prompt him to compete for his place in that community, but his ethics prompt him also to co-operate
(perhaps in order that there may be a place to compete for).
The land ethic simply enlarges the boundaries of the community to include
soils, waters, plants, and animals, or collectively: the land.
This sounds simple: do we not already sing our love for and obligation to the
land of the free and the home of the brave? Yes, but just what and whom do we
love? Certainly not the soil, which we are sending helter-skelter downriver. Certainly not the waters, which we assume have no function except to turn turbines,
float barges, and carry off sewage. Certainly not the plants, of which we exterminate whole communities without batting an eye. Certainly not the animals, of
which we have already extirpated many of the largest and most beautiful species.
A land ethic of course cannot prevent the alteration, management, and use of

10

1The Ten Commandments found in the book of Exodus in the Bible. — Eds.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 907

6/18/12 3:13 PM

908

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

these “resources,” but it does affirm their right to continued existence, and, at
least in spots, their continued existence in a natural state.
In short, a land ethic changes the role of Homo sapiens from conqueror of
the land-community to plain member and citizen of it. It implies respect for his
fellow-members, and also respect for the community as such.
In human history, we have learned (I hope) that the conqueror role is eventually self-defeating. Why? Because it is implicit in such a role that the conqueror
knows, ex cathedra,2 just what makes the community clock tick, and just what and
who is valuable, and what and who is worthless, in community life. It always
turns out that he knows neither, and this is why his conquests eventually defeat
themselves.
In the biotic community, a parallel situation exists. Abraham knew exactly
what the land was for: it was to drip milk and honey into Abraham’s mouth. At
the present moment, the assurance with which we regard this assumption is
inverse to the degree of our education.
The ordinary citizen today assumes that science knows what makes the community clock tick; the scientist is equally sure that he does not. He knows that the
biotic mechanism is so complex that its workings may never be fully understood.
That man is, in fact, only a member of a biotic team is shown by an ecological
interpretation of history. Many historical events, hitherto explained solely in
terms of human enterprise, were actually biotic interactions between people and
land. The characteristics of the land determined the facts quite as potently as the
characteristics of the men who lived on it.
Consider, for example, the settlement of the Mississippi valley. In the years
following the Revolution, three groups were contending for its control: the native
Indian, the French and English traders, and the American settlers. Historians
wonder what would have happened if the English at Detroit had thrown a little
more weight into the Indian side of those tipsy scales which decided the outcome
of the colonial migration into the cane-lands of Kentucky. It is time now to ponder the fact that the cane-lands, when subjected to the particular mixture of
forces represented by the cow, plow, fire, and axe of the pioneer, became bluegrass. What if the plant succession inherent in this dark and bloody ground had,
under the impact of these forces, given us some worthless sedge, shrub, or weed?
Would Boone and Kenton3 have held out? Would there have been any overflow
into Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Missouri? Any Louisiana Purchase? Any transcontinental union of new states? Any Civil War?
Kentucky was one sentence in the drama of history. We are commonly told
what the human actors in this drama tried to do, but we are seldom told that their

15

2

Latin for “from the chair,” here meaning from the seat of authority, often a reference to infallible papal decrees. — Eds.
3Daniel Boone (1734–1820) and Simon Kenton (1755–1836), famous American frontiersmen. — Eds.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 908

6/18/12 3:13 PM

LEOpOLD • THE LAND ETHIC

909

success, or the lack of it, hung in large degree on the reaction of particular soils to
the impact of the particular forces exerted by their occupancy. In the case of Kentucky, we do not even know where the bluegrass came from — whether it is a
native species, or a stowaway from Europe.
Contrast the cane-lands with what hindsight tells us about the Southwest,
where the pioneers were equally brave, resourceful, and persevering. The impact
of occupancy here brought no bluegrass, or other plant fitted to withstand the
bumps and buffetings of hard use. This region, when grazed by livestock, reverted
through a series of more and more worthless grasses, shrubs, and weeds to a condition of unstable equilibrium. Each recession of plant types bred erosion; each
increment to erosion bred a further recession of plants. The result today is a progressive and mutual deterioration, not only of plants and soils, but of the animal
community subsisting thereon. The early settlers did not expect this: on the
ciénegas4 of New Mexico some even cut ditches to hasten it. So subtle has been its
progress that few residents of the region are aware of it. It is quite invisible to the
tourist who finds this wrecked landscape colorful and charming (as indeed it is,
but it bears scant resemblance to what it was in 1848).
This same landscape was “developed” once before, but with quite different
results. The Pueblo Indians settled the Southwest in pre-Columbian times, but
they happened not to be equipped with range livestock. Their civilization expired,
but not because their land expired.
In India, regions devoid of any sod-forming grass have been settled, apparently without wrecking the land, by the simple expedient of carrying the grass to
the cow, rather than vice versa. (Was this the result of some deep wisdom, or was
it just good luck? I do not know.)
In short, the plant succession steered the course of history; the pioneer simply
demonstrated, for good or ill, which successions inhered in the land. Is history
taught in this spirit? It will be, once the concept of land as a community really
penetrates our intellectual life.

20

The Ecological Conscience
Conservation is a state of harmony between men and land. Despite nearly a century of propaganda, conservation still proceeds at a snail’s pace; progress still
consists largely of letterhead pieties and convention oratory. On the back forty we
still slip two steps backward for each forward stride.
The usual answer to this dilemma is “more conservation education.” No one
will debate this, but is it certain that only the volume of education needs stepping
up? Is something lacking in the content as well?
It is difficult to give a fair summary of its content in brief form, but, as I
understand it, the content is substantially this: obey the law, vote right, join some

25

4Spring-fed marshes. — Eds.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 909

6/18/12 3:13 PM

910

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

organizations, and practice what conservation is profitable on your own land; the
government will do the rest.
Is not this formula too easy to accomplish anything worth-while? It defines
no right or wrong, assigns no obligation, calls for no sacrifice, implies no change
in the current philosophy of values. In respect of land-use, it urges only enlightened self-interest. Just how far will such education take us? An example will
perhaps yield a partial answer.
By 1930 it had become clear to all except the ecologically blind that southwestern Wisconsin’s topsoil was slipping seaward. In 1933 the farmers were told
that if they would adopt certain remedial practices for five years, the public would
donate CCC labor to install them, plus the necessary machinery and materials.
The offer was widely accepted, but the practices were widely forgotten when the
five-year contract period was up. The farmers continued only those practices that
yielded an immediate and visible economic gain for themselves.
This led to the idea that maybe farmers would learn more quickly if they
themselves wrote the rules. Accordingly the Wisconsin Legislature in 1937 passed
the Soil Conservation District Law. This said to farmers, in effect: We, the public,
will furnish you free technical service and loan you specialized machinery, if you will
write your own rules for land-use. Each county may write its own rules, and these
will have the force of law. Nearly all the counties promptly organized to accept the
proffered help, but after a decade of operation, no county has yet written a single
rule. There has been visible progress in such practices as strip-cropping, pasture
renovation, and soil liming, but none in fencing woodlots against grazing, and
none in excluding plow and cow from steep slopes. The farmers, in short, have
selected those remedial practices which were profitable anyhow, and ignored
those which were profitable to the community, but not clearly profitable to themselves.
When one asks why no rules have been written, one is told that the community is not yet ready to support them; education must precede rules. But the
education actually in progress makes no mention of obligations to land over and
above those dictated by self-interest. The net result is that we have more education but less soil, fewer healthy woods, and as many floods as in 1937.
The puzzling aspect of such situations is that the existence of obligations
over and above self-interest is taken for granted in such rural community enterprises as the betterment of roads, schools, churches, and baseball teams. Their
existence is not taken for granted, nor as yet seriously discussed, in bettering the
behavior of the water that falls on the land, or in the preserving of the beauty or
diversity of the farm landscape. Land-use ethics are still governed wholly by economic self-interest, just as social ethics were a century ago.
To sum up: we asked the farmer to do what he conveniently could to save his
soil, and he has done just that, and only that. The farmer who clears the woods off
a 75 per cent slope, turns his cows into the clearing, and dumps its rainfall, rocks,
and soil into the community creek, is still (if otherwise decent) a respected mem-

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 910

30

6/18/12 3:13 PM

LEOpOLD • THE LAND ETHIC

911

ber of society. If he puts lime on his fields and plants his crops on contour, he is
still entitled to all the privileges and emoluments of his Soil Conservation District. The District is a beautiful piece of social machinery, but it is coughing along
on two cylinders because we have been too timid, and too anxious for quick success, to tell the farmer the true magnitude of his obligations. Obligations have no
meaning without conscience, and the problem we face is the extension of social
conscience from people to land.
No important change in ethics was ever accomplished without an internal
change in our intellectual emphasis, loyalties, affections, and convictions. The
proof that conservation has not yet touched these foundations of conduct lies in
the fact that philosophy and religion have not yet heard of it. In our attempt to
make conservation easy, we have made it trivial. . . .

Land Health and the A-B Cleavage
A land ethic, then, reflects the existence of an ecological conscience, and this in
turn reflects a conviction of individual responsibility for the health of the land.
Health is the capacity of the land for self-renewal. Conservation is our effort to
understand and preserve this capacity.
Conservationists are notorious for their dissensions. Superficially these seem
to add up to mere confusion, but a more careful scrutiny reveals a single plane of
cleavage common to many specialized fields. In each field one group (A) regards
the land as soil, and its function as commodity-production; another group (B)
regards the land as a biota, and its function as something broader. How much
broader is admittedly in a state of doubt and confusion.
In my own field, forestry, Group A is quite content to grow trees like cabbages,
with cellulose as the basic forest commodity. It feels no inhibition against violence; its ideology is agronomic. Group B, on the other hand, sees forestry as
fundamentally different from agronomy because it employs natural species, and
manages a natural environment rather than creating an artificial one. Group B
prefers natural reproduction on principle. It worries on biotic as well as economic grounds about the loss of species like chestnut, and the threatened loss of
the white pines. It worries about a whole series of secondary forest functions:
wildlife, recreation, watersheds, wilderness areas. To my mind, Group B feels the
stirrings of an ecological conscience.
In the wildlife field, a parallel cleavage exists. For Group A the basic commodities are sport and meat; the yardsticks of production are ciphers of take in
pheasants and trout. Artificial propagation is acceptable as a permanent as well as
a temporary recourse — if its unit costs permit. Group B, on the other hand, worries about a whole series of biotic side-issues. What is the cost in predators of
producing a game crop? Should we have further recourse to exotics? How can
management restore the shrinking species, like prairie grouse, already hopeless
as shootable game? How can management restore the threatened rarities, like

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 911

35

6/18/12 3:13 PM

912

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

trumpeter swan and whooping crane? Can management principles be extended
to wildflowers? Here again it is clear to me that we have the same A-B cleavage as
in forestry.
In the larger field of agriculture I am less competent to speak, but there seem
to be somewhat parallel cleavages. Scientific agriculture was actively developing
before ecology was born, hence a slower penetration of ecological concepts might
be expected. Moreover the farmer, by the very nature of his techniques, must
modify the biota more radically than the forester or the wildlife manager. Nevertheless, there are many discontents in agriculture which seem to add up to a new
vision of “biotic farming.”
Perhaps the most important of these is the new evidence that poundage or
tonnage is no measure of the food-value of farm crops; the products of fertile soil
may be qualitatively as well as quantitatively superior. We can bolster poundage
from depleted soils by pouring on imported fertility, but we are not necessarily
bolstering food-value. The possible ultimate ramifications of this idea are so
immense that I must leave their exposition to abler pens.
The discontent that labels itself “organic farming,” while bearing some of the
earmarks of a cult, is nevertheless biotic in its direction, particularly in its insistence on the importance of soil flora and fauna.
The ecological fundamentals of agriculture are just as poorly known to the
public as in other fields of land-use. For example, few educated people realize that
the marvelous advances in technique made during recent decades are improvements in the pump, rather than the well. Acre for acre, they have barely sufficed
to offset the sinking level of fertility.
In all of these cleavages, we see repeated the same basic paradoxes: man the
conqueror versus man the biotic citizen; science the sharpener of his sword versus
science the searchlight on his universe; land the slave and servant versus land the
collective organism. Robinson’s injunction to Tristram may well be applied, at
this juncture, to Homo sapiens as a species in geological time:

40

Whether you will or not
You are a King, Tristram, for you are one
Of the time-tested few that leave the world,
When they are gone, not the same place it was.
Mark what you leave.

The Outlook
It is inconceivable to me that an ethical relation to land can exist without love,
respect, and admiration for land, and a high regard for its value. By value, I of
course mean something far broader than mere economic value; I mean value in
the philosophical sense.
Perhaps the most serious obstacle impeding the evolution of a land ethic is
the fact that our educational and economic system is headed away from, rather

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 912

6/18/12 3:13 PM

LEOpOLD • THE LAND ETHIC

913

than toward, an intense consciousness of land. Your true modern is separated
from the land by many middlemen, and by innumerable physical gadgets. He has
no vital relation to it; to him it is the space between cities on which crops grow.
Turn him loose for a day on the land, and if the spot does not happen to be a golf
links or a “scenic” area, he is bored stiff. If crops could be raised by hydroponics
instead of farming, it would suit him very well. Synthetic substitutes for wood,
leather, wool, and other natural land products suit him better than the originals.
In short, land is something he has “outgrown.”
Almost equally serious as an obstacle to a land ethic is the attitude of the
farmer for whom the land is still an adversary, or a taskmaster that keeps him in
slavery. Theoretically, the mechanization of farming ought to cut the farmer’s
chains, but whether it really does is debatable.
One of the requisites for an ecological comprehension of land is an understanding of ecology, and this is by no means co-extensive with “education”; in
fact, much higher education seems deliberately to avoid ecological concepts. An
understanding of ecology does not necessarily originate in courses bearing ecological labels; it is quite as likely to be labeled geography, botany, agronomy, history, or economics. This is as it should be, but whatever the label, ecological
training is scarce.
The case for a land ethic would appear hopeless but for the minority which
is in obvious revolt against these “modern” trends.
The “key-log” which must be moved to release the evolutionary process for
an ethic is simply this: quit thinking about decent land-use as solely an economic
problem. Examine each question in terms of what is ethically and esthetically
right, as well as what is economically expedient. A thing is right when it tends to
preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the biotic community. It is wrong
when it tends otherwise.
It of course goes without saying that economic feasibility limits the tether of
what can or cannot be done for land. It always has and it always will. The fallacy
the economic determinists have tied around our collective neck, and which we
now need to cast off, is the belief that economics determines all land-use. This is
simply not true. An innumerable host of actions and attitudes, comprising perhaps the bulk of all land relations, is determined by the land-users’ tastes and
predilections, rather than by his purse. The bulk of all land relations hinges on
investments of time, forethought, skill, and faith rather than on investments of
cash. As a land-user thinketh, so is he.
I have purposely presented the land ethic as a product of social evolution
because nothing so important as an ethic is ever “written.” Only the most superficial student of history supposes that Moses “wrote” the Decalogue; it evolved in
the minds of a thinking community, and Moses wrote a tentative summary of it
for a “seminar.” I say tentative because evolution never stops.
The evolution of a land ethic is an intellectual as well as emotional process.
Conservation is paved with good intentions which prove to be futile, or even

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 913

45

50

6/18/12 3:13 PM

914

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

dangerous, because they are devoid of critical understanding either of the land, or
of economic land-use. I think it is a truism that as the ethical frontier advances
from the individual to the community, its intellectual content increases.
The mechanism of operation is the same for any ethic: social approbation for
right actions: social disapproval for wrong actions.
By and large, our present problem is one of attitudes and implements. We are
remodeling the Alhambra5 with a steam-shovel, and we are proud of our yardage.
We shall hardly relinquish the shovel, which after all has many good points, but
we are in need of gentler and more objective criteria for its successful use.

Exploring the Text
1. What is the effect of the story about Odysseus that begins Aldo Leopold’s essay?
2. How would you describe Leopold’s tone at the beginning of “The Ethical
Sequence”?
3. What are the ecological and philosophical distinctions that Leopold makes
regarding the land ethic? Think of two contemporary examples that illustrate
how these are actually “two definitions of one thing” (para. 4).
4. Paragraph 15 ends: “At the present moment, the assurance with which we regard
this assumption is inverse to the degree of our education.” What is the assumption to which he refers? Who holds it? What is Leopold’s attitude toward it? What
can we infer from the allusion to Abraham that precedes this sentence?
5. How does Leopold use analogy, particularly in paragraph 31, as a rhetorical technique? Is the claim he develops in that paragraph still true today? Explain your
response.
6. Identify the claim in paragraph 33. Do you agree with it? Explain.
7. In the section “Land Health and the A-B Cleavage,” Leopold introduces two ways
of looking at the land, which he labels A and B (para. 35). Which viewpoint is
more prominent today?
8. How effective are Leopold’s appeals to ethos in paragraphs 38 and 39? Do they
make his argument more convincing? Explain.
9. Expressing a view widely held in 1949, Leopold writes of the “discontent that
labels itself ‘organic farming’” (para. 40). Do we still see organic farming as a
discontent today? Explain.
10. At the beginning of “The Outlook,” Leopold characterizes the “modern” (para.
44). Does that characterization hold true today? Explain your response.
11. How does Leopold’s use of the “key-log” metaphor (para. 48) move his essay
toward its conclusion?
12. Leopold wrote “The Land Ethic” over sixty years ago. To what extent do his ideas
apply to our current environmental situation?
5A famous Spanish palace. — Eds.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 914

6/18/12 3:13 PM

THOMAS • NATURAL MAN

915

Natural Man
Lewis Thomas
Lewis Thomas (1913–1993) was educated at Harvard Medical School and
worked as a medical researcher. He served as president and chancellor of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York and as professor of pathology and
medicine at Cornell University. Thomas published many scientific articles and
books, and in 1971 he began writing regularly for the New England Journal of
Medicine. His columns were collected in 1974 to form the best-selling book Lives
of a Cell, which won the American Book Award and includes the essay presented
here, “Natural Man.” Thomas’s other books include The Medusa and the Snail
(1979) and Late Night Thoughts on Listening to Mahler’s Ninth Symphony (1983).
In honor of his stellar prose style as well as his engaging ideas, the Lewis Thomas
prize is awarded annually by the Rockefeller University to a scientist for artistic
achievement. Thomas is widely known as one of the originators of the sciencebased personal essay.

T

he social scientists, especially the economists, are moving deeply into
ecology and the environment these days, with disquieting results. It goes
somehow against the grain to learn that cost-benefit analyses can be done neatly
on lakes, meadows, nesting gannets, and even whole oceans. It is hard enough to
confront the environmental options ahead, and the hard choices, but even harder
when the price tags are so visible. Even the new jargon is disturbing: it hurts the
spirit, somehow, to read the word “environments,” when the plural means that
there are so many alternatives there to be sorted through, as in a market, and
voted on. Economists need cool heads and cold hearts for this sort of work, and
they must write in icy, often skiddy, prose.
The degree to which we are all involved in the control of the earth’s life is just
beginning to dawn on most of us, and it means another revolution for human
thought.
This will not come easily. We’ve just made our way through inconclusive
revolutions on the same topic, trying to make up our minds how we feel about
nature. As soon as we arrived at one kind of consensus, like an enormous committee, we found it was time to think it through all over, and now here we are, at
it again.
The oldest, easiest to swallow idea was that the earth was man’s personal
property, a combination of garden, zoo, bank vault and energy source, placed at
our disposal to be consumed, ornamented or pulled apart as we wished. The betterment of mankind was, as we understood it, the whole point of the thing. Mastery over nature, mystery and all, was a moral duty and social obligation.
In the last few years we were wrenched away from this way of looking at it,
and arrived at something like general agreement that we had it wrong. We still

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 915

5

6/18/12 3:13 PM

916

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

argue the details, but it is conceded almost everywhere that we are not the masters
of nature that we thought ourselves; we are as dependent as the leaves or midges
or fish on the rest of life. We are part of the system. One way to put it is that the
earth is a loosely formed, spherical organism, with all its working parts linked in
symbiosis. We are, in this view, neither owners nor operators; at best, we might
see ourselves as motile tissue specialized for receiving information — perhaps, in
the best of all possible worlds, functioning as a nervous system for the whole
being.
There is, for some, too much dependency in this view, and they prefer to see
us as a separate, qualitatively different, special species, unlike any other form of
life, despite the sharing around of genes, enzymes and organelles. No matter,
there is still the underlying idea that we cannot have a life of our own without
concern for the ecosystem in which we live, whether in majesty or not. This idea
has been strong enough to launch the new movements for the sustenance of wilderness, the protection of wild life, the turning off of insatiable technologies, the
preservation of “whole earth.”
But now, just when the new view seems to be taking hold, we may be in for
another wrench, this time more dismaying and unsettling than anything we’ve
come through. In a sense, we will be obliged to swing back again, still believing in
the new way but constrained by the facts of life to live in the old. It may be too
late, as things have turned out.
We are, in fact, the masters, like it or not.
It is a despairing prospect. Here we are, practically speaking 21st-century
mankind, filled to exuberance with our new understanding of kinship to all the
family of life, and here we are, still 19th-century man, walking bootshod over the
open face of nature, subjugating and civilizing it. And we cannot stop this controlling, unless we vanish under the hill ourselves. If there were such a thing as a
world mind, it should crack over this.
The truth is, we have become more deeply involved than we ever dreamed.
The fact that we sit around as we do, worrying seriously about how best to preserve the life of the earth, is itself the sharpest measure of our involvement. It
is not human arrogance that has taken us in this direction, but the most natural
of natural events. We developed this way, we grew this way, we are this kind of
species.
We have become, in a painful, unwished-for way, nature itself. We have grown
into everywhere, spreading like a new growth over the entire surface, touching
and affecting every other kind of life, incorporating ourselves. The earth risks
being eutrophied by us. We are now the dominant feature of our own environment. Human beings, large terrestrial metazoans, fired by energy from microbial
symbionts lodged in their cells, instructed by tapes of nucleic acid stretching back
to the earliest live membranes, informed by neurons essentially the same as all the
other neurons on earth, sharing structures with mastodons and lichens, living off
the sun, are now in charge, running the place, for better or worse.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 916

10

6/18/12 3:13 PM

THOMAS • NATURAL MAN

917

Or is it really this way? It could be, you know, just the other way round. Perhaps we are the invaded ones, the subjugated, used.
Certain animals in the sea live by becoming part animal, part plant. They
engulf algae, which then establish themselves as complex plant tissues, essential
for the life of the whole company. I suppose the giant clam, if he had more of a
mind, would have moments of dismay on seeing what he has done to the plant
world, incorporating so much of it, enslaving green cells, living off the photosynthesis. But the plant cells would take a different view of it, having captured the
clam on the most satisfactory of terms, including the small lenses in his tissues
that focus sunlight for their benefit; perhaps algae have bad moments about what
they may collectively be doing to the world of clams.
With luck, our own situation might be similar, on a larger scale. This might
turn out to be a special phase in the morphogenesis of the earth when it is necessary to have something like us, for a time anyway, to fetch and carry energy, look
after new symbiotic arrangements, store up information for some future season,
do a certain amount of ornamenting, maybe even carry seeds around the solar
system. That kind of thing. Handyman for the earth.
I would much prefer this useful role, if I had any say, to the essentially
unearthly creature we seem otherwise on the way to becoming. It would mean
making some quite fundamental changes in our attitudes toward each other, if we
were really to think of ourselves as indispensable elements of nature. We would
surely become the environment to worry about the most. We would discover, in
ourselves, the sources of wonderment and delight that we have discerned in all
other manifestations of nature. Who knows, we might even acknowledge the fragility and vulnerability that always accompany high specialization in biology, and
movements might start up for the protection of ourselves as a valuable, endangered species. We couldn’t lose.

15

Exploring the Text
1. What is Lewis Thomas’s complaint in the first paragraph? What does he find
“disquieting”? Do you see evidence today of the trend that Thomas bemoans?
Do you find it disquieting, or do you have a different perspective? Explain your
response.
2. The first “Earth Day” celebration was on April 22, 1970, and it became international in 1990. Considering the increased environmental awareness we have experienced since the 1970s, have we achieved the “revolution for human thought”
(para. 2) that Thomas mentions?
3. What is Thomas’s attitude toward the preference he alludes to in paragraph 6?
4. Why does Thomas regard the recognition that we are masters as a “despairing
prospect” (para. 9)?
5. How many times does Thomas use the pronoun “we”? What is its effect?

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 917

6/18/12 3:13 PM

918

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

6. Do you agree with Thomas that “the earth risks being eutrophied” (para. 11)?
Explain your response.
7. Note the appositive for human beings that Thomas writes in paragraph 11. How
does such a characterization affect the reader? How does it affect Thomas’s argument?
8. What rhetorical relationship does paragraph 13 have with the preceding paragraph?
9. What are the implications of the analogy Thomas develops in paragraph 13? How
effectively does it serve his purpose? Explain your response.

from The End of Nature
Bill McKibben
Author of a dozen books about the environment, Bill McKibben (b. 1960) grew up
in Massachusetts and attended Harvard University, where he was president of the
Harvard Crimson newspaper. After college he joined the New Yorker, where he
was a staff writer until 1987. His first book, The End of Nature, was published in
1989 after being serialized in the New Yorker. It is regarded as the first book
about climate change for a general audience and has been printed in more than
twenty languages. Among McKibben’s other books are Long Distance: A Year of
Living Strenuously (2000), Enough (2003), and Wandering Home (2005). In
2010, he published another national best seller, Eaarth: Making a Life on a Tough
New Planet, an account of the rapid onset of climate change. It was excerpted in
Scientific American. Time magazine has called McKibben “the planet’s best green
journalist,” and the Boston Globe has said that he is “probably the country’s most
important environmentalist.” He is currently a scholar-in-residence at Middlebury
College in vermont. The excerpt included here is from the conclusion of The End of
Nature.

T

he inertia of affluence, the push of poverty, the soaring population —
these and the other reasons . . . make me pessimistic about the chances
that we will dramatically alter our ways of thinking and living, that we will turn
humble in the face of our troubles.
A purely personal effort is, of course, just a gesture — a good gesture, but a
gesture. The greenhouse effect is the first environmental problem we can’t escape
by moving to the woods. There are no personal solutions. There is no time to just
decide we’ll raise enlightened children and they’ll slowly change the world. (When
the problem was that someone might drop the Bomb, it perhaps made sense to
bear and raise sane, well-adjusted children in the hope that they’d help prevent
the Bomb from being dropped. But the problem now is precisely too many chil-

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 918

6/18/12 3:13 PM

McKIBBEN • THE END OF NATURE

919

dren, well adjusted or otherwise.) We have to be the ones to do it, and simply
driving less won’t matter, except as a statement, a way to get other people — many
other people — to drive less. Most people have to be persuaded, and persuaded
quickly, to change.
But saying that something is difficult is not the same as saying it is impossible.
After all, George Bush decided in the wake of the 1988 heat that he was an environmentalist. Margaret Thatcher, who in 1985 had linked environmental groups
with other “subversives” as “the enemy within,” found the religion at about the
same time, after the death of the North Sea seals and the odyssey of the Karin B,
the wandering toxic-waste barge. “Protecting the balance of nature,” she said, is
“one of the great challenges of the twentieth century.”
I’ve been using the analogy of slavery throughout this discussion: we feel it
our privilege (and we feel it a necessity) to dominate nature to our advantage, as
whites once dominated blacks. When one method of domination seems to be
ending — the reliance on fossil fuels, say — we cast about for another, like genetic
tinkering, much as Americans replaced slavery with Jim Crow segregation. However, in my lifetime that official segregation ended. Through their courage, men
and women like Martin Luther King and Fannie Lou Hamer managed to harness
the majority’s better qualities — idealism, love for one’s neighbor — to transform
the face of American society. Racism, it is true, remains virulent, but the majority of Americans have voted for legislators who passed laws — radical laws —
mandating affirmative action programs. Out of some higher motive (and, of
course, some base motives, such as the fear of black revolt), whites have sacrificed
at least a little potential wealth and power. It would be wrong to say categorically
that such a shift couldn’t happen with regard to the environment — that a mixture of fear and the love for nature buried in most of us couldn’t rise to the surface. Some small but significant steps have been taken. Los Angeles, for instance,
recently enacted a series of laws to improve air quality that will change at least the
edges of the lives of every resident. Los Angelenos will drive different cars, turn in
their gas-powered lawn mowers, start their barbecues without lighter fluid.
Most of my hope, however, fades in the face of the uniqueness of the situation. As we have seen, nature is already ending, its passing quiet and accidental.
And not only does its ending prevent us from returning to the world we previously knew, but it also, for two powerful reasons, makes any of the fundamental
changes we’ve discussed even more unlikely than they might be in easier times. If
the end of nature were still in the future, a preventable possibility, the equation
might be different. But it isn’t in the future — it’s in the recent past, and the
present.

5

Y
The end of nature is a plunge into the unknown, fearful as much because it is
unknown as because it might be hot or dry or whipped by hurricanes. This lack
of security is the first reason that fundamental change will be much harder, for

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 919

6/18/12 3:13 PM

920

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

the changes we’ve been discussing — the deep ecology alternative, for instance —
would make life even more unpredictable. One would have to begin to forgo the
traditional methods of securing one’s future — many children, many possessions,
and so on. Jeremy Rifkin, in his book on genetic engineering, said there was still
a chance we would choose to sacrifice “a measure of our own future security in
order to represent the interests of the rest of the cosmos. . . . If we have been saving that spirit up for a propitious moment, then certainly now is the time for it to
pour forth.”
But now isn’t the time — now, as the familiar world around us starts to
change, is the moment when every threatened instinct will push us to scramble to
preserve at least our familiar style of life. We can — and we may well — make the
adjustments necessary for our survival. For instance, much of the early work in
agricultural biotechnology has focused on inventing plants able to survive heat
and drought. It seems the sensible thing to do — the way to keep life as “normal”
as possible in the face of change. It leads, though, as I have said, to the second
death of nature: the imposition of our artificial world in place of the broken
natural one.
The rivers of the American Southwest, in particular the Colorado, provide a
perfect example of this phenomenon. Though Ed Abbey wrote about the entire
Southwest, the one spot he kept returning to, the navel of his universe, was Glen
Canyon dam. The dam, built a couple of decades ago near the Utah-Arizona line,
is just upstream of the Grand Canyon. It backs up the waters of the Colorado into
Lake Powell, a reservoir that rises and falls with the demand for hydroelectric
power. The water covers Glen Canyon, a place so sweet Abbey called it “paradise” — and the description of his raft trip through the gorge shortly before the
dam was finished makes the term sound weak, understated.
Since the degradation of this canyon stood in his mind for all human arrogance, its salvation would be the sign that man had turned the corner, begun the
long trek back toward his proper station. (Blowing up the dam is the great aim of
[Abbey’s] Monkey Wrench Gang.) If we decide to take out the dam, it would signal many things, among them that perhaps the desert should not house huge numbers of people — that some should move, and others take steps to ensure smaller
future generations. True, if we decide to take out the dam and the lake flowed away
toward Mexico, it would “no doubt expose a drear and hideous scene: immense
mud flats and whole plateaus of sodden garbage strewn with dead trees, sunken
boats, the skeletons of long-forgotten, decomposing waterskiers,” Abbey writes.
“But to those who find the prospect too appalling, I say give nature a little time.
In five years, at most in ten, the sun and wind and storms will cleanse and sterilize
the repellent mess. The inevitable floods will soon remove all that does not belong
within the canyons. Fresh green willow, box elder, and redbud will reappear; and
the ancient drowned cottonwoods (noble monuments to themselves) will be
replaced by young of their own kind. . . . Within a generation — thirty years — I
predict the river and canyons will bear a decent resemblance to their former
selves. Within the lifetime of our children Glen Canyon and the living river, heart

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 920

6/18/12 3:13 PM

McKIBBEN • THE END OF NATURE

921

of the canyonlands, will be restored to us. The wilderness will again belong to
God, the people, and the wild things that call it home.”
Such a vision is, of course, romantically unlikely under any circumstances.
But the new insecurity that accompanies the end of nature makes it even more
far-fetched. As we have seen, the projected increases in evaporation and decreases
in rainfall in the Colorado watershed could cut flows along the river nearly in half.
As a result, noted an EPA report, the reluctance in recent years to build big dams,
for fear of environmental opposition, “may be re-evaluated in light of possible
new demands for developed water under warm-dry climate change scenarios.”
Specifically, “climate change may create pressure to build the Animas-LaPlata and
Narrows projects proposed for Colorado.” In other words, where Abbey hoped
for box elder and redbud more dams will bloom. The authors of Gaia: An Atlas of
Planet Management are quite explicit about dam building. In a section on water
conservation they put forth a lot of good ideas for fixing leaky mains and such,
but they also sing the praises of damming rivers, a process that “can help satisfy a
number of needs at once: it helps control flooding, provides the potential for
generating hydropower, and stores water for a variety of purposes, including irrigation. The resulting reservoirs represent a multi-purpose resource, with potential for aquaculture and leisure activities.” A flood-washed paradise of cottonwood
or a “multi-purpose resource” — that is the choice, and it is not hard to guess, if
the heat is on, what the voters of Arizona will demand.
I got a glimpse of this particular future a few years ago when I spent some
time along the La Grande River, in sub-Arctic Quebec. It is barren land but
beautiful — a tundra of tiny ponds and hummocks stretching to the horizon, carpeted in light-green caribou moss. There are trees — almost all black spruce, and
all spindly, sparse. A number of Indians and Eskimos lived there — about the
number the area could support. Then, a decade or so ago, Hydro-Quebec, the
provincial utility, decided to exploit the power of the La Grande by building three
huge dams along the river’s 350-mile length. The largest, said the Hydro-Quebec
spokesman, is the size of fifty-four thousand two-story houses or sixty-seven billion peas. Its spillway could carry the combined flow of all the rivers of Europe,
and erecting it was a Bunyanesque task: eighteen thousand men carved the roads
north through the tundra and poured the concrete. (Photos show the cooks stirring spaghetti sauce with canoe paddles.) On the one hand, this is a perfect
example of “environmentally sound” energy generation; it produces an enormous
amount of power without giving off so much as a whiff of any greenhouse gas.
This is the sort of structure we’ll be clamoring to build as the warming progresses.
But environmentally sound is not the same as natural. The dams have altered
an area larger than Switzerland — the flow of the Caniapiscau River, for instance,
has been partly reversed to provide more water for the turbines. In September
1984, at least ten thousand caribou drowned trying to cross the river during their
annual migration. They were crossing at their usual spot, but the river was not its
usual size; it was so swollen that many of the animals were swept forty-five miles
downstream. Every good argument — the argument that fossil fuels cause the

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 921

10

6/18/12 3:13 PM

922

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

greenhouse effect; the argument that in a drier, hotter world we’ll need more
water; the argument that as our margin of security dwindles we must act to
restore it — will lead us to more La Grande projects, more dams on the Colorado,
more “management.” Every argument — that the warmer weather and increased
ultraviolet is killing plants and causing cancer; that the new weather is causing
food shortages — will have us looking to genetic engineering for salvation. And
with each such step we will move farther from nature.

Y
At the same time — and this is the second kicker — the only real counterargument, the argument for an independent, eternal, ever-sweet nature, will grow ever
fainter and harder to make. Why? Because nature, independent nature, is already
ending. Fighting for it is like fighting for an independent Latvia except that it’s
harder, since the end of nature may be permanent. Take out Glen Canyon dam
and let the Colorado run free, let the “inevitable floods” wash away the debris?
But floods may be a thing of the past on the Colorado; the river may, in effect, be
dammed at the source — in the clouds that no longer dump their freight on its
upper reaches, and in the heat that evaporates the water that does fall.
If nature were about to end, we might muster endless energy to stave it off;
but if nature has already ended, what are we fighting for? Before any redwoods
had been cloned or genetically improved, one could understand clearly what the
fight against such tinkering was about. It was about the idea that a redwood was
somehow sacred, that its fundamental identity should remain beyond our control. But once that barrier has been broken, what is the fight about then? It’s not
like opposing nuclear reactors or toxic waste dumps, each one of which poses
new risks to new areas. This damage is to an idea, the idea of nature, and all the
ideas that descend from it. It is not cumulative. Wendell Berry once argued that
without a “fascination” with the wonder of the natural world “the energy needed
for its preservation will never be developed” — that “there must be a mystique of
the rain if we are ever to restore the purity of the rainfall.” This makes sense when
the problem is transitory — sulfur from a smokestack drifting over the Adirondacks. But how can there be a mystique of the rain now that every drop — even
the drops that fall as snow on the Arctic, even the drops that fall deep in the
remaining forest primeval — bears the permanent stamp of man? Having lost its
separateness, it loses its special power. Instead of being a category like God —
something beyond our control — it is now a category like the defense budget or
the minimum wage, a problem we must work out. This in itself changes its meaning completely, and changes our reaction to it.
A few weeks ago, on the hill behind my house, I almost kicked the biggest
rabbit I had ever seen. She had nearly finished turning white for the winter, and
we stood there watching each other for a pleasant while, two creatures linked by
curiosity. What will it mean to come across a rabbit in the woods once genetically
engineered “rabbits” are widespread? Why would we have any more reverence or
affection for such a rabbit than we would for a Coke bottle?

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 922

15

6/18/12 3:13 PM

McKIBBEN • THE END OF NATURE

923

The end of nature probably also makes us reluctant to attach ourselves to its
remnants, for the same reason that we usually don’t choose friends from among
the terminally ill. I love the mountain outside my back door — the stream that
runs along its flank, and the smaller stream that slides down a quarter-mile mossy
chute, and the place where the slope flattens into an open plain of birch and oak.
But I know that some part of me resists getting to know it better — for fear, weakkneed as it sounds, of getting hurt. If I knew as well as a forester what sick trees
looked like, I fear I would see them everywhere. I find now that I like the woods
best in winter, when it is harder to tell what might be dying. The winter woods
might be perfectly healthy come spring, just as the sick friend, when she’s sleeping
peacefully, might wake up without the wheeze in her lungs.
Writing on a different subject, the bonds between men and women, Allan
Bloom describes the difficulty of maintaining a committed relationship in an age
when divorce — the end of that relationship — is so widely accepted: “The possibility of separation is already the fact of separation, inasmuch as people today must plan to be whole and self-sufficient and cannot risk interdependence.”
Instead of working to strengthen our attachments, our energies “are exhausted in
preparation for independence.” How much more so if that possible separation is
definite, if that hurt and confusion is certain. I love winter best now, but I try not
to love it too much, for fear of the January perhaps not so distant when the snow
will fall as warm rain. There is no future in loving nature.
And there may not even be much past. Though Thoreau’s writings grew in
value and importance the closer we drew to the end of nature, the time fast
approaches when he will be inexplicable, his notions less sensible to future men
than the cave paintings are to us. Thoreau writes, on his climb up Katahdin, that
the mountain “was vast, Titanic, and such as man never inhabits. Some part of
the beholder, even some vital part, seems to escape through the loose grating of
his ribs. . . . Nature has got him at a disadvantage, caught him alone, and pilfers
him of some of his divine faculty. She does not smile on him as in the plains. She
seems to say sternly, why came ye here before your time? This ground is not
prepared for you.” This sentiment describes perfectly the last stage of the relationship of man to nature — though we had subdued her in the low places, the peaks,
the poles, the jungles still rang with her pure message. But what sense will this
passage make in the years to come, when Katahdin, the “cloud factory,” is ringed
by clouds of man’s own making? When the massive pines that ring its base have
been genetically improved for straightness of trunk and “proper branch drop,” or,
more likely, have sprung from the cones of genetically improved trees that began
a few miles and a few generations distant on some timber plantation? When the
moose that ambles by is part of a herd whose rancher is committed to the enlightened, Gaian notion that “conservation and profit go hand in hand”?
Thoreau describes an afternoon of fishing at the mouth of Murch Brook, a
dozen miles from the summit of Katahdin. Speckled trout “swallowed the bait as
fast as we could throw in; and the finest specimens . . . that I have ever seen, the
largest one weighing three pounds, were heaved upon the shore.” He stood there

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 923

6/18/12 3:13 PM

924

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

to catch them as “they fell in a perfect shower” around him. “While yet alive,
before their tints had faded, they glistened like the fairest flowers, the product of
primitive rivers; and he could hardly trust his senses, as he stood over them, that
these jewels should have swam away in that Aboljacknagesic water for so long,
some many dark ages — these bright fluviatile flowers, seen of Indians only, made
beautiful, the Lord only knows why, to swim there!” But through biotechnology
we have already synthesized growth hormone for trout. Soon pulling them from
the water will mean no more than pulling cars from an assembly line. We won’t
have to wonder why the Lord made them beautiful and put them there; we will
have created them to increase protein supplies or fish-farm profits. If we want to
make them pretty, we may. Soon Thoreau will make no sense. And when that
happens, the end of nature — which began with our alteration of the atmosphere,
and continued with the responses to our precarious situation of the “planetary
managers” and the “genetic engineers” — will be final. The loss of memory will be
the eternal loss of meaning.

Y
In the end, I understand perfectly well that defiance may mean prosperity and a
sort of security — that more dams will help the people of Phoenix, and that
genetic engineering will help the sick, and that there is so much progress that can
still be made against human misery. And I have no great desire to limit my way of
life. If I thought we could put off the decision, foist it on our grandchildren, I’d
be willing. As it is, I have no plans to live in a cave, or even an unheated cabin. If
it took ten thousand years to get where we are, it will take a few generations to
climb back down. But this could be the epoch when people decide at least to go
no farther down the path we’ve been following — when we make not only the
necessary technological adjustments to preserve the world from overheating but
also the necessary mental adjustments to ensure that we’ll never again put our
good ahead of everything else’s. This is the path I choose, for it offers at least a
shred of hope for a living, eternal, meaningful world.
The reasons for my choice are as numerous as the trees on the hill outside
my window, but they crystallized in my mind when I read a passage from one
of the brave optimists of our managed future. “The existential philosophers —
particularly Sartre — used to lament that man lacked an essential purpose,” writes
Walter Truett Anderson. “We find now that the human predicament is not quite
so devoid of inherent purpose after all. To be caretakers of a planet, custodians
of all its life forms and shapers of its (and our own) future is certainly purpose
enough.” This intended rallying cry depresses me more deeply than I can say.
That is our destiny? To be “caretakers” of a managed world, “custodians” of all
life? For that job security we will trade the mystery of the natural world, the pungent mystery of our own lives and of a world bursting with exuberant creation?
Much better, Sartre’s neutral purposelessness. But much better than that, another
vision, of man actually living up to his potential.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 924

20

6/18/12 3:13 PM

McKIBBEN • THE END OF NATURE

925

As birds have flight, our special gift is reason. Part of that reason drives the
intelligence that allows us, say, to figure out and master DNA, or to build big
power plants. But our reason could also keep us from following blindly the biological imperatives toward endless growth in numbers and territory. Our reason
allows us to conceive of our species as a species, and to recognize the danger that
our growth poses to it, and to feel something for the other species we threaten.
Should we so choose, we could exercise our reason to do what no other animal
can do: we could limit ourselves voluntarily, choose to remain God’s creatures
instead of making ourselves gods. What a towering achievement that would be, so
much more impressive than the largest dam (beavers can build dams) because so
much harder. Such restraint — not genetic engineering or planetary management —
is the real challenge, the hard thing. Of course we can splice genes. But can we not
splice genes?
The momentum behind our impulse to control nature may be too strong to
stop. But the likelihood of defeat is not an excuse to avoid trying. In one sense it’s
an aesthetic choice we face, much like Thoreau’s, though what is at stake is less the
shape of our lives than the very practical question of the lives of all the other species and the creation they together constitute. But it is, of course, for our benefit,
too. Jeffers wrote, “Integrity is wholeness, the greatest beauty is / organic wholeness of life and things, the divine beauty of the universe. Love that, not man /
Apart from that, or else you will share man’s pitiful confusions, or drown in
despair when his days darken.” The day has come when we choose between that
wholeness and man in it or man apart, between that old clarity or new darkness.
The strongest reason for choosing man apart is, as I have said, the idea that
nature has ended. And I think it has. But I cannot stand the clanging finality of
the argument I’ve made, any more than people have ever been able to stand the
clanging finality of their own deaths. So I hope against hope. Though not in our
time, and not in the time of our children, or their children, if we now, today, limited our numbers and our desires and our ambitions, perhaps nature could
someday resume its independent working. Perhaps the temperature could someday adjust itself to its own setting, and the rain fall of its own accord.
Time, as I said at the start of this essay, is elusive, odd. Perhaps the ten thousand years of our encroaching, defiant civilization, an eternity to us and a yawn
to the rocks around us, could give way to ten thousand years of humble civilization when we choose to pay more for the benefits of nature, when we rebuild the
sense of wonder and sanctity that could protect the natural world. At the end of
that span we would still be so young, and perhaps ready to revel in the timelessness that surrounds us. I said, much earlier, that one of the possible meanings of
the end of nature is that God is dead. But another, if there was or is any such thing
as God, is that he has granted us free will and now looks on, with great concern
and love, to see how we exercise it: to see if we take the chance offered by this
crisis to bow down and humble ourselves, or if we compound original sin with
terminal sin.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 925

25

6/18/12 3:13 PM

926

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

Y
And if what I fear indeed happens? If the next twenty years sees us pump ever
more gas into the sky, and if it sees us take irrevocable steps into the genetically
engineered future, what solace then? The only ones in need of consolation will be
those of us who were born in the transitional decades, too early to adapt completely to a brave new ethos.
I’ve never paid more than the usual attention to the night sky, perhaps
because I grew up around cities, on suburban blocks lined with streetlights. But
last August, on a warm Thursday afternoon, my wife and I hauled sleeping bags
high into the mountains and laid them out on a rocky summit and waited for
night to fall and the annual Perseid meteor shower to begin. After midnight, it
finally started in earnest — every minute, every thirty seconds, another spear of
light shot across some corner of the sky, so fast that unless you were looking right
at it you had only the sense of a flash. Our bed was literally rock-hard, and when,
toward dawn, an unforecast rain soaked our tentless clearing, it was cold — but
the night was glorious, and I’ve since gotten a telescope. When, in Paradise Lost,
Adam asks about the movements of the heavens, Raphael refuses to answer. “Let
it speak,” he says, “the Maker’s high magnificence, who built / so spacious, and his
line stretcht out so far; / That man may know he dwells not in his own; / An edifice too large for him to fill, / Lodg’d in a small partition, and the rest / Ordain’d
for uses to his Lord best known.” We may be creating microscopic nature; we may
have altered the middle nature all around us; but this vast nature above our atmosphere still holds mystery and wonder. The occasional satellite does blip across,
but it is almost a self-parody. Someday, man may figure out a method of conquering the stars, but at least for now when we look into the night sky, it is as
Burroughs1 said: “We do not see ourselves reflected there — we are swept away
from ourselves, and impressed with our own insignificance.”
As I lay on the mountaintop that August night I tried to pick out the few
constellations I could identify — Orion’s Belt, the Dippers. The ancients, surrounded by wild and even hostile nature, took comfort in seeing the familiar
above them — spoons and swords and nets. But we will need to train ourselves
not to see those patterns. The comfort we need is inhuman.

Exploring the Text
1. At the beginning of the first section, Bill McKibben confesses that he is pessimistic. How does such a remark affect your reading of the selection?
2. He says in paragraph 5 that there are two reasons for pessimism. What are they?
Paraphrase each. Do you agree? Explain why or why not.
3. What does McKibben mean by “the second death of nature” (para. 7)?
1John Burroughs (1837–1921), Amerian naturalist and nature writer. — Eds.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 926

6/18/12 3:13 PM

WILLIAMS • THE CLAN OF ONE-BREASTED WOMEN

927

4. What is significant about the quotation marks around such words and phrases as
“multi-purpose resource” (para. 10), “environmentally sound” (para. 11), “management” (para. 12), “conservation and profit go hand in hand” (para. 18), and
“planetary managers” and “genetic engineers” (para. 19)?
5. In paragraph 12, McKibben delineates where “[e]very good argument” will lead
us. Do you think each of the arguments that McKibben presents is “good,” as he
states? Do you think that the public at large would agree? Explain why or why not.
6. What is the nature of the argument McKibben advances in paragraph 14? Explain
it according to the Toulmin model (see Chapter 3).
7. Identify the analogies McKibben develops in paragraphs 16 and 17. How effectively do they contribute to his position?
8. Do you think that the choice McKibben discusses in paragraph 22 is a likely one
for humanity to take? Why or why not? Does McKibben think it likely? Explain.
9. McKibben confesses that perhaps there is room for hope if we take action now,
casting today in italics (para. 24) in 1989. He then writes, “And if what I fear indeed
happens? If the next twenty years sees us pump ever more gas into the sky, and if
it sees us take irrevocable steps into the genetically engineered future, what solace
then?” (para. 26). We now know what those twenty years (and more) have seen.
Do you think that we can still “hope against hope,” as McKibben puts it? Explain.
10. What is the “brave new ethos” (para. 26) that McKibben suggests has arrived?
11. Why is our environmental problem unique when compared to the threats posed
by the human cruelty associated with slavery or atomic warfare? Do you agree
with McKibben that nature has ended? Why or why not?

The Clan of One-Breasted Women
Terry Tempest Williams
Terry Tempest Williams was born in Nevada in 1955. She studied at the University
of Utah, where she became a professor of English. She has also been naturalist-inresidence at the Utah Museum of Natural History. Williams’s work has appeared
in the New Yorker, Orion, the New York Times, the Nation, and The Best American
Essays (2000). Williams has won a Guggenheim Fellowship and a Lannan Literary
Fellowship. Among her books are the essay collections An Unspoken Hunger:
Stories from the Field (1995), Finding Beauty in a Broken World (2008), and Refuge: An Unnatural History of Family and Place (1989), from which the following
selection is taken. The essay is based on her family’s experience in Utah, where
she lives and writes on social and environmental issues.

I

belong to a Clan of One-breasted Women. My mother, my grandmothers,
and six aunts have all had mastectomies. Seven are dead. The two who
survive have just completed rounds of chemotherapy and radiation.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 927

6/18/12 3:13 PM

928

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

I’ve had my own problems: two biopsies for breast cancer and a small tumor
between my ribs diagnosed as “a border-line malignancy.”
This is my family history.
Most statistics tell us breast cancer is genetic, hereditary, with rising percentages attached to fatty diets, childlessness, or becoming pregnant after thirty. What
they don’t say is living in Utah may be the greatest hazard of all.
We are a Mormon family with roots in Utah since 1847. The word-of-wisdom,
a religious doctrine of health, kept the women in my family aligned with good
foods: no coffee, no tea, tobacco, or alcohol. For the most part, these women were
finished having their babies by the time they were thirty. And only one faced
breast cancer prior to 1960. Traditionally, as a group of people, Mormons have a
low rate of cancer.
Is our family a cultural anomaly? The truth is we didn’t think about it. Those
who did, usually the men, simply said, “bad genes.” The women’s attitude was
stoic. Cancer was part of life. On February 16, 1971, the eve before my mother’s
surgery, I accidently picked up the telephone and overheard her ask my grandmother what she could expect.
“Diane, it is one of the most spiritual experiences you will ever encounter.”
I quietly put down the receiver.
Two days later, my father took my three brothers and me to the hospital to
visit her. She met us in the lobby in a wheelchair. No bandages were visible. I’ll
never forget her radiance, the way she held herself in a purple velour robe and
how she gathered us around her.
“Children, I am fine. I want you to know I felt the arms of God around me.”
We believed her. My father cried. Our mother, his wife, was thirty-eight years old.
Two years ago, after my mother’s death from cancer, my father and I were
having dinner together. He had just returned from St. George where his construction company was putting in natural gas lines for towns in southern Utah. He
spoke of his love for the country: the sandstoned landscape, bare-boned and
beautiful. He had just finished hiking the Kolob trail in Zion National Park. We
got caught up in reminiscing, recalling with fondness our walk up Angel’s Landing on his fiftieth birthday and the years our family had vacationed there. This
was a remembered landscape where we had been raised.
Over dessert, I shared a recurring dream of mine. I told my father that for
years, as long as I could remember, I saw this flash of light in the night in the
desert. That this image had so permeated my being, I could not venture south
without seeing it again, on the horizon, illuminating buttes and mesas.
“You did see it,” he said.
“Saw what?” I asked, a bit tentative.
“The bomb. The cloud. We were driving home from Riverside, California.
You were sitting on your mother’s lap. She was pregnant. In fact, I remember the
date, September 7, 1957. We had just gotten out of the Service. We were driving
north, past Las Vegas. It was an hour or so before dawn, when this explosion went

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 928

5

10

15

6/18/12 3:13 PM

WILLIAMS • THE CLAN OF ONE-BREASTED WOMEN

929

off. We not only heard it, but felt it. I thought the oil tanker in front of us had
blown up. We pulled over and suddenly, rising from the desert floor, we saw it,
clearly, this golden-stemmed cloud, the mushroom. The sky seemed to vibrate
with an eerie pink glow. Within a few minutes, a light ash was raining on the car.”
I stared at my father. This was new information to me.
“I thought you knew that,” my father said. “It was a common occurrence in
the fifties.”
It was at this moment I realized the deceit I had been living under. Children
growing up in the American Southwest, drinking contaminated milk from contaminated cows, even from the contaminated breasts of their mother, my
mother — members, years later, of the Clan of One-breasted Women.

Y
It is a well-known story in the Desert West, “The Day We Bombed Utah,” or perhaps, “The Years We Bombed Utah.”1 Above ground atomic testing in Nevada
took place from January 27, 1951, through July 11, 1962. Not only were the winds
blowing north, covering “low use segments of the population” with fallout and
leaving sheep dead in their tracks, but the climate was right. The United States of
the 1950s was red, white, and blue. The Korean War was raging. McCarthyism
was rampant. Ike was it and the Cold War was hot. If you were against nuclear
testing, you were for a Communist regime.
Much has been written about this “American nuclear tragedy.” Public health
was secondary to national security. The Atomic Energy Commissioner, Thomas
Murray said, “Gentlemen, we must not let anything interfere with this series of
tests, nothing.”2
Again and again, the American public was told by its government, in spite of
burns, blisters, and nausea, “It has been found that the tests may be conducted with
adequate assurance of safety under conditions prevailing at the bombing reservations.”3 Assuaging public fears was simply a matter of public relations. “Your best
action,” an Atomic Energy Commission booklet read, “is not to be worried about
fallout.” A news release typical of the times stated, “We find no basis for concluding that harm to any individual has resulted from radioactive fallout.”4
On August 30, 1979, during Jimmy Carter’s presidency, a suit was filed
entitled “Irene Allen vs. the United States of America.” Mrs. Allen was the first to
be alphabetically listed with twenty-four test cases, representative of nearly 1200
plaintiffs seeking compensation from the United States government for cancers
caused from nuclear testing in Nevada.

20

1

Fuller, John G., The Day We Bombed Utah (New York: New American Library, 1984).
Szasz, Ferenc M., “Downwind from the Bomb,” Nevada Historical Society Quarterly, Fall 1987,
Vol. XXX, No. 3, p. 185.
3Fradkin, Philip L., Fallout (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1989), 98.
4Ibid., 109.
2

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 929

6/18/12 3:13 PM

930

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

Irene Allen lived in Hurricane, Utah. She was the mother of five children and
had been widowed twice. Her first husband with their two oldest boys had
watched the tests from the roof of the local high school. He died of leukemia in
1956. Her second husband died of pancreatic cancer in 1978.
In a town meeting conducted by Utah Senator Orrin Hatch, shortly before
the suit was filed, Mrs. Allen said, “I am not blaming the government, I want you
to know that, Senator Hatch. But I thought if my testimony could help in any way
so this wouldn’t happen again to any of the generations coming up after us . . .
I am really happy to be here this day to bear testimony of this.”5
God-fearing people. This is just one story in an anthology of thousands.
On May 10, 1984, Judge Bruce S. Jenkins handed down his opinion. Ten of
the plaintiffs were awarded damages. It was the first time a federal court had
determined that nuclear tests had been the cause of cancers. For the remaining fourteen test cases, the proof of causation was not sufficient. In spite of the
split decision, it was considered a landmark ruling.6 It was not to remain so
for long.
In April, 1987, the 10th Circuit Court of Appeals overturned Judge Jenkins’
ruling on the basis that the United States was protected from suit by the legal
doctrine of sovereign immunity, the centuries-old idea from England in the days
of absolute monarchs.7
In January, 1988, the Supreme Court refused to review the Appeals Court
decision. To our court system, it does not matter whether the United States Government was irresponsible, whether it lied to its citizens or even that citizens died
from the fallout of nuclear testing. What matters is that our government is
immune. “The King can do no wrong.”

25

Y
In Mormon culture, authority is respected, obedience is revered, and independent thinking is not. I was taught as a young girl not to “make waves” or “rock
the boat.”
“Just let it go —” my mother would say. “You know how you feel, that’s what
counts.”
For many years, I did just that — listened, observed, and quietly formed my
own opinions within a culture that rarely asked questions because they had all the
answers. But one by one, I watched the women in my family die common, heroic
deaths. We sat in waiting rooms hoping for good news, always receiving the bad.
I cared for them, bathed their scarred bodies and kept their secrets. I watched
beautiful women become bald as cytoxan, cisplatin and adriamycin were injected

30

5

Town meeting held by Senator Orrin Hatch in St. George, Utah, April 17, 1979, transcript,
26–28.
6Fradkin, op. cit., 228.
7U.S. vs. Allen, 816 Federal Reporter, 2d/1417 (10th Circuit Court 1987), cert. denied, 108 S. Ct.
694 (1988).

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 930

6/18/12 3:13 PM

WILLIAMS • THE CLAN OF ONE-BREASTED WOMEN

931

into their veins. I held their foreheads as they vomited green-black bile and I shot
them with morphine when the pain became inhuman. In the end, I witnessed
their last peaceful breaths, becoming a midwife to the rebirth of their souls. But
the price of obedience became too high.
The fear and inability to question authority that ultimately killed rural communities in Utah during atmospheric testing of atomic weapons was the same
fear I saw being held in my mother’s body. Sheep. Dead sheep. The evidence is
buried.
I cannot prove that my mother, Diane Dixon Tempest, or my grandmothers,
Lettie Romney Dixon and Kathryn Blackett Tempest, along with my aunts contracted cancer from nuclear fallout in Utah. But I can’t prove they didn’t.
My father’s memory was correct, the September blast we drove through in
1957 was part of Operation Plumbbob, one of the most intensive series of bomb
tests to be initiated. The flash of light in the night in the desert I had always thought
was a dream developed into a family nightmare. It took fourteen years, from
1957 to 1971, for cancer to show up in my mother — the same time, Howard L.
Andrews, an authority on radioactive fallout at the National Institutes of Health,
says radiation cancer requires to become evident.8 The more I learn about what it
means to be a “downwinder,” the more questions I drown in.
What I do know, however, is that as a Mormon woman of the fifth generation
of “Latter-Day-Saints,” I must question everything, even if it means losing my
faith, even if it means becoming a member of a border tribe among my own
people. Tolerating blind obedience in the name of patriotism or religion ultimately takes our lives.
When the Atomic Energy Commission described the country north of the
Nevada Test Site as “virtually uninhabited desert terrain,” my family members
were some of the “virtual uninhabitants.”

35

Y
One night, I dreamed women from all over the world were circling a blazing fire
in the desert. They spoke of change, of how they hold the moon in their bellies
and wax and wane with its phases. They mocked at the presumption of even-tempered beings and made promises that they would never fear the witch inside
themselves. The women danced wildly as sparks broke away from the flames and
entered the night sky as stars.
And they sang a song given to them by Shoshoni grandmothers:
Ah ne nah, nah
nin nah nah —
Ah ne nah, nah
nin nah nah —
Nyaga mutzi
8Fradkin, op. cit., 116.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 931

6/18/12 3:13 PM

932

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

oh ne nay —
Nyaga mutzi
oh ne nay —9

The women danced and drummed and sang for weeks, preparing themselves
for what was to come. They would reclaim the desert for the sake of their children, for the sake of the land.
A few miles downwind from the fire circle, bombs were being tested. Rabbits
felt the tremors. Their soft leather pads on paws and feet recognized the shaking
sands while the roots of mesquite and sage were smoldering. Rocks were hot from
the inside out and dust devils hummed unnaturally. And each time there was
another nuclear test, ravens watched the desert heave. Stretch marks appeared.
The land was losing its muscle.
The women couldn’t bear it any longer. They were mothers. They had suffered labor pains but always under the promise of birth. The red hot pains beneath
the desert promised death only as each bomb became a stillborn. A contract had
been broken between human beings and the land. A new contract was being
drawn by the women who understood the fate of the earth as their own.
Under the cover of darkness, ten women slipped under the barbed wire fence
and entered the contaminated country. They were trespassing. They walked
toward the town of Mercury in moonlight, taking their cues from coyote, kit fox,
antelope squirrel, and quail. They moved quietly and deliberately through the
maze of Joshua trees. When a hint of daylight appeared they rested, drinking tea
and sharing their rations of food. The women closed their eyes. The time had
come to protest with the heart, that to deny one’s genealogy with the earth was to
commit treason against one’s soul.
At dawn, the women draped themselves in mylar, wrapping long streamers of
silver plastic around their arms to blow in the breeze. They wore clear masks that
became the faces of humanity. And when they arrived on the edge of Mercury,
they carried all the butterflies of a summer day in their wombs. They paused to
allow their courage to settle.
The town which forbids pregnant women and children to enter because of
radiation risks to their health was asleep. The women moved through the streets
as winged messengers, twirling around each other in slow motion, peeking inside
homes and watching the easy sleep of men and women. They were astonished
by such stillness and periodically would utter a shrill note or low cry just to verify life.

40

45

9

This song was sung by the Western Shoshone women as they crossed the line at the Nevada
Test Site on March 18, 1988, as part of their “Reclaim the Land” action. The translation they
gave was: “Consider the rabbits how gently they walk on the earth. Consider the rabbits how
gently they walk on the earth. We remember them. We can walk gently also. We remember
them. We can walk gently also.”

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 932

6/18/12 3:13 PM

WILLIAMS • THE CLAN OF ONE-BREASTED WOMEN

933

The residents finally awoke to what appeared as strange apparitions. Some
simply stared. Others called authorities, and in time, the women were apprehended by wary soldiers dressed in desert fatigues. They were taken to a white,
square building on the other edge of Mercury. When asked who they were and
why they were there, the women replied, “We are mothers and we have come to
reclaim the desert for our children.”
The soldiers arrested them. As the ten women were blindfolded and handcuffed, they began singing:
You can’t forbid us everything
You can’t forbid us to think —
You can’t forbid our tears to flow
And you can’t stop the songs that we sing.

The women continued to sing louder and louder, until they heard the voices
of their sisters moving across the mesa.
Ah ne nah, nah
nin nah nah —
Ah ne nah, nah
nin nah nah —
Nyaga mutzi
oh ne nay —
Nyaga mutzi
oh ne nay —

“Call for re-enforcement,” one soldier said.
“We have,” interrupted one woman. “We have — and you have no idea of our
numbers.”
On March 18, 1988, I crossed the line at the Nevada Test Site and was arrested
with nine other Utahns for trespassing on military lands. They are still conducting nuclear tests in the desert. Ours was an act of civil disobedience. But as I
walked toward the town of Mercury, it was more than a gesture of peace. It was a
gesture on behalf of the Clan of One-breasted Women.
As one officer cinched the handcuffs around my wrists, another frisked my
body. She found a pen and a pad of paper tucked inside my left boot.
“And these?” she asked sternly.
“Weapons,” I replied.
Our eyes met. I smiled. She pulled the leg of my trousers back over my boot.
“Step forward, please,” she said as she took my arm.
We were booked under an afternoon sun and bused to Tonapah, Nevada. It
was a two-hour ride. This was familiar country to me. The Joshua trees standing
their ground had been named by my ancestors who believed they looked like
prophets pointing west to the promised land. These were the same trees that

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 933

50

55

6/18/12 3:13 PM

934

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

bloomed each spring, flowers appearing like white flames in the Mojave. And I
recalled a full moon in May when my mother and I had walked among them,
flushing out mourning doves and owls.
The bus stopped short of town. We were released. The officials thought it was
a cruel joke to leave us stranded in the desert with no way to get home. What they
didn’t realize is that we were home, soul-centered and strong, women who recognized the sweet smell of sage as fuel for our spirits.

Exploring the Text
1. The first section of the essay (paras. 1–19) begins and ends with a reference to the
title. Why do you think Terry Tempest Williams frames this section this way?
How does it affect the tone?
2. Williams claims that “[t]raditionally, as a group of people, Mormons have a low
rate of cancer” (para. 5). What are some of the possible reasons for this?
3. Research the story that a group of women warriors called the Amazons each
slashed off one breast to get better leverage when using bow and arrow. How
effectively does Williams use the reference to this legend?
4. What is the effect of repeating the word contaminated three times in paragraph 19?
5. At paragraph 20, why does Williams interrupt the story of her own family’s illness to begin to tell the story of Irene Allen and her family?
6. Williams says in paragraph 22, “Assuaging public fears was simply a matter of
public relations” by the government. What does she mean? Is she being ironic, or
is she giving a matter-of-fact description of public policy at the time? Explain
your response.
7. Why does Williams put a section break between paragraphs 29 and 30? Why is
there no smooth transition from the Supreme Court case to Mormon culture?
8. How does footnote 9 differ from the others?
9. What is the effect of the footnotes Williams includes and of the reference to the
National Institutes of Health in paragraph 35?
10. In paragraph 43, Williams writes, “The time had come to protest with the heart,
that to deny one’s genealogy with the earth was to commit treason against one’s
soul.” What underlying assumption connects her support to this claim?
11. In paragraphs 43 and 58, how does Williams give the impression of a spiritual
presence in nature?
12. What is the rhetorical effect of shifting among narration, exposition, and argument in this essay?

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 934

6/18/12 3:13 PM

WILLIAMS • SAvE THE WHALES, SCREW THE SHRIMp

935

Save the Whales, Screw the Shrimp
Joy Williams
Joy Williams was born in Chelmsford, Massachusetts, in 1944 and presently lives
in Key West, Florida, and Tucson, Arizona. She received a BA from Marietta College and an MFA from the University of Iowa. She has taught creative writing at the
University of Houston, the University of Florida, the University of Iowa, the University
of Arizona, and the University of Wyoming. Williams is the author of four novels.
Her first, State of Grace (1973), was nominated for a National Book Award for
Fiction. Her most recent novel, The Quick and the Dead (2000), was a finalist for
the pulitzer prize for Fiction. She has also written works of nonfiction, including The
Florida Keys: A History & Guide, illustrated by Robert Carawan (2003). “Save the
Whales, Screw the Shrimp” is from the essay collection Ill Nature: Rants and
Reflections on Humanity and Other Animals (2001), a finalist for the National
Book Critics Circle Award for Criticism.

I

don’t want to talk about me, of course, but it seems as though far too
much attention has been lavished on you lately — that your greed and
vanities and quest for self-fulfillment have been catered to far too much. You just
want and want and want. You believe in yourself excessively. You don’t believe in
Nature anymore. It’s too isolated from you. You’ve abstracted it. It’s so messy and
damaged and sad. Your eyes glaze as you travel life’s highway past all the crushed
animals and the Big Gulp cups. You don’t even take pleasure in looking at nature
photographs these days. Oh, they can be just as pretty as always, but don’t they
make you feel increasingly . . . anxious? Filled with more trepidation than peace?
So what’s the point? You see the picture of the baby condor or the panda munching on a bamboo shoot, and your heart just sinks, doesn’t it? A picture of a poor
old sea turtle with barnacles on her back, all ancient and exhausted, depositing
her five gallons of doomed eggs in the sand hardly fills you with joy, because you
realize, quite rightly, that just outside the frame falls the shadow of the condo.
What’s cropped from the shot of ocean waves crashing on a pristine shore is the
plastics plant, and just beyond the dunes lies a parking lot. Hidden from immediate view in the butterfly-bright meadow, in the dusky thicket, in the oak and holly
wood, are the surveyors’ stakes, for someone wants to build a mall exactly there —
some gas stations and supermarkets, some pizza and video shops, a health club,
maybe a bulimia treatment center. Those lovely pictures of leopards and herons
and wild rivers — well, you just know they’re going to be accompanied by a text
that will serve only to bring you down. You don’t want to think about it! It’s all so
uncool. And you don’t want to feel guilty either. Guilt is uncool. Regret maybe
you’ll consider. Maybe. Regret is a possibility, but don’t push me, you say. Nature
photographs have become something of a problem, along with almost everything
else. Even though they leave the bad stuff out — maybe because you know they’re

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 935

6/18/12 3:13 PM

936

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

leaving all the bad stuff out — such pictures are making you increasingly aware
that you’re a little too late for Nature. Do you feel that? Twenty years too late?
Well, it appears that you are. And since you are, you’ve decided you’re just not
going to attend this particular party.

Y
Pascal said that it is easier to endure death without thinking about it than to
endure the thought of death without dying. This is how you manage to dance the
strange dance with that grim partner, nuclear annihilation. When the U.S. Army
notified Winston Churchill that the first A-bomb had been detonated in New
Mexico, it chose the code phrase BABIES SATISFACTORILY BORN. So you
entered the age of irony, and the strange double life you’ve been leading with the
world ever since. Joyce Carol Oates suggests that the reason writers — real writers,
one assumes — don’t write about Nature is that it lacks a sense of humor and
registers no irony. It just doesn’t seem to be of the times — these slick, sleek,
knowing, objective, indulgent times. And the word environment. Such a bloodless
word. A flat-footed word with a shrunken heart. A word increasingly disengaged
from its association with the natural world. Urban planners, industrialists, economists, developers use it. It’s a lost word, really. A cold word, mechanistic, suited
strangely to the coldness generally felt toward Nature. It’s their word now. You
don’t mind giving it up. As for environmentalist, that’s one that can really bring on
the yawns, for you’ve tamed and tidied it, neutered it quite nicely. An environmentalist must be calm, rational, reasonable, and willing to compromise; otherwise, you won’t listen to him. Still, his beliefs are opinions only, for this is the age
of radical subjectivism. Some people might prefer a Just for Feet store to open
space, and they shouldn’t be castigated for it. All beliefs and desires and needs are
pretty much equally valid. The speculator has just as much right to that open
space as the swallow, and the consumer has the most rights of all. Experts and
computer models, to say nothing of lawsuits, can hold up enironmental checks
and reform for decades. The Environmental Protection Agency protects us by
finding “acceptable levels of harm” from pollutants and then issuing rules allowing industry to pollute to those levels. Any other approach would place limits on
economic growth. Limits on economic growth! What a witchy notion! The EPA
can’t keep abreast of progress and its unintended consequences. They’re drowning in science. Whenever they do lumber into action and ban a weed killer, say
(and you do love your weed killers — you particularly hate to see the more popular ones singled out), they have to pay all disposal costs and compensate the manufacturers for the market value of the chemicals they still have in stock.
That seems . . . that seems only fair, you say. Financial loss is a serious matter.
And think of the farmers when a particular effective herbicide or pesticide is banned.
They could be driven right out of business.
Farmers grow way too much stuff anyway. Federal farm policy, which subsidizes overproduction, encourages bigger and bigger farms and fewer and fewer
farmers. The largest farms don’t produce food at all, they grow feed. One third of

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 936

6/18/12 3:13 PM

WILLIAMS • SAvE THE WHALES, SCREW THE SHRIMp

937

the wheat, three quarters of the corn, and almost all of the soybeans are used for
feed. You get cheap hamburgers; the agribusiness moguls get immense profits.
Subsidized crops are grown with subsidized water created by turning rivers great
and small into a plumbing system of dams and irrigation ditches. Rivers have
become conduits. Wetlands are increasingly being referred to as filtering systems —
things deigned useful because of their ability to absorb urban runoff, oil from
roads, et cetera.
We know that. We’ve known that for years about farmers. We know a lot these
days. We’re very well informed. If farmers aren’t allowed to make a profit by growing
surplus crops, they’ll have to sell their land to developers, who’ll turn all that arable
land into office parks. Arable land isn’t Nature anyway, and besides, we like those
office parks and shopping plazas, with their monster supermarkets open twenty-four
hours a day and aisle after aisle after aisle of products. It’s fun. Products are fun.

5

Y
Farmers like their poisons, but ranchers like them even more. There are wellfunded federal programs like the Agriculture Department’s “Animal Damage
Control Unit,” which, responding to public discomfort about its agenda, decided
recently to change its name to the euphemistic Wildlife Services. Wildlife Services
poisons, shoots, and traps thousands of animals each year. Servicing diligently, it
kills bobcats, foxes, black bears, mountain lions, rabbits, badgers, countless
birds — all to make this great land safe for the string bean and the corn, the sheep
and the cow, even though you’re not consuming as much cow these days. A burger
now and then, but burgers are hardly cows at all, you feel. They’re not all our
cows, in any case, for some burger matter is imported. There’s a bit of Central
American burger matter in your bun. Which is contributing to the conversion of
tropial rain forest into cow pasture. Even so, you’re getting away from meat these
days. You’re eschewing cow. It’s seafood you love, shrimp most of all. And when
you love something, it had better watch out, because you have a tendency to love
it to death. Shrimp, shrimp, shrimp. It’s more common on menus than chicken.
In the wilds of Ohio, far, far from watery shores, four out of the six entrees on a
menu will be shrimp something-or-other, available for a modest sum. Everywhere, it’s all the shrimp you can eat or all you care to eat, for sometimes you just
don’t feel like eating all you can. You are intensively harvesting shrimp. Soon there
won’t be any left, and then you can stop. Shrimpers put out these big nets, and in
these nets, for each pound of shrimp, they catch more than ten times that amount
of fish, turtles, and dolphins. These, quite the worse for wear, are dumped back in.
There is an object called TED (Turtle Excluder Device) that would save thousands of turtles and some dolphins from dying in the net, but shrimpers are loath
to use TEDs, as they argue it would cut the size of their shrimp catch.
We’ve heard about TED, you say.
At Kiawah Island, off the coast of South Carolina, visitors go out on Jeep
“safaris” through the part of the island that hasn’t been developed yet. (“Wherever you see trees,” the guide says, “it’s actually a lot.”) The visitors (i.e., potential

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 937

6/18/12 3:13 PM

938

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

buyers) drive their own Jeeps, and the guide talks to them by radio. Kiawah has
nice beaches, and the guide talks about turtles. When he mentions the shrimpers’
role in the decline of the turtle, the shrimpers, who share the same frequency,
scream at him. Shrimpers and most commercial fishermen (many of them working with drift and gill nets anywhere from six to thirty miles long) think of themselves as an endangered species. A recent newspaper headline said, “SHRIMPERS
SPARED ANTI-TURTLE DEVICES.” Even so, with the continuing wanton depletion of shrimp beds, they will undoubtedly have to find some other means of
employment soon. They might, for instance, become part of that vast throng
laboring in the tourist industry.

Y
Tourism has become an industry as destructive as any other. You are no longer
benign in traveling somewhere to look at the scenery. You never thought there
was much gain in just looking anyway; you’ve always preferred to use the scenery
in some manner. In your desire to get away from what you’ve got, you’ve caused
there to be no place to get away to. You’re just all bumpered up out there. Sewage
and dumps have become prime indicators of America’s lifestyle. In resort towns
in New England and the Adirondacks, measuring the flow into the sewage plants
serves as a business barometer. Tourism is a growth industry. You believe in
growth. Controlled growth, of course. Controlled exponential growth is what
you’d really like to see. You certainly don’t want to put a moratorium or a cap on
anything. That’s illegal, isn’t it? Retro you’re not. You don’t want to go back or
anything. Forward. Maybe ask directions later. Growth is desirable as well as being
inevitable. Growth is the one thing you seem to be powerless before, so you try to
be realistic about it. Growth — it’s weird — it’s like cancer or something.
As a tourist you have long ago discovered your national parks and are quickly
overburdening them. All that spare land, and it belongs to you! It’s exotic land too,
not looking like all the stuff around it that looks like everything else. You want to
take advantage of this land, of course, and use it in every way you can. Thus
the managers — or stewards, as they like to be called — have developed wise and
multiple-use plans, keeping in mind exploiters’ interests (for they have their needs,
too), as well as the desires of the backpackers. Thus mining, timbering, and
ranching activities take place in the national forest, where the Forest Service
maintains a system of logging roads eight times greater than the interstate highway system. Snowmobilers demand that their trails be groomed. The national
parks are more of a public playground and are becoming increasingly Europeanized in their look and management. Lots of concessions and motels. Paths paved
to accommodate strollers. You deserve a clean bed and a hot meal when you go
into the wilderness. At least, your stewards think that you do. You keep your stewards busy. Not only must they cater to your multiple and conflicting desires, they
have to manage your wildlife resources. They have managed wildfowl to such an
extent that, the reasoning has become, if it weren’t for hunters, ducks would disappear. Duck stamps and licensing fees support the whole rickety duck manage-

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 938

10

6/18/12 3:13 PM

WILLIAMS • SAvE THE WHALES, SCREW THE SHRIMp

939

ment system. Yes! If it weren’t for the people who kill them, wild ducks wouldn’t
exist! Many a manager believes that better wildlife protection is provided when
wildlife is allowed to be shot. Conservation commissions can only oversee hunting when hunting is allowed. But wild creatures are managed in other ways as
well. Managers track and tape and tag and band. They relocate, restock, and reintroduce. They cull and control. It’s hard to keep it straight. Protect or poison?
Extirpate or just mostly eliminate? Sometimes even the stewards get mixed up.

Y
This is the time of machines and models, hands-on management and master plans.
Don’t you ever wonder as you pass that billboard advertising another MASTER
PLANNED COMMUNITY just what master they are actually talking about? Not
the Big Master, certainly. Something brought to you by one of the tiny masters, of
which there are many. But you like these tiny masters and have even come to
expect and require them. In Florida they’re well into building a ten-thousand-acre
city in the Everglades. It’s a megaproject, one of the largest ever in the state. Yes,
they must have thought you wanted it. No, what you thought of as the Everglades,
the park, is only a little bitty part of the Everglades. Developers have been gnawing at this irreplaceable, strange land for years. It’s like they just hate this ancient
sea of grass. Maybe you could ask them about this sometime. Every tree and bush
and inch of sidewalk in the project has been planned, of course. Nevertheless,
because the whole thing will take twenty-five years to complete, the plan is going
to be constantly changed. You can understand this. The important thing is that
there be a blueprint. You trust a blueprint. The tiny masters know what you like.
You like a secure landscape and access to services. You like grass — that is, lawns.
The ultimate lawn is the golf course, which you’ve been told has “some ecological
value.” You believe this! Not that it really matters — you just like to play golf.
These golf courses require a lot of watering. So much that the more inspired of
the masters have taken to watering them with effluent, treated effluent, but yours,
from all the condos and villas built around the stocked artificial lakes you fancy.
I really don’t want to think about sewage, you say, but it sounds like progress.
It is true that the masters are struggling with the problems of your incessant
flushing. Cuisine is also one of their concerns. Great advances have been made in
sorbets — sorbet intermezzos — in their clubs and fine restaurants. They know
what you want. You want A HAVEN FROM THE ORDINARY WORLD. If you’re
a NATURE LOVER in the West, you want to live in a WILD ANIMAL HABITAT.
If you’re eastern and consider yourself more hip, you want to live in a new town —
a brand-new reconstructed-from-scratch town — in a house of NINETEENTHCENTURY DESIGN. But in these new towns the masters are building, getting
around can be confusing. There is an abundance of curves and an infrequency of
through streets. It’s the new wilderness without any trees. You can get lost, even
with all the “mental bread crumbs” the masters scatter about as visual landmarks — the windmill, the water views, the various groupings of landscape
“material.” You are lost, you know. But you trust a Realtor will show you the way.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 939

6/18/12 3:13 PM

940

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

There are many more Realtors than tiny masters, and many of them have to make
do with less than a loaf — that is, trying to sell stuff that’s already been built in an
environment already “enhanced” rather than something being planned — but
they’re everywhere, willing to show you the path. If Dante returned to Hell today,
he’d probably be escorted down by a Realtor talking all the while about how it was
just another level of Paradise.
When have you last watched a sunset? Do you remember where you were? With whom?
At Loews Ventana Canyon Resort, the Grand Foyer will provide you with the opportunity through lighting that is computerized to diminish with the approaching sunset!

The tiny masters are willing to arrange Nature for you. They will compose it into
a picture that you can look at at your leisure, when you’re not doing work or
something like that. Nature becomes scenery, a prop. At some golf courses in the
Southwest, the saguaro cactuses are reported to be repaired with green paste when
balls blast into their skin. The saguaro can attempt to heal themselves by growing
over the balls, but this takes time, and the effect can be somewhat . . . baroque. It’s
better to get out the pastepot. Nature has become simply a visual form of entertainment, and it had better look snappy.
Listen, you say, we’ve been at Ventana Canyon. It’s in the desert, right? It’s very,
very nice, a world-class resort. A totally self-contained environment with everything
that a person could possibly want, on more than a thousand acres in the middle of
zip. It sprawls but nestles, like. And they’ve maintained the integrity of as much of the
desert ecosystem as possible. Give them credit for that. Great restaurant, too. We had
baby bay scallops there. Coming into the lobby there are these two big hand-carved
coyotes, mutely howling. And that’s the way we like them, mute. God, why do those
things howl like that?
Wildlife is a personal matter, you think. The attitude is up to you. You can
prefer to see it dead or not dead. You might want to let it mosey about its business
or blow it away. Wild things exist only if you have the graciousness to allow them
to. Just outside Tucson, Arizona, there is a structure modeled after a French foreign legion outpost. It’s the International Wildlife Museum, and it’s full of dead
animals. Three hundred species are there, at least a third of them — the rarest
ones — killed and collected by one C. J. McElroy, who enjoyed doing it and now
shares what’s left with you. The museum claims to be educational because you can
watch a taxidermist at work or touch a lion’s tooth. You can get real close to these
dead animals, closer than you can in a zoo. Some of you prefer zoos, however,
which are becoming bigger, better, and bioclimatic. New-age zoo designers want
the animals to flow right out into your space. In Dallas there’s a Wilds of Africa
exhibit; in San Diego there’s a simulated rain forest, where you can thread your
way “down the side of a lush canyon, the air filled with a fine mist from 300 highpressure nozzles . . .”; in New Orleans you’ve constructed a swamp, the real swamp
not far away being on the verge of disappearing. Animals in these places are
abstractions — wandering relics of their true selves, but that doesn’t matter. Ani-

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 940

15

6/18/12 3:13 PM

WILLIAMS • SAvE THE WHALES, SCREW THE SHRIMp

941

mal behavior in a zoo is nothing like natural behavior, but that doesn’t matter,
either. Zoos are pretty, contained, and accessible. These new habitats can contain
one hundred different species — not more than one or two of each thing, of
course — on seven acres, three, one. You don’t want to see too much of anything,
certainly. An example will suffice. Sort of like a biological Crabtree & Evelyn basket selected with you in mind. You like things reduced, simplified. It’s easier to take
it all in, park it in your mind. You like things inside better than outside anyway.
You are increasingly looking at and living in proxy environments created by substitution and simulation. Resource economists are a wee branch in the tree of tiny
masters, and one, Martin Krieger, wrote, “Artificial prairies and wildernesses have
been created, and there is no reason to believe that these artificial environments
need be unsatisfactory for those who experience them. . . . We will have to realize
that the way in which we experience nature is conditioned by our society — which
more and more is seen to be receptive to responsible intervention.”

Y
Fiddle, fiddle, fiddle. You support fiddling, as well as meddling. This is how you
learn. Though it’s quite apparent that the environment has been grossly polluted
and the natural world abused and defiled, you seem to prefer to continue pondering effects rather than preventing causes. You want proof, you insist on proof. A
Dr. Lave from Carnegie-Mellon — and he’s an expert, an economist and an environmental expert — says that scientists will have to prove to you that you will
suffer if you don’t become less of a “throw-away society.” If you really want me to
give up my car or my air conditioner, you’d better prove to me first that the earth
would otherwise be uninhabitable, Dr. Lave says. Me is you, I presume, whereas you
refers to them. You as in me — that is, me, me, me — certainly strike a hard bargain. Uninhabitable the world has to get before you rein in your requirements.
You’re a consumer after all, the consumer upon whom so much attention is lavished, the ultimate user of a commodity that has become, these days, everything.
To try to appease your appetite for proof, for example, scientists have been leasing
for experimentation forty-six pristine lakes in Canada.
They don’t want to keep them, they just want to borrow them.
They’ve been intentionally contaminating many of the lakes with a variety of
pollutants dribbled into the propeller wash of research boats. It’s one of the boldest
experiments in lake ecology ever conducted. They’ve turned these remote lakes into
huge real-world test tubes. They’ve been doing this since 1976! And what they’ve
found so far in these preliminary studies is that pollutants are really destructive.
The lakes get gross. Life in them ceases. It took about eight years to make this happen in one of them, everything carefully measured and controlled all the while.
Now the scientists are slowly reversing the process. But it will take hundreds of
years for the lakes to recover. They think.

Y

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 941

6/18/12 3:13 PM

942

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

Remember when you used to like rain, the sound of it, the feel of it, the way it
made the plants and trees all glisten? We needed that rain, you would say. It
looked pretty too, you thought, particularly in the movies. Now it rains and you
go, Oh-oh. A nice walloping rain these days means overtaxing our sewage treatment plants. It means untreated waste discharged directly into our waterways. It
means . . .
Okay. Okay.
Acid rain! And we all know what this is. Or most of us do. People of power
in government and industry still don’t seem to know what it is. Whatever it is,
they say, they don’t want to curb it, but they’re willing to study it some more.
Economists call air and water pollution “externalities” anyway. Oh, acid rain.
You do get so sick of hearing about it. The words have already become a whitenoise kind of thing. But you think in terms of mitigating it maybe. As for the
greenhouse effect, you think in terms of countering that. One way that’s been discussed is the planting of new forests, not for the sake of the forests alone, oh my
heavens, no. Not for the sake of majesty and mystery or of Thumper and Bambi,
are you kidding me, but because, as every schoolchild knows, trees absorb carbon dioxide. They just soak it up and store it. They just love it. So this is the plan:
you can plant millions of acres of trees, and you go on doing pretty much whatever you’re doing — driving around, using staggering amounts of energy, keeping those power plants fired to the max. Isn’t Nature remarkable? So willing to
serve? You wouldn’t think it had anything more to offer, but it seems it does. Of
course, these “forests” wouldn’t exactly be forests. They would be more like trees.
Managed trees. The Forest Service, which now manages our forests by cutting
them down, might be called upon to evolve in its thinking and allow these trees
to grow. They would probably be patented trees after a time. Fast-growing, uniform, genetically created toxin-eating machines. They would be new-age trees,
because the problem with planting the old-fashioned variety to combat the greenhouse effect, which is caused by pollution, is that they’re already dying from it. All
along the crest of the Appalachians from Maine to Georgia, forests struggle to
survive in a toxic soup of poisons. They can’t help us if we’ve killed them, now can
they?
All right, you say, wow, lighten up, will you? Relax. Tell about yourself.
Well, I say, I live in Florida . . .
Oh my god, you say. Florida! Florida is a joke! How do you expect us to take you
seriously if you still live there! Florida is crazy, it’s pink concrete. It’s paved, it’s over.
And a little girl just got eaten by an alligator down there. It came out of some swamp
next to a subdivision and carried her off. That set your Endangered Species Act back
fifty years, you can bet.
I...
Listen, we don’t want to hear any more about Florida. We don’t want to hear
about Phoenix or California’s Central Valley. If our wetlands — our vanishing wetlands — are mentioned one more time, we’ll scream. And the talk about condors and

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 942

20

25

6/18/12 3:13 PM

WILLIAMS • SAvE THE WHALES, SCREW THE SHRIMp

943

grizzlies and wolves is becoming too de trop.1 We had just managed to get whales out
of our minds. Now there are butterflies, frogs even that you want us to worry about.
And those manatees. Don’t they know what a boat propeller can do to them by now?
They’re not too smart. And those last condors are pathetic. Can’t we just get this
over with?
Aristotle said that all living beings are ensouled and strive to participate in
eternity.
Oh, I just bet he said that, you say. That doesn’t sound like Aristotle. He was a
humanist. We’re all humanists here.This is the age of humanism. Militant humanism. And it has been for a long time.
You are driving with a stranger in the car, and it is the stranger who is behind the
wheel. In the backseat are your pals for many years now — DO WHAT YOU LIKE
and his swilling sidekick, WHY NOT. A deer, or some emblematic animal —
something from that myriad natural world you’ve come from that you now treat
with such indifference and scorn — steps from the dimming woods and tentatively upon the highway. The stranger does not decelerate or brake, not yet, maybe
not at all. The feeling is that whatever it is will get out of the way. Oh, it’s a fine car
you’ve got, a fine machine, and oddly you don’t mind the stranger driving it,
because in a way, everything has gotten too complicated, way, way out of your
control. You’ve given the wheel to the masters, the managers, the comptrollers.
Something is wrong, maybe, you feel a little sick, actually, but the car is luxurious
and fast and you’re moving, which is the most important thing by far.
Why make a fuss when you’re so comfortable? Don’t make a fuss, make a
baby. Go out and get something to eat, build something. Make another baby.
Babies are cute. Babies show you have faith in the future. Although faith is perhaps too strong a word. They’re everywhere these days; in all the crowds and traffic jams, there are the babies too. You don’t seem to associate them with the
problems of population increase.They’re just babies! And you’ve come to believe
in them again. They’re a lot more tangible than the afterlife, which, of course, you
haven’t believed in in ages. At least not for yourself. The afterlife now belongs to
plastics and poisons. Yes, plastics and poisons will have a far more extensive afterlife than you, that’s known. A disposable diaper, for example, which is all plastic
and wood pulp, will take around four centuries to degrade. But you like disposables — so easy to use and toss — and now that marketing is urging you not to
rush the potty training by making diapers for four-year-olds available and socially
acceptable, there will be more and more dumped diapers around, each taking,
like most plastics, centuries and centuries to deteriorate. In the sea, many marine
animals die from ingesting or being entangled in discarded plastic. In the dumps,
plastic squats on more than 25 percent of dump space. But your heart is disposed
toward plastic. Someone, no doubt the plastics industry, told you it was convenient. This same industry avidly promotes recycling in an attempt to get the critics

30

1French; “excessive.” — Eds.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 943

6/18/12 3:13 PM

944

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

of their nefarious, multifarious products off their backs. That should make you
feel better, because recycling has become an honorable word, no longer merely the
hobby of Volvo owners.The fact is that people in plastics are born obscurants.
Recycling won’t solve the plastic glut, only reduction of production will, and the
plastics industry isn’t looking into that, you can be sure. Waste is not just the stuff
you throw away, of course, it’s also the stuff you use to excess. With the exception
of hazardous waste, which you do worry about from time to time, it’s even thought
that you have a declining sense of emergency about the problem. Builders are
building bigger houses because you want bigger. You’re trading up. Utility companies are beginning to worry about your constantly rising consumption. Utility companies! You haven’t entered a new age at all but one of upscale nihilism,
deluxe nihilism.
With each election there is the possibility that the environment will become
a political issue. But it never does. You don’t want it to be, preferring instead to
continue in your politics of subsidizing and advancing avarice. The issues are the
same as always — jobs, defense, the economy the economy the economy, maintaining the standard of living in this greedy, selfish, expansionistic, industrialized
society.
You’re getting a little shrill here, you say.
You’re pretty well off. And you expect to become even better off. You do. What
does this mean? More software, more scampi, more square footage, more communication towers to keep you in touch and amused and informed? You want to
count birds? Go to the bases of communication towers being built across the
country. Three million migratory songbirds perish each year by slamming into
towers and their attendant guy wires. The building of thousands of new digital
television towers one thousand feet and taller is being expedited by the FCC, which
proposes to preempt all local and state environmental laws. You have created an
ecological crisis. The earth is infinitely variable and alive, and you are moderating
it, simplifying it, killing it. It seems safer this way. But you are not safe. You want
to find wholeness and happiness in a land increasingly damaged and betrayed,
and you never will. More than material matters. You must change your ways.
What is this? Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God?
The ecological crisis cannot be resolved by politics. It cannot be resolved by
science or technology. It is a crisis caused by culture and character, and a deep
change in personal consciousness is needed. Your fundamental attitudes toward
the earth have become twisted. You have made only brutal contact with Nature;
you cannot comprehend its grace. You must change. Have few desires and simple
pleasures. Honor nonhuman life. Control yourself, become more authentic. Live
lightly upon the earth and treat it with respect. Redefine the word progress and
dismiss the managers and masters. Grow inwardly and with knowledge become
truly wiser. Think differently, behave differently. For this is essentially a moral
issue we face, and moral decisions must be made.
A moral issue! Okay, this discussion is now over. A moral issue . . . And who’s
this we now? Who are you, is what I’d like to know. You’re not me, anyway. I admit

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 944

35

6/18/12 3:13 PM

WILSON • THE FUTURE OF LIFE

945

someone’s to blame and something should be done. But I’ve got to go. It’s getting late.
Take care of yourself.

Exploring the Text
1. You will doubtless notice that Joy Williams speaks in the second person throughout the essay. Count the instances of the word you and its forms (your, yours,
yourself, etc.). What tone does she achieve through this repetition? How do you
feel reading the essay, considering the fact that it addresses you directly? Do you
sympathize with her perspective? Explain.
2. Note the details Williams chooses to use at the beginning — such places as a plastics plant, gas stations, video shops, and the like. Identify all of the “place” references. What is their cumulative effect?
3. Williams writes, “So you entered the age of irony, and the strange double life
you’ve been leading with the world ever since” (para. 2). What does she mean by
“age of irony” and “strange double life”?
4. Why does Williams cast environment in italics in paragraph 2?
5. In paragraph 5, Williams writes a response from “you” saying, “We know a lot
these days.” What is her intended purpose here? What is the supposed source of
the knowledge?
6. Select what you think is Williams’s most ironic or most humorous statement.
What are its tone and purpose?
7. Consider the difference between verbal irony and sarcasm. Where in the essay
does Williams’s irony become sarcasm? Is it effective? Why or why not?
8. Of the concerns and issues that Williams mentions, which is the most serious,
which the most difficult to address? Why?
9. Williams employs italics, quotation marks, and capital letters liberally, and for
different purposes. Identify three examples of each, and analyze their rhetorical
effect.
10. Williams uses quite a few inverted sentences in this piece. Identify a few, and discuss their rhetorical effect.
11. Effective humorists and satirists usually have a very serious point. What is Williams’s serious point? Do you agree with her overall idea? Explain your response.

from The Future of Life
E. O. Wilson
Edward O. Wilson was born in Birmingham, Alabama, in 1929. As a boy he found
companionship in nature and was determined early on to become an entomologist. Wilson received his phD from Harvard University and is recognized as the
world’s leading authority on ants — he discovered their use of pheromones for

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 945

6/18/12 3:13 PM

946

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

communication. In 1975, he published his first major book, Sociobiology. In On
Human Nature, which was awarded the pulitzer prize in 1978, he examined the
scientific arguments surrounding the role of biology in the evolution of human culture. Officially retired from teaching at Harvard in 1996, he continues to hold the
posts of professor Emeritus and Honorary Curator in Entomology. Wilson’s most
recent books include Creation: An Appeal to Save Life on Earth (2006); Nature
Revealed: Selected Writings, 1949–2006; and a novel, Anthill (2010). The selection included here is from the final chapter of his 2002 book The Future of Life,
called “The Solution.”

T

he human species is like the mythical giant Antaeus, who drew strength
from contact with his mother, Gaea, the goddess Earth, and used it to
challenge and defeat all comers. Hercules, learning his secret, lifted and held
Antaeus above the ground until the giant weakened — then crushed him. Mortal
humans are also handicapped by our separation from Earth, but our impairment
is self-administered, and it has this added twist: our exertions also weaken Earth.
What humanity is inflicting on itself and Earth is, to use a modern metaphor,
the result of a mistake in capital investment. Having appropriated the planet’s
natural resources, we chose to annuitize them with a short-term maturity reached
by progressively increasing payouts. At the time it seemed a wise decision. To
many it still does. The result is rising per-capita production and consumption,
markets awash in consumer goods and grain, and a surplus of optimistic economists. But there is a problem: the key elements of natural capital, Earth’s arable
land, ground water, forests, marine fisheries, and petroleum, are ultimately finite,
and not subject to proportionate capital growth. Moreover, they are being decapitalized by overharvesting and environmental destruction. With population and
consumption continuing to grow, the per-capita resources left to be harvested are
shrinking. The long-term prospects are not promising. Awakened at last to this
approaching difficulty, we have begun a frantic search for substitutes.
Meanwhile, two collateral results of the annuitization of nature, as opposed
to its stewardship, and settling in to beg our attention. The first is economic disparity: in relative terms the rich grow richer and the poor poorer. According to
the United Nations Human Development Report 1999, the income differential
between the fifth of the world’s population in the wealthiest countries and the
fifth in the poorest was 30 to 1 in 1960, 60 to 1 in 1990, and 74 to 1 in 1995.
Wealthy people are also by and large profligate consumers, and as a result the
income differential has this disturbing consequence: for the rest of the world to
reach United States levels of consumption with existing technology would require
four more planet Earths.
Europe is only slightly behind, while the Asian economic tigers appear to be
pulling up at maximum possible speed. The income gap is the setting for resentment and fanaticism that causes even the strongest nations, led by the American
colossus, to conduct their affairs with an uneasy conscience and a growing fear of
heaven-bound suicide bombers.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 946

6/18/12 3:13 PM

WILSON • THE FUTURE OF LIFE

947

The second collateral result, and the principal concern of the present work, is
the accelerating extinction of natural ecosystems and species. The damage already
done cannot be repaired within any period of time that has meaning for the
human mind. The fossil record shows that new faunas and floras take millions of
years to evolve to the richness of the prehuman world. The more the losses are
allowed to accumulate, the more future generations will suffer for it, in some
ways already felt and in others no doubt waiting to be painfully learned.
Why, our descendants will ask, by needlessly extinguishing the lives of other
species, did we permanently impoverish our own? That hypothetical question is
not the rhetoric of radical environmentalism. It expresses a growing concern
among leaders in science, religion, business, and government as well as the educated public.
What is the solution to biological impoverishment? The answer I will now
pose is guardedly optmistic. In essence, it is that the problem is now well understood, we have a grip on its dimensions and magnitude, and a workable strategy
has begun to take shape.
The new strategy to save the world’s fauna and flora begins, as in all human
affairs, with ethics. Moral reasoning is not a cultural artifact invented for convenience. It is and always has been the vital glue of society, the means by which
transactions are made and honored to ensure survival. Every society is guided by
ethical precepts, and every one of its members is expected to follow moral leadership and ethics-based tribal law. The propensity does not have to be beaten into
us. Evidence exists instead of an instinct to behave ethically, or at least to insist on
ethical behavior in others. Psychologists, for example, have discovered a hereditary tendency to detect cheaters and to respond to them with intense moral outrage. People by and large are natural geniuses at spotting deception in others, and
equally brilliant in constructing deceptions of their own. We are daily soaked in
self-righteous gossip. We pummel others with expostulation, and we hunger for
sincerity in all our relationships. Even the tyrant is sterling in pose, invoking
patriotism and economic necessity to justify his misdeeds. At the next level down,
the convicted criminal is expected to show remorse, in the course of which he
explains he was either insane at the time or redressing personal injustice.
And everyone has some kind of environmental ethic, even if it somehow
makes a virtue of cutting the last ancient forests and damming the last wild rivers.
Done, it is said, to grow the economy and save jobs. Done because we are running
short of space and fuel. Hey, listen, people come first! — and most certainly before
beach mice and louseworts. I recall vividly the conversation I had with a cab
driver in Key West in 1968 when we touched on the Everglades burning to the
north. Too bad, he said. The Everglades are a wonderful place. But wilderness
always gives way to civilization, doesn’t it? That is progress and the way of the
world, and we can’t do much about it.
Everyone is also an avowed environmentalist. No one says flatly, “To hell with
nature.” On the other hand, no one says,” Let’s give it all back to nature.” Rather,
when invoking the social contract by which we all live, the typical people-first

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 947

5

10

6/18/12 3:13 PM

948

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

ethicist thinks about the environment short-term and the typical environmental
ethicist thinks about it long-term. Both are sincere and have something true and
important to say. The people-first thinker says we need to take a little cut here and
there; the environmentalist says nature is dying the death of a thousand cuts. So
how do we combine the best of short-term and long-term goals? Perhaps, despite
decades of bitter philosophical dispute, an optimum mix of goals might result in
a consensus more satisfactory than either side thought possible from total victory. The people-firster likes parks, and the environmentalist rides petroleumpowered vehicles to get there.
The first step is to turn away from claims of inherent moral superiority based
on political ideology and religious dogma. The problems of the environment
have become too complicated to be solved by piety and an unyielding clash of
good intentions.
The next step is to disarm. The most destructive weapons to be stacked are
the stereotypes, the total-war portraits crafted for public consumption by extremists on both sides. I know them very well from years of experience on the boards
of conservation organizations, as a participant in policy conferences, and during
service on government advisory committees. To tell the truth, I am a little battlefatigued. The stereotypes cannot be simply dismissed, since they are so often
voiced and contain elements of real substance, like rocks in snowballs. But they
can be understood clearly and sidestepped in the search for common ground. Let
me illustrate a stereotype skirmish with imaginary opponents engaging in typical
denunciations.

The People-First Critic Stereotypes the Environmentalists
Environmentalists or conservationists is what they usually call themselves. Depending on
how angry we are, we call them greens, enviros, environmental extremists, or environmental wackos. Mark my word, conservation pushed by these people always goes too far,
because it is an instrument for gaining political power. The wackos have a broad and
mostly hidden agenda that always comes from the left, usually far left. How to get power?
is what they’re thinking. Their aim is to expand government, especially the federal government. They want environmental laws and regulatory surveillance to create governmentsupported jobs for their kind of bureaucrats, lawyers, and consultants. The New Class,
these professionals have been called. What’s at stake as they busy themselves are your tax
dollars and mine, and ultimately our freedom too. Relax your guard when these people
are in power and your property rights go down the tube. Some Bennington College student with a summer job will find an endangered red spider on your property, and before
you know what happened the Endangered Species Act will be used to shut you down.
Can’t sell to a developer, can’t even harvest your woodlot. Business investors can’t get at
the oil and gas on federal lands this country badly needs. Mind you, I’m all for the environment, and I agree that species extinction is a bad thing, but conservation should be
kept in perspective. It is best put in private hands. Property owners know what’s good for
their own land. They care about the plants and animals living there. Let them work out

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 948

6/18/12 3:13 PM

WILSON • THE FUTURE OF LIFE

949

conservation. They are the real grass roots in this country. Let them be the stewards and
handle conservation. A strong, growing free-market economy, not creeping socialism, is
what’s best for America — and it’s best for the environment too.

The Environmentalist Stereotypes the People-First Critics
“Critics” of the environmental movement? That may be what they call themselves, but
we know them more accurately as anti-environmentalists and brown lashers or, more
locally out west, wise users (their own term, not intended to be ironic) and sagebrush
rebels. In claiming concern of any kind for the natural environment, these people are the
worst bunch of hypocrites you’ll ever not want to find. What they are really after, especially the corporate heads and big-time landowners, is unrestrained capitalism with land
development über alles. They keep their right-wing political agenda mostly hidden when
downgrading climate change and species extinction, but for them economic growth is
always the ultimate, and maybe the only, good. Their idea of conservation is stocking
trout streams and planting trees around golf courses. Their conception of the public trust
is a strong military establishment and subsidies for loggers and ranchers. The antienvironmentalists would be laughed out of court if they weren’t tied so closely to the
corporate power structure. And notice how rarely international policy makers pay attention to the environment. At the big conferences of the World Trade Organization and other
such gatherings of the rich and powerful, conservation almost never gets so much as a hearing. The only recourse we have is to protest at their meetings. We hope to attract the attention of the media and at least get our unelected rulers to look out the window. In America
the right-wingers have made the word “conservative” a mockery. What exactly are they
trying to conserve? Their own selfish interests, for sure, not the natural environment.

There are partisans on both sides who actually state their case in this manner,
either in pieces or in entirety. And the accusations sting, because so many people
on either side believe them.The suspicion and anger they express paralyze further
discussion. Worse, in an era when journalism feeds on controversy, its widely
used gladiatorial approach divides people and pushes them away from the center
toward opposite extremes.
It is a contest that will not be settled by partisan victory. The truth is that
everyone wants a highly productive economy and lots of well-paying jobs. People
almost all agree that private property is a sacred right. On the other hand,
everyone treasures a clean environment. In the United States at least, the preservation of nature has almost the status of a sacred trust. In a 1996 survey conducted by Belden & Russonello for the U.S. Consultative Group on Biological
Diversity, 79 percent rated a healthy and pleasant environment of the greatest
importance, giving it a 10 on a scale of 1 to 10. Seventy-one percent agreed at the
same high level with the statement “Nature is God’s creation and humans should
respect God’s work.” Only when these two obvious and admirable goals, prosperity and saving the creation, are cast in opposition does the issue become confused. And when the apparent conflict is in addition reinforced by opposing
political ideologies, as it frequently is, the problem becomes intractable.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 949

15

6/18/12 3:13 PM

950

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

The ethical solution is to diagnose and disconnect extraneous political ideology, then shed it in order to move toward the common ground where economic
progress and conservation are treated as one and the same goal.
The guiding principles of a united environmental movement must be, and
eventually will be, chiefly long-term. If two hundred years of history of environmentalism have taught us anything, it is that a change of heart occurs when
people look beyond themselves to others, and then to the rest of life. It is strengthened when they also expand their view of landscape, from parish to nation and
beyond, and their sweep of time from their own life spans to multiple generations
and finally to the extended future history of humankind. . . .
The precepts of the people-firsters are foundationally just as ethical as those
of the traditional environmentalists, but their arguments are more about method
and short-term results. Further, their values are not, as often assumed, merely a
reflection of capitalist philosophy. Corporate CEOs are people too, with families
and the same desire for a healthy, biodiverse world. Many are leaders in the environmental movement. It is time to recognize that their commitment is vital to
success. The world economy is now propelled by venture capital and technical
innovation; it cannot be returned to a pastoral civilization. Nor will socialism
return in a second attempt to rescue us, at least in any form resembling the Soviet
model. Quite the contrary, its demise was a good thing all around for nature. In
most places the socialist experiment was tried, its record was even worse than in
capitalist countries. Totalitarianism, left or right, is a devil’s bargain: slavery purchased at the price of a ruined environment.
The juggernaut of technology-based capitalism will not be stopped. Its
momentum is reinforced by the billions of poor people in developing countries
anxious to participate in order to share the material wealth of the industrialized
nations. But its direction can be changed by mandate of a generally shared longterm environmental ethic. The choice is clear: the juggernaut will very soon either
chew up what remains of the living world, or it will be redirected to save it.

20

Notes (by paragraph)
3 The income disparities of the richest and poorest countries are cited from the United
Nations’ Human Development Report 1999 and discussed by Fouad Ajami in Foreign
Policy 119: 30–4 (summer 2000). The consequences of the disparity are explored by
Geoffrey D. Dabelko in the Wilson Quarterly 23 (4): 14–19 (autumn 1999) and by
Thomas F. Homer-Dixon in Environment, Scarcity, and Violence (Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1999) and The Ingenuity Gap (New York: Knopf, 2000).
3 On the difference in consumption by rich and poor nations: William E. Rees and
Mathis Wackernagel in AnnMari Jansson et al., eds., Investing in Natural Capital: The
Ecological Economics Approach to Sustainability (Washington, D.C.: Island Press,
1994), pp. 362–90. The four-worlds estimate is from a personal communication from
Mathis Wackernagel (January 24, 2000) (Redefining Progress, 1 Kearny St., San Fran-

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 950

6/18/12 3:13 PM

WILSON • THE FUTURE OF LIFE

951

cisco, CA); see the explanation of the concept of the ecological footprint in chapter 2
of the present book.
16 The poll of American attitudes toward the natural world and the values that shape
them was conducted by the research firm Belden & Russonello and Research/Strategy/Management (R/S/M), commissioned by the Communications Consortium
Media Center on behalf of the Consultative Group on Biodiversity, and published as
a report, “Human Values and Nature’s Future: American Attitudes on Biological
Diversity” (October 1996). The results are cited here by permission of the CCMC.

Exploring the Text
1. Why does E. O. Wilson begin with an allusion to Antaeus? How effectively does
the allusion serve to introduce the author’s ideas? Explain your response.
2. Explain the problem that Wilson identifies in paragraph 2. Why does he use economic language to criticize an economic approach to the environment?
3. What are the assumptions underlying the rhetorical question that begins paragraph 6?
4. In paragraph 8, Wilson writes: “We pummel others with expostulation, and we
hunger for sincerity in all our relationships. Even the tyrant is sterling in pose,
invoking patriotism and economic necessity to justify his misdeeds.” How would
you explain the relationship between those two sentences?
5. Wilson claims that “when invoking the social contract by which we all live, the
typical people-first ethicist thinks about the environment short-term and the
typical environmental ethicist thinks about it long-term. Both are sincere and
have something true and important to say” (para. 10). Do you agree? Explain
your position with examples.
6. In paragraph 12, Wilson uses metaphor and simile to describe the nature of stereotypes. How effectively do these communicate his attitude and meaning?
7. How does Wilson use rhetorical strategies to satirize the “people-first critic”
(para. 13)? How does he do so for “the environmentalist” (para. 14)?
8. Are there reasonable statements in either of the stereotyped characterizations?
What are they? How could they be more reasonably expressed so as to be rhetorically effective?
9. After presenting the two stereotypes, Wilson writes: “The suspicion and anger
they express paralyze further discussion” (para. 15). Do you agree?
10. How effectively does Wilson characterize the precepts of the opposing groups in
paragraphs 19 and 20? Do you think his solution is possible? Why or why not?
11. How does the information in the endnotes contribute to the effectiveness of
Wilson’s argument? Does it appeal more to ethos, logos, or pathos? Explain.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 951

6/18/12 3:13 PM

952

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

Inversnaid
Gerard Manley Hopkins
Torn between his obligations as a Jesuit priest and his love for poetry, Gerard Manley Hopkins (1844–1889) declined to seek an audience for his work during his
lifetime; the bulk of his poems were published posthumously in 1916. Hopkins was
born in Stratford, England, to a wealthy family. After converting to Catholicism near
the end of his studies at Oxford, Hopkins entered the priesthood and, adhering to
one of his vows, burned nearly all of his accumulated poems. He began to write
again in 1875, when he was asked to commemorate the death of five Franciscan
nuns who drowned in a shipwreck off the coast of England as they fled oppression
in Germany. In the poem he wrote, entitled “Wreck of the Deutschland,” Hopkins
introduced what he called “sprung rhythm,” a meter designed to imitate the rhythm
of natural speech; this meter anticipated free verse and would influence new generations of poets. Inversnaid is a village near Loch Lomond in Scotland.

This darksome burn,1 horseback brown,
His rollrock highroad roaring down,
In coop2 and in comb3 the fleece of his foam
Flutes and low to the lake falls home.
A windpuff-bonnet of fawn-froth
Turns and twindles4 over the broth
Of a pool so pitchblack, fell-frowning,
It rounds and rounds Despair to drowning.
Degged5 with dew, dappled with dew,
Are the groins of the braes6 that the brook treads through,
Wiry heathpacks, flitches7 of fern,
And the beadbonny ash that sits over the burn.

5

10

What would the world be, once bereft
Of wet and wildness? Let them be left,

1

A brook or stream. —Eds.
A hollow. —Eds.
3
A crest. —Eds.
4
Hopkins’s own invention: both twist and dwindle. —Eds.
5Dappled or sprinkled. —Eds.
6Hills. —Eds.
7Clumps or clusters. —Eds.
2

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 952

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CRUMB • A SHORT HISTORY OF AMERICA

O let them be left, wildness and wet;
Long live the weeds and the wilderness yet.

953

15

Exploring the Text
1. How would you characterize the speaker of this poem?
2. What is the effect of the images presented in the first three quatrains?
3. What is the effect of such diction as “burn,” “rollrock,” “coop,” “comb,” “fawnfroth,” “twindles,” “degged,” “braes,” and “flitches”?
4. How does line 8 stand out among the first 12 lines of the poem? What does
Hopkins suggest that nature is capable of?
5. What might be the value of “the weeds and the wilderness” in the last line?
6. How would Rachel Carson answer the rhetorical question that Hopkins poses at
the beginning of the fourth stanza? Lewis Thomas? Bill McKibben? Joy Williams?
What would your answer be? Write a brief response from each, and then your own.
7. Would you call Hopkins an environmentalist? Explain why or why not.

A Short History of America
Robert Crumb
Born in 1943, Robert Crumb was one of the originators of “underground” comics,
creating such characters as Mr. Natural and Fritz the Cat. The comic strip included
here first appeared in CoEvolution Quarterly in 1979.

Exploring the Text
1. How would you paraphrase the narrative sequence depicted in the twelve frames?
2. Imagine that you are living in the time that one of the frames presents. In a letter
to someone living in an earlier frame, write about the progress the country has
made. Or, write a warning to future generations who might occupy later frames.
3. What can you infer about Robert Crumb’s attitude toward the progress depicted
in the cartoon? Do you agree with his perspective? Why or why not?
4. Write an answer to the question posed at the end of the final frame. Then create
your own visual that supports your response. You can create your visual in one of
three ways: draw the next frame or sequence of frames, take photos that depict the
next frame or sequence, or find images online or in magazines that do so.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 953

6/18/12 3:13 PM

954

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

(See insert for color version.)

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 954

6/18/12 3:13 PM

ROYAL DUTCH/SHELL • LET’S GO

955

Let’s Go
Royal Dutch/Shell
The following advertisement for the major oil company Royal Dutch/Shell has
appeared in several national magazines.

Exploring the Text
1. Based on your reading of this ad, how would you define Shell’s position on fuel
efficiency and energy conservation?
2. What is the relationship between the graphic and the text in this ad? Explain how
each complements the other.
3. The text begins with the inclusive “we.” Notice also the repetition of “Let’s go” (i.e.,
let us go) in the caption and the text. How does such a hortatory approach influence the effectiveness of the ad?
4. Shell makes much of its living selling gasoline. If we convert kilometers to miles
and litres to gallons, the car featured could get as much as 8,700 miles per gallon.
Why would such a company extol the efficiency of such a vehicle? What is the
rhetorical effect of such an advertisement?
5. What is the primary appeal of the ad? To ethos, logos, or pathos? Explain.
6. Considering its claims, assumptions, and evidence, how would you analyze this ad
according to the Toulmin model that you learned about in Chapter 3?
7. After reading and thinking about the ad, how do you feel about the Shell oil company? How do you feel about the issues raised by the ad?

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 955

6/18/12 3:13 PM

956

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

(See insert for color version.)

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 956

6/18/12 3:13 PM

ROYAL DUTCH/SHELL • LET’S GO

957

(See insert for color version.)

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 957

6/18/12 3:13 PM

Conversation
Sustainable Eating
The following texts each present a view on the issue of eating in an environmentally sustainable way.

Sources
1. Peter Menzel, from Hungry Planet (photo essay)
2. Michael Pollan, A Naturalist in the Supermarket
3. James McWilliams, The Locavore Myth
4. Jonathan Safran Foer, The American Table and The Global Table
5. Nicolette Hahn Niman, The Carnivore’s Dilemma
6. Will Allen, A Good Food Manifesto for America
7. A. J. Jacobs, Farm to Table: How Our Restaurant Gets Its Food to Your Plate
8. Michael Specter, from Test-Tube Burgers
After you have read, studied, and synthesized these pieces, enter the Conversation
by responding to one of the writing prompts on page 987.

1. from Hungry Planet
Peter Menzel
The photos on the following pages appeared in the book Hungry Planet: What
the World Eats (2005). Each photo is a portrait of a family posing with one
week’s worth of groceries, accompanied by geographical location, food
expenditure for one week, and favorite foods or family recipe. See the color
insert for color versions of the photos.

958

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 958

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CONvERSATION

959

United States: The Caven family of California
Food expenditure for one week: $159.18
Favorite foods: beef stew, berry yogurt sundae, clam chowder, ice cream

Kuwait: The Al Haggan family of Kuwait City
Food expenditure for one week: 63.63 dinar or $221.45
Family recipe: Chicken biryani with basmati rice

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 959

6/18/12 3:13 PM

960

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

Bhutan: The Namgay family of Shingkhey village
Food expenditure for one week: 224.93 ngultrum or $5.03
Family recipe: Mushroom, cheese and pork

Ecuador: The Ayme family of Tingo
Food expenditure for one week: $31.55
Family recipe: potato soup with cabbage

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 960

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CONvERSATION

961

Chad: The Aboubakar family of Breidjing Camp
Food expenditure for one week: 685 CFA francs or $1.23
Favorite foods: soup with fresh sheep meat

Germany: The Melander family of Bargteheide
Food expenditure for one week: 375.39 euros or $500.07
Favorite foods: fried potatoes with onions, bacon and herring, fried noodles with
eggs and cheese, pizza, vanilla pudding

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 961

6/18/12 3:13 PM

962

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

Questions
1. Which of the photos resemble each other the most regarding the food represented?
2. Which are most similar in terms of the setting?
3. Consider the number of family members, or “mouths to feed,” in each photo.
Compute the cost of food per person per week. What does your answer suggest
about the global economy?
4. From your analysis of the photos, what inferences do you make about the countries depicted? Overall, what does the photo sequence suggest about sustainable
eating worldwide?

2. A Naturalist in the Supermarket
Michael Pollan
The following selection is from the first chapter of The Omnivore’s Dilemma
(2006), a best-selling book about sustainable eating.

Air-conditioned, odorless, illuminated by buzzing fluorescent tubes, the American supermarket doesn’t present itself as having very much to do with Nature.
And yet what is this place if not a landscape (man-made, it’s true) teeming with
plants and animals?
I’m not just talking about the produce section or the meat counter, either —
the supermarket’s flora and fauna. Ecologically speaking, these are this landscape’s
most legible zones, the places where it doesn’t take a field guide to identify the
resident species. Over there’s your eggplant, onion, potato, and leek; here your
apple, banana, and orange. Spritzed with morning dew every few minutes, Produce is the only corner of the supermarket where we’re apt to think “Ah, yes,
the bounty of Nature!” Which probably explains why such a garden of fruits and
vegetables (sometimes flowers, too) is what usually greets the shopper coming
through the automatic doors.
Keep rolling, back to the mirrored rear wall behind which the butchers toil,
and you encounter a set of species only slightly harder to identify — there’s
chicken and turkey, lamb and cow and pig. Though in Meat the creaturely character of the species on display does seem to be fading, as the cows and pigs
increasingly come subdivided into boneless and bloodless geometrical cuts. In
recent years some of this supermarket euphemism has seeped into Produce,
where you’ll now find formerly soil-encrusted potatoes cubed pristine white, and
“baby” carrots machine-lathed into neatly tapered torpedoes. But in general here
in flora and fauna you don’t need to be a naturalist, much less a food scientist, to
know what species you’re tossing into your cart.
Venture farther, though, and you come to regions of the supermarket where
the very notion of species seems increasingly obscure: the canyons of breakfast

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 962

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CONvERSATION

963

cereals and condiments; the freezer cases stacked with “home meal replacements”
and bagged platonic peas; the broad expanses of soft drinks and towering cliffs of
snacks; the unclassifiable Pop-Tarts and Lunchables; the frankly synthetic coffee
whiteners and the Linnaeus-defying Twinkie. Plants? Animals?! Though it might
not always seem that way, even the deathless Twinkie is constructed out of . . .
well, precisely what I don’t know offhand, but ultimately some sort of formerly
living creature, i.e., a species. We haven’t yet begun to synthesize our foods from
petroleum, at least not directly.
If you do manage to regard the supermarket through the eyes of a naturalist,
your first impression is apt to be of its astounding biodiversity. Look how many
different plants and animals (and fungi) are represented on this single acre of
land! What forest or prairie could hope to match it? There must be a hundred different species in the produce section alone, a handful more in the meat counter.
And this diversity appears only to be increasing: When I was a kid, you never saw
radicchio in the produce section, or a half dozen different kinds of mushrooms,
or kiwis and passion fruit and durians and mangoes. Indeed, in the last few years
a whole catalog of exotic species from the tropics has colonized, and considerably
enlivened, the produce department. Over in fauna, on a good day you’re apt to
find — beyond beef — ostrich and quail and even bison, while in Fish you can
catch not just salmon and shrimp but catfish and tilapia, too. Naturalists regard
biodiversity as a measure of a landscape’s health, and the modern supermarket’s
devotion to variety and choice would seem to reflect, perhaps even promote, precisely that sort of ecological vigor.
Except for the salt and a handful of synthetic food additives, every edible
item in the supermarket is a link in a food chain that begins with a particular
plant growing in a specific patch of soil (or, more seldom, stretch of sea) somewhere on earth. Sometimes, as in the produce section, that chain is fairly short
and easy to follow: As the netted bag says, this potato was grown in Idaho, that
onion came from a farm in Texas. Move over to Meat, though, and the chain
grows longer and less comprehensible: The label doesn’t mention that that ribeye steak came from a steer born in South Dakota and fattened in a Kansas feedlot
on grain grown in Iowa. Once you get into the processed foods you have to be a
fairly determined ecological detective to follow the intricate and increasingly
obscure lines of connection linking the Twinkie, or the nondairy creamer, to a
plant growing in the earth someplace, but it can be done.
So what exactly would an ecological detective set loose in an American supermarket discover, were he to trace the items in his shopping cart all the way back
to the soil? The notion began to occupy me a few years ago, after I realized that
the straightforward question “What should I eat?” could no longer be answered
without first addressing two other even more straightforward questions: “What
am I eating? And where in the world did it come from?” Not very long ago an
eater didn’t need a journalist to answer these questions. The fact that today one
so often does suggests a pretty good start on a working definition of industrial

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 963

5

6/18/12 3:13 PM

964

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

food: Any food whose provenance is so complex or obscure that it requires expert
help to ascertain.
When I started trying to follow the industrial food chain — the one that now
feeds most of us most of the time and typically culminates either in a supermarket or fast-food meal — I expected that my investigations would lead me to a wide
variety of places. And though my journeys did take me to a great many states, and
covered a great many miles, at the very end of these food chains (which is to say,
at the very beginning), I invariably found myself in almost exactly the same place:
a farm field in the American Corn Belt. The great edifice of variety and choice
that is an American supermarket turns out to rest on a remarkably narrow biological foundation comprised of a tiny group of plants that is dominated by a
single species: Zea mays, the giant tropical grass most Americans know as corn.
Corn is what feeds the steer that becomes the steak. Corn feeds the chicken
and the pig, the turkey and the lamb, the catfish and the tilapia and, increasingly,
even the salmon, a carnivore by nature that the fish farmers are reengineering to
tolerate corn. The eggs are made of corn. The milk and cheese and yogurt, which
once came from dairy cows that grazed on grass, now typically come from Holsteins that spend their working lives indoors tethered to machines, eating corn.
Head over to the processed foods and you find ever more intricate manifestations of corn. A chicken nugget, for example, piles corn upon corn: what chicken
it contains consists of corn, of course, but so do most of a nugget’s other constituents, including the modified corn starch that glues the thing together, the
corn flour in the batter that coats it, and the corn oil in which it gets fried. Much
less obviously, the leavenings and lecithin, the mono-, di-, and triglycerides, the
attractive golden coloring, and even the citric acid that keeps the nugget “fresh”
can all be derived from corn.
To wash down your chicken nuggets with virtually any soft drink in the
supermarket is to have some corn with your corn. Since the 1980s virtually all the
sodas and most of the fruit drinks sold in the supermarket have been sweetened
with high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS) — after water, corn sweetener is their
principal ingredient. Grab a beer for your beverage instead and you’d still be
drinking corn, in the form of alcohol fermented from glucose refined from corn.
Read the ingredients on the label of any processed food and, provided you know
the chemical names it travels under, corn is what you will find. For modified or
unmodified starch, for glucose syrup and maltodextrin, for crystalline fructose
and ascorbic acid, for lecithin and dextrose, lactic acid and lysine, for maltose and
HFCS, for MSG and polyols, for the caramel color and xanthan gum, read: corn.
Corn is in the coffee whitener and Cheez Whiz, the frozen yogurt and TV dinner,
the canned fruit and ketchup and candies, the soups and snacks and cake mixes,
the frosting and gravy and frozen waffles, the syrups and hot sauces, the mayonnaise and mustard, the hot dogs and the bologna, the margarine and shortening, the salad dressings and the relishes and even the vitamins. (Yes, it’s in the
Twinkie, too.) There are some forty-five thousand items in the average American

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 964

10

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CONvERSATION

965

supermarket and more than a quarter of them now contain corn. This goes for
the nonfood items as well — everything from the toothpaste and cosmetics to the
disposable diapers, trash bags, cleansers, charcoal briquettes, matches, and batteries, right down to the shine on the cover of the magazine that catches your eye by
the checkout: corn. Even in Produce on a day when there’s ostensibly no corn for
sale you’ll nevertheless find plenty of corn: in the vegetable wax that gives the
cucumbers their sheen, in the pesticide responsible for the produce’s perfection,
even in the coating on the cardboard it was shipped in. Indeed, the supermarket
itself — the wallboard and joint compound, the linoleum and fiberglass and
adhesives out of which the building itself has been built — is in no small measure
a manifestation of corn.
And us?

Questions
1. Does Michael Pollan’s humor contibute to the effectiveness of his argument? Provide a few examples in support of your response.
2. In paragraph 3, why does Pollan use the term “cow” rather than “beef,” and “pig”
rather than “pork”? What does this language suggest about our attitude toward
eating these animals?
3. Pollan writes, “When I was a kid, you never saw radicchio in the produce section, or
a half dozen different kinds of mushrooms, or kiwis and passion fruit and durians
and mangoes” (para. 5). What is his point? Have things changed in the supermarket
since you were “a kid” as well? Is this a good thing, or not? Explain your response.
4. In paragraph 7, Pollan asks three questions and writes, “Not very long ago an eater
didn’t need a journalist to answer these questions.” Do you see those questions as
important? Do you share his concerns? Why or why not?
5. Pollan’s piece is based largely on observation and reporting. How does this method
serve to advance his argument?
6. What is the most surprising thing that you learned from Pollan’s piece? How does
it affect your attitude toward food? Toward eating?

3. The Locavore Myth
James McWilliams
The following article challenging the locavore movement appeared in Forbes,
a business magazine, in 2009. McWilliams is a professor of history at Texas
State University.

Buy local, shrink the distance food travels, save the planet. The locavore movement has captured a lot of fans. To their credit, they are highlighting the problems with industrialized food. But a lot of them are making a big mistake. By

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 965

6/18/12 3:13 PM

966

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

focusing on transportation, they overlook other energy-hogging factors in food
production.
Take lamb. A 2006 academic study (funded by the New Zealand government) discovered that it made more environmental sense for a Londoner to buy
lamb shipped from New Zealand than to buy lamb raised in the U.K. This finding is counterintuitive — if you’re only counting food miles. But New Zealand
lamb is raised on pastures with a small carbon footprint, whereas most English
lamb is produced under intensive factory-like conditions with a big carbon footprint. This disparity overwhelms domestic lamb’s advantage in transportation
energy.
New Zealand lamb is not exceptional. Take a close look at water usage, fertilizer types, processing methods and packaging techniques and you discover that
factors other than shipping far outweigh the energy it takes to transport food.
One analysis, by Rich Pirog of the Leopold Center for Sustainable Agriculture,
showed that transportation accounts for only 11% of food’s carbon footprint. A
fourth of the energy required to produce food is expended in the consumer’s
kitchen. Still more energy is consumed per meal in a restaurant, since restaurants
throw away most of their leftovers.
Locavores argue that buying local food supports an area’s farmers and, in
turn, strengthens the community. Fair enough. Left unacknowledged, however, is
the fact that it also hurts farmers in other parts of the world. The U.K. buys most
of its green beans from Kenya. While it’s true that the beans almost always arrive
in airplanes — the form of transportation that consumes the most energy — it’s
also true that a campaign to shame English consumers with small airplane stickers
affixed to flown-in produce threatens the livelihood of 1.5 million sub-Saharan
farmers.
Another chink in the locavores’ armor involves the way food miles are calculated. To choose a locally grown apple over an apple trucked in from across the
country might seem easy. But this decision ignores economies of scale. To take an
extreme example, a shipper sending a truck with 2,000 apples over 2,000 miles
would consume the same amount of fuel per apple as a local farmer who takes a
pickup 50 miles to sell 50 apples at his stall at the green market. The critical measure here is not food miles but apples per gallon.
The one big problem with thinking beyond food miles is that it’s hard to get
the information you need. Ethically concerned consumers know very little about
processing practices, water availability, packaging waste and fertilizer application.
This is an opportunity for watchdog groups. They should make life-cycle carbon
counts available to shoppers.
Until our food system becomes more transparent, there is one thing you can
do to shrink the carbon footprint of your dinner: Take the meat off your plate. No
matter how you slice it, it takes more energy to bring meat, as opposed to plants,
to the table. It takes 6 pounds of grain to make a pound of chicken and 10 to 16
pounds to make a pound of beef. That difference translates into big differences in
inputs. It requires 2,400 liters of water to make a burger and only 13 liters to grow

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 966

5

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CONvERSATION

967

a tomato. A majority of the water in the American West goes toward the production of pigs, chickens and cattle.
The average American eats 273 pounds of meat a year. Give up red meat once
a week and you’ll save as much energy as if the only food miles in your diet were
the distance to the nearest truck farmer.
If you want to make a statement, ride your bike to the farmer’s market. If you
want to reduce greenhouse gases, become a vegetarian.

Questions
1. According to James McWilliams, locavores point to what serious problems? What
are some of the unexpected disadvantages of the locavore movement?
2. Do you find McWilliams’s use of lamb as an example to be convincing? Why or
why not?
3. In paragraph 4, McWilliams writes, “Fair enough.” What is the rhetorical effect of
this sentence fragment? How does it contribute to his argument?
4. McWilliams writes, “To take an extreme example, a shipper sending a truck with
2,000 apples over 2,000 miles would consume the same amount of fuel per apple
as a local farmer who takes a pickup 50 miles to sell 50 apples at his stall at the
green market” (para. 5). Do you find the example of the local farmer to be realistic? Is McWilliams’s “extreme example” perhaps too extreme? Is it a “straw man”?
How does it affect the persuasiveness of his argument? Explain your response.
5. Go back and read the title of the article. Which features of the locavore movement
does McWilliams regard as “myth”? Which does he regard as real?
6. In paragraph 7, McWilliams shifts his attention to the topic of meat. Do you think
this shift in focus is effective, or is it an unnecessary tangent? What is the rhetorical
effect of the final sentence? Explain.

4. The American Table and The Global Table
Jonathan Safran Foer
The following piece is excerpted from the final chapter of Eating Animals
(2009), a book by novelist Jonathan Safran Foer that reflects on the ethics of
eating meat.

The American Table
We shouldn’t kid ourselves about the number of ethical eating options available
to most of us. There isn’t enough nonfactory chicken produced in America to
feed the population of Staten Island and not enough nonfactory pork to serve
New York City, let alone the country. Ethical meat is a promissory note, not a reality. Any ethical-meat advocate who is serious is going to be eating a lot of vegetarian fare.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 967

6/18/12 3:13 PM

968

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

A good number of people seem to be tempted to continue supporting factory
farms while also buying meat outside that system when it is available. That’s nice.
But if it is as far as our moral imaginations can stretch, then it’s hard to be optimistic about the future. Any plan that involves funneling money to the factory
farm won’t end factory farming. How effective would the Montgomery bus boycott have been if the protesters had used the bus when it became inconvenient not
to? How effective would a strike be if workers announced they would go back to
work as soon as it became difficult to strike? If anyone finds in this book encouragement to buy some meat from alternative sources while buying factory farm
meat as well, they have found something that isn’t here.
If we are at all serious about ending factory farming, then the absolute least
we can do is stop sending checks to the absolute worst abusers. For some, the
decision to eschew factory-farmed products will be easy. For others, the decision
will be a hard one. To those for whom it sounds like a hard decision (I would have
counted myself in this group), the ultimate question is whether it is worth the
inconvenience. We know, at least, that this decision will help prevent deforestation, curb global warming, reduce pollution, save oil reserves, lessen the burden on rural America, decrease human rights abuses, improve public health, and
help eliminate the most systematic animal abuse in world history. What we don’t
know, though, may be just as important. How would making such a decision
change us?
Setting aside the direct material changes initiated by opting out of the factory
farm system, the decision to eat with such deliberateness would itself be a force
with enormous potential. What kind of world would we create if three times a
day we activated our compassion and reason as we sat down to eat, if we had the
moral imagination and the pragmatic will to change our most fundamental act of
consumption? Tolstoy famously argued that the existence of slaughterhouses and
battlefields is linked. Okay, we don’t fight wars because we eat meat, and some
wars should be fought — which is not to mention that Hitler was a vegetarian.
But compassion is a muscle that gets stronger with use, and the regular exercise
of choosing kindness over cruelty would change us.
It might sound naive to suggest that whether you order a chicken patty or a
veggie burger is a profoundly important decision. Then again, it certainly would
have sounded fantastic if in the 1950s you were told that where you sat in a restaurant or on a bus could begin to uproot racism. It would have sounded equally
fantastic if you were told in the early 1970s, before César Chávez’s workers’ rights
campaigns, that refusing to eat grapes could begin to free farmworkers from
slave-like conditions. It might sound fantastic, but when we bother to look, it’s
hard to deny that our day-to-day choices shape the world. When America’s early
settlers decided to throw a tea party in Boston, forces powerful enough to create
a nation were released. Deciding what to eat (and what to toss overboard) is the
founding act of production and consumption that shapes all others. Choosing
leaf or flesh, factory farm or family farm, does not in itself change the world, but

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 968

5

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CONvERSATION

969

teaching ourselves, our children, our local communities, and our nation to choose
conscience over ease can. One of the greatest opportunities to live our values —
or betray them — lies in the food we put on our plates. And we will live or betray
our values not only as individuals, but as nations.
We have grander legacies than the quest for cheap products. Martin Luther
King Jr. wrote passionately about the time when “one must take a position that is
neither safe, nor politic, nor popular.” Sometimes we simply have to make a decision because “one’s conscience tells one that it is right.” These famous words of
King’s, and the efforts of Chávez’s United Farm Workers, are also our legacy. We
might want to say that these social-justice movements have nothing to do with
the situation of the factory farm. Human oppression is not animal abuse. King
and Chávez were moved by a concern for suffering humanity, not suffering chickens or global warming. Fair enough. One can certainly quibble with, or even
become enraged by, the comparison implicit in invoking them here, but it is
worth noting that César Chávez and King’s wife, Coretta Scott King, were vegans,
as is King’s son Dexter. We interpret the Chávez and King legacies — we interpret
America’s legacy — too narrowly if we assume in advance that they cannot speak
against the oppression of the factory farm.

The Global Table
Next time you sit down for a meal, imagine that there are nine other people
sitting with you at the table, and that together you represent all the people on the
planet. Organized by nations, two of your tablemates are Chinese, two Indian,
and a fifth respresents all the other countries in Northeast, South, and Central
Asia. A sixth represents the nations of Southeast Asia and Oceana. A seventh
represents sub-Saharan Africa, and an eighth represents the remainder of Africa
and the Middle East. A ninth represents Europe. The remaining seat, representing
the countries of South, Central, and North America, is for you.
If we allocate seats by native language, only Chinese speakers would get their
own representative. All English and Spanish speakers together would have to
share a chair.
Organized by religion, three people are Christian, two are Muslim, and three
practice Buddhism, traditional Chinese religions, or Hinduism. Another two belong to other religious traditions or identify as nonreligious. (My own Jewish
community, which is smaller than the margin of error in the Chinese census,
can’t even squeeze half of a tuches onto a chair.)
If seated by nourishment, one person is hungry and two are obese. More than
half eat a mostly vegetarian diet, but that number is shrinking.The stricter vegetarians and vegans have one seat at the table, but barely. And more than half of
the time any one of you reaches for eggs, chicken, or pork, they will have come
from a factory farm. If current trends continue for another twenty years, the beef
and mutton you reach for also will.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 969

10

6/18/12 3:13 PM

970

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

The United States is not even close to getting its own seat when the table is
organized by population, but it would have somewhere between two and three
seats when people are seated by how much food they consume. No one loves to
eat as much as we do, and when we change what we eat, the world changes.
I’ve restricted myself to mostly discussing how our food choices affect the
ecology of our planet and the lives of its animals, but I could have just as easily
made the entire book about public health, workers’ rights, decaying rural communities, or global poverty — all of which are profoundly affected by factory
farming. Factory farming, of course, does not cause all the world’s problems, but
it is remarkable just how many of them intersect there. And it is equally remarkable, and completely improbable, that the likes of you and me would have real
influence over factory farming. But no one can seriously doubt the influence of
U.S. consumers on global farm practices.
I realize that I’m coming dangerously close to suggesting that quaint notion
that every person can make a difference. The reality is more complicated, of
course. As a “solitary eater,” your decisions will, in and of themselves, do nothing
to alter the industry. That said, unless you obtain your food in secret and eat it in
the closet, you don’t eat alone. We eat as sons and daughters, as families, as communities, as generations, as nations, and increasingly as a globe. We can’t stop our
eating from radiating influence even if we want to.
As anyone who has been a vegetarian for a number of years might tell you,
the influence that this simple dietary choice has on what others around you eat
can be surprising. The body that represents restaurants in America, the National
Restaurant Association, has advised every restaurant in the nation to have at least
one vegetarian entrée. Why? It’s simple: their own polling data indicates that
more than a third of restaurant operators have observed an uptick in demand for
vegetarian meals. A leading restaurant industry periodical, Nation’s Restaurant
News, advises restaurants to “add vegetarian or vegan dishes to the mix. Vegetarian dishes, aside from being less expensive . . . also mitigate the veto vote. Usually,
if you have a vegan in your party, that will dictate where the party eats.”
Millions upon millions of advertising dollars are spent to make sure that we
see people drinking milk or eating beef in movies, and millions more are spent to
make sure that when I have a soda in my hand, you can tell (probably from some
distance) whether it is Coke or Pepsi. The National Restaurant Association doesn’t
make these recommendations, and multinational corporations don’t spend millions on product placement, to make us feel good about the influence we have on
others around us. They simply recognize the fact that eating is a social act.
When we lift our forks, we hang our hats somewhere. We set ourselves in one
relationship or another to farmed animals, farmworkers, national economies, and
global markets. Not making a decision — eating “like everyone else” — is to make
the easiest decision, a decision that is increasingly problematic. Without question,
in most places and in most times, to decide one’s diet by not deciding — to eat
like everyone else — was probably a fine idea. Today, to eat like everyone else is to

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 970

15

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CONvERSATION

971

add another straw to the camel’s back. Our straw may not be the backbreaker, but
the act will be repeated — every day of our lives, and perhaps every day of the
lives of our children and our children’s children. . . .
The seating arrangements and servings at the global table we all eat from
change. The two Chinese at our table have four times the amount of meat on
their plates as they did a few decades ago — and the pile keeps getting higher.
Meanwhile, the two people at the table without clean drinking water are eyeballing China. Today, animal products still account for only 16 percent of the Chinese
diet, but farmed animals account for more than 60 percent of China’s water
consumption — and at a time when Chinese water shortages are already cause
for global concern. The desperate person at our table, who is struggling to find
enough food to eat, might reasonably worry even more at how much of the
world’s march toward U.S.-style meat eating will make the basic grains he or she
relies on for life even less available. More meat means more demand for grains
and more hands fighting over them. By 2050, the world’s livestock will consume
as much food as four billion people.Trends suggest that the one hungry person at
our table could easily become two (270,000 more people become hungry each
day). This will almost certainly happen as the obese also gain another seat. It’s too
easy to imagine a near future in which most of the seats at the global table are
filled by either obese or malnourished people.
But it doesn’t have to be this way. The best reason to think that there could be
a better future is the fact that we know just how bad the future could be.
Rationally, factory farming is so obviously wrong, in so many ways. In all of
my reading and conversations, I’ve yet to find a credible defense of it. But food is
not rational. Food is culture, habit, and identity. For some, that irrationality leads
to a kind of resignation. Food choices are likened to fashion choices or life-style
preferences — they do not respond to judgments about how we should live. And I
would agree that the messiness of food, the almost infinite meanings it proliferates,
does make the question of eating — and eating animals especially — surprisingly
fraught. Activists I spoke with were endlessly puzzled and frustrated by the disconnect between clear thinking and people’s food choices. I sympathize, but I also
wonder if it is precisely the irrationality of food that holds the most promise.
Food is never simply a calculation about which diet uses the least water or
causes the least suffering. And it is in this, perhaps, that our greatest hope for
actually motivating ourselves to change lies. In part, the factory farm requires us
to suppress conscience in favor of craving. But at another level, the ability to
reject the factory farm can be exactly what we most desire.
The debacle of the factory farm is not, I’ve come to feel, just a problem about
ignorance — it’s not, as activists often say, a problem that arose because “people
don’t know the facts.” Clearly that is one cause. I’ve filled this book with an awful
lot of facts because they are a necessary starting point. And I’ve presented what
we know scientifically about the legacy we are creating with our daily food choices
because that also matters a great deal. I’m not suggesting our reason should not

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 971

20

6/18/12 3:13 PM

972

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

guide us in many important ways, but simply that being human, being humane,
is more than an exercise of reason. Responding to the factory farm calls for a
capacity to care that dwells beyond information, and beyond the oppositions of
desire and reason, fact and myth, and even human and animal.
The factory farm will come to an end because of its absurd economics someday. It is radically unsustainable. The earth will eventually shake off factory farming like a dog shakes off fleas; the only question is whether we will get shaken off
along with it.
Thinking about eating animals, especially publicly, releases unexpected forces
into the world. The questions are charged like few others. From one angle of
vision, meat is just another thing we consume, and matters in the same way as the
consumption of paper napkins or SUVs — if to a greater degree. Try changing
napkins at Thanksgiving, though — even do it bombastically, with a lecture on
the immorality of such and such a napkin maker — and you’ll have a hard time
getting anyone worked up. Raise the question of a vegetarian Thanksgiving,
though, and you’ll have no problem eliciting strong opinions — at least strong
opinions. The question of eating animals hits chords that resonate deeply with
our sense of self — our memories, desires, and values. Those resonances are
potentially controversial, potentially threatening, potentially inspiring, but always
filled with meaning. Food matters and animals matter and eating animals matters
even more. The question of eating animals is ultimately driven by our intuitions
about what it means to reach an ideal we have named, perhaps incorrectly, “being
human.”

Questions
1. Jonathan Safran Foer writes of the things “[w]e know” (para. 3). Would most
people agree that we know the things that he indicates? Would most of his readers?
Do you? Why or why not?
2. Safran Foer writes: “One of the greatest opportunities to live our values — or
betray them — lies in the food we put on our plates” (para. 5). Do you agree? Why
or why not? Do you find the extended analogy between civil rights and ethical eating persuasive? Explain.
3. What is the most surprising fact that you’ve learned through the analogy of the ten
people sitting at the global table? How does it affect your attitude toward eating?
4. The writer, in paragraph 16, suggests that things today are not like before. Why is
that? What has changed?
5. Safran Foer writes, “In part, the factory farm requires us to suppress conscience in
favor of craving” (para. 20). What does the author imply with that statement? Do
you agree? Explain.
6. Safran Foer says that the factory farm is “radically unsustainable” and that it will
end because of its “absurd economics” (para. 22). Do you think that is true? Why
or why not?

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 972

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CONvERSATION

973

5. The Carnivore’s Dilemma
Nicolette Hahn Niman
In the following selection, published in the New York Times in 2009, Nicolette
Hahn Niman, who is a lawyer and rancher, argues the case for eating meat.

Is eating a hamburger the global warming equivalent of driving a Hummer? This
week an article in the Times of London carried a headline that blared: “Give Up
Meat to Save the Planet.” Former Vice President Al Gore, who has made climate
change his signature issue, has even been assailed for omnivorous eating by animal rights activists.
It’s true that food production is an important contributor to climate change.
And the claim that meat (especially beef) is closely linked to global warming has
received some credible backing, including by the United Nations and University
of Chicago. Both institutions have issued reports that have been widely summarized as condemning meat-eating.
But that’s an overly simplistic conclusion to draw from the research. To a
rancher like me, who raises cattle, goats and turkeys the traditional way (on
grass), the studies show only that the prevailing methods of producing meat —
that is, crowding animals together in factory farms, storing their waste in giant
lagoons and cutting down forests to grow crops to feed them — cause substantial
greenhouse gases. It could be, in fact, that a conscientious meat eater may have a
more environmentally friendly diet than your average vegetarian.
So what is the real story of meat’s connection to global warming? Answering
the question requires examining the individual greenhouse gases involved: carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxides.
Carbon dioxide makes up the majority of agriculture-related greenhouse
emissions. In American farming, most carbon dioxide emissions come from fuel
burned to operate vehicles and equipment. World agricultural carbon emissions,
on the other hand, result primarily from the clearing of woods for crop growing
and livestock grazing. During the 1990s, tropical deforestation in Brazil, India,
Indonesia, Sudan and other developing countries caused 15 percent to 35 percent
of annual global fossil fuel emissions.
Much Brazilian deforestation is connected to soybean cultivation. As much
as 70 percent of areas newly cleared for agriculture in Mato Grosso State in Brazil
is being used to grow soybeans. Over half of Brazil’s soy harvest is controlled by a
handful of international agribusiness companies, which ship it all over the world
for animal feed and food products, causing emissions in the process.
Meat and dairy eaters need not be part of this. Many smaller, traditional
farms and ranches in the United States have scant connection to carbon dioxide
emissions because they keep their animals outdoors on pasture and make little
use of machinery. Moreover, those farmers generally use less soy than industrial
operations do, and those who do often grow their own, so there are no emissions

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 973

5

6/18/12 3:13 PM

974

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

from long-distance transport and zero chance their farms contributed to deforestation in the developing world.
In contrast to traditional farms, industrial livestock and poultry facilities
keep animals in buildings with mechanized systems for feeding, lighting, sewage
flushing, ventilation, heating and cooling, all of which generate emissions. These
factory farms are also soy guzzlers and acquire much of their feed overseas. You
can reduce your contribution to carbon dioxide emissions by avoiding industrially produced meat and dairy products.
Unfortunately for vegetarians who rely on it for protein, avoiding soy from
deforested croplands may be more difficult: as the Organic Consumers Association notes, Brazilian soy is common (and unlabeled) in tofu and soymilk sold in
American supermarkets.
Methane is agriculture’s second-largest greenhouse gas. Wetland rice fields
alone account for as much as 29 percent of the world’s human-generated methane. In animal farming, much of the methane comes from lagoons of liquefied
manure at industrial facilities, which are as nauseating as they sound.
This isn’t a problem at traditional farms. “Before the 1970s, methane emissions from manure were minimal because the majority of livestock farms in the
U.S. were small operations where animals deposited manure in pastures and corrals,” the Environmental Protection Agency says. The E.P.A. found that with the
rapid rise of factory farms, liquefied manure systems became the norm and
methane emissions skyrocketed. You can reduce your methane emissions by seeking out meat from animals raised outdoors on traditional farms.

10

Y
Critics of meat-eating often point out that cattle are prime culprits in methane
production. Fortunately, the cause of these methane emissions is understood,
and their production can be reduced.
Much of the problem arises when livestock eat poor quality forages, throwing
their digestive systems out of balance. Livestock nutrition experts have demonstrated that by making minor improvements in animal diets (like providing
nutrient-laden salt licks) they can cut enteric methane by half. Other practices,
like adding certain proteins to ruminant diets, can reduce methane production
per unit of milk or meat by a factor of six, according to research at Australia’s
University of New England. Enteric methane emissions can also be substantially
reduced when cattle are regularly rotated onto fresh pastures, researchers at University of Louisiana have confirmed.
Finally, livestock farming plays a role in nitrous oxide emissions, which make
up around 5 percent of this country’s total greenhouse gases. More than threequarters of farming’s nitrous oxide emissions result from man-made fertilizers.
Thus, you can reduce nitrous oxide emissions by buying meat and dairy products
from animals that were not fed fertilized crops — in other words, from animals
raised on grass or raised organically.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 974

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CONvERSATION

975

In contrast to factory farming, well-managed, non-industrialized animal
farming minimizes greenhouse gases and can even benefit the environment. For
example, properly timed cattle grazing can increase vegetation by as much as
45 percent, North Dakota State University researchers have found. And grazing
by large herbivores (including cattle) is essential for well-functioning prairie ecosystems, research at Kansas State University has determined.
Additionally, several recent studies show that pasture and grassland areas
used for livestock reduce global warming by acting as carbon sinks. Converting
croplands to pasture, which reduces erosion, effectively sequesters significant
amounts of carbon. One analysis published in the journal Global Change Biology
showed a 19 percent increase in soil carbon after land changed from cropland to
pasture. What’s more, animal grazing reduces the need for the fertilizers and fuel
used by farm machinery in crop cultivation, things that aggravate climate change.
Livestock grazing has other noteworthy environmental benefits as well.
Compared to cropland, perennial pastures used for grazing can decrease soil erosion by 80 percent and markedly improve water quality, Minnesota’s Land Stewardship Project research has found. Even the United Nations report acknowledges,
“There is growing evidence that both cattle ranching and pastoralism can have
positive impacts on biodiversity.”
As the contrast between the environmental impact of traditional farming
and industrial farming shows, efforts to minimize greenhouse gases need to be
much more sophisticated than just making blanket condemnations of certain
foods. Farming methods vary tremendously, leading to widely variable global
warming contributions for every food we eat. Recent research in Sweden shows
that, depending on how and where a food is produced, its carbon dioxide emissions vary by a factor of 10.
And it should also be noted that farmers bear only a portion of the blame for
greenhouse gas emissions in the food system. Only about one-fifth of the food
system’s energy use is farm-related, according to University of Wisconsin research.
And the Soil Association in Britain estimates that only half of food’s total greenhouse impact has any connection to farms. The rest comes from processing,
transportation, storage, retailing and food preparation. The seemingly innocent
potato chip, for instance, turns out to be a dreadfully climate-hostile food. Foods
that are minimally processed, in season and locally grown, like those available at
farmers’ markets and backyard gardens, are generally the most climate-friendly.
Rampant waste at the processing, retail and household stages compounds the
problem. About half of the food produced in the United States is thrown away,
according to University of Arizona research. Thus, a consumer could measurably
reduce personal global warming impact simply by more judicious grocery purchasing and use.
None of us, whether we are vegan or omnivore, can entirely avoid foods that
play a role in global warming. Singling out meat is misleading and unhelpful,
especially since few people are likely to entirely abandon animal-based foods.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 975

15

20

6/18/12 3:13 PM

976

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

Mr. Gore, for one, apparently has no intention of going vegan. The 90 percent of
Americans who eat meat and dairy are likely to respond the same way.
Still, there are numerous reasonable ways to reduce our individual contributions to climate change through our food choices. Because it takes more resources
to produce meat and dairy than, say, fresh locally grown carrots, it’s sensible to
cut back on consumption of animal-based foods. More important, all eaters can
lower their global warming contribution by following these simple rules: avoid
processed foods and those from industrialized farms; reduce food waste; and buy
local and in season.

Questions
1. What is the “overly simplistic conclusion” that Nicolette Hahn Niman challenges?
Why is it “overly simplistic” (para. 3)?
2. How successfully does Hahn Niman use sources and statistics to help support her
argument? Do you find them convincing? Why or why not?
3. According to this article, what are the chief differences between factory farms
and traditional farms? How compelling is the argument for traditional farming
methods?
4. How has reading this piece affected your view of sustainable eating?
5. What is your view of the three rules with which the selection concludes? Are they
good rules to follow? Why or why not?

6. A Good Food Manifesto for America
Will Allen
The following blog post from growingpower.org is a plea for sustainable agricultural practices. It was written in 2010 by Will Allen, an urban farmer and
former professional basketball player.

I am a farmer. While I find that this has come to mean many other things to other
people — that I have become also a trainer and teacher, and to some a sort of food
philosopher — I do like nothing better than to get my hands into good rich soil
and sow the seeds of hope.
So, spring always enlivens me and gives me the energy to make haste, to feel
confidence, to take full advantage of another all-too-short Wisconsin summer.
This spring, however, much more so than in past springs, I feel my hope and
confidence mixed with a sense of greater urgency. This spring, I know that my
work will be all the more important, for the simple but profound reason that
more people are hungry.
For years I have argued that our food system is broken, and I have tried to
teach what I believe must be done to fix it. This year, and last, we have begun

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 976

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CONvERSATION

977

seeing the unfortunate results of systemic breakdown. We have seen it in higher
prices for those who can less afford to pay, in lines at local food pantries, churches,
and missions, and in the anxious eyes of people who have suddenly become
unemployed. We have seen it, too, in nationwide outbreaks of food-borne illness
in products as unlikely as spinach and peanuts.
Severe economic recession certainly has not helped matters, but the current
economy is not alone to blame. This situation has been spinning toward this day
for decades. And while many of my acquaintances tend to point the finger at
the big agro-chemical conglomerates as villains, the fault really is with all of us
who casually, willingly, even happily surrendered our rights to safe, wholesome,
affordable, and plentiful food in exchange for over-processed and pre-packaged
convenience.
Over the past century, we allowed our agriculture to become more and more
industrialized, more and more reliant on unsustainable practices, and much
more distant from the source to the consumer. We have allowed corn and soybeans, grown on the finest farmland in the world, to become industrial commodities rather than foodstuffs. We have encouraged a system by which most of
the green vegetables we eat come from a few hundred square miles of irrigated
semi-desert in California.
When fuel prices skyrocket, as they did last year, things go awry. When a
bubble like ethanol builds and then bursts, things go haywire. When drought
strikes that valley in California, as is happening right now, things start to topple.
And when the whole economy shatters, the security of a nation’s food supply
teeters on the brink of failure.
To many people, this might sound a bit hysterical. There is still food in the
suburban supermarket aisles, yes. The shelves are not empty; there are no bread
lines. We haven’t read of any number of Americans actually starving to death.
No, and were any of those things to happen, you can rest assured that there
would be swift and vigorous action. What is happening is that many vulnerable
people, especially in the large cities where most of us live, in vast urban tracts
where there are in fact no supermarkets, are being forced to buy cheaper and
lower-quality foods, to forgo fresh fruits and vegetables, or are relying on food
programs — including our children’s school food programs — that by necessity
are obliged to distribute any kind of food they can afford, good for you or not.
And this is coming to haunt us in health care and social costs. No, we are not suddenly starving to death; we are slowly but surely malnourishing ourselves to
death. And this fate is falling ever more heavily on those who were already
stressed: the poor. Yet there is little action.
Many astute and well-informed people beside myself, most notably Michael
Pollan, in a highly persuasive treatise last fall in the New York Times, have issued
these same warnings and laid out the case for reform of our national food policy.
I need not go on repeating what Pollan and others have already said so well, and
I do not wish merely to add my voice to a chorus.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 977

5

6/18/12 3:13 PM

978

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

I am writing to demand action.
It is time and past time for this nation, this government, to react to the dangers inherent in its flawed farm and food policies and to reverse course from
subsidizing wealth to subsidizing health.
We have to stop paying the largest farm subsidies to large growers of unsustainable and inedible crops like cotton. We have to stop paying huge subsidies
to Big Corn, Big Soy, and Big Chem to use prime farmland to grow fuel, plastics,
and fructose. We have to stop using federal and state agencies and institutions as
taxpayer-funded research arms for the very practices that got us into this mess.
We have to start subsidizing health and well-being by rewarding sustainable
practices in agriculture and assuring a safe, adequate, and wholesome food supply to all our citizens. And we need to start this reform process now, as part of the
national stimulus toward economic recovery.
In my organization, Growing Power Inc. of Milwaukee, we have always before
tried to be as self-sustaining as possible and to rely on the market for our success.
Typically, I would not want to lean on government support, because part of the
lesson we teach is to be self-reliant.
But these are not typical times, as we are now all too well aware.
As soon as it became clear that Congress would pass the National Recovery
Act, I and members of my staff brainstormed ideas for a meaningful stimulus
package aimed at creating green jobs, shoring up the security of our urban food
systems, and promoting sound food policies of national scope. The outcome
needed to be both “shovel-ready” for immediate impact and sustainable for
future growth.
We produced a proposal for the creation of a public-private enabling institution called the Centers for Urban Agriculture. It would incorporate a national
training and outreach center, a large working urban farmstead, a research and
development center, a policy institute, and a state-of-the-future urban agriculture demonstration center into which all of these elements would be combined in
a functioning community food system scaled to the needs of a large city.
We proposed that this working institution — not a “think tank” but a “do
tank” — be based in Milwaukee, where Growing Power has already created an
operating model on just two acres. But ultimately, satellite centers would become
established in urban areas across the nation. Each would be the hub of a local or
regional farm-to-market community food system that would provide sustainable
jobs, job training, food production, and food distribution to those most in need
of nutritional support and security.
This proposal was forwarded in February to our highest officials at the city,
state, and federal level, and it was greeted with considerable approval. Unfortunately, however, it soon became clear that the way Congress had structured the
stimulus package, with funds earmarked for only particular sectors of the economy, chiefly infrastructure, afforded neither our Congressional representatives
nor our local leaders with the discretion to direct any significant funds to this

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 978

10

15

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CONvERSATION

979

innovative plan. It simply had not occurred to anyone that immediate and lasting
job creation was plausible in a field such as community-based agriculture.
I am asking Congress today to rectify that oversight, whether by modifying
the current guidelines of the Recovery Act or by designating new and dedicated
funds to the development of community food systems through the creation of
this national Centers for Urban Agriculture.
Our proposal budgeted the initial creation of this CUA at a minimum of
$63 million over two years — a droplet compared to the billions being invested in
other programs both in the stimulus plan and from year-to-year in the federal
budget.
Consider that the government will fund the Centers for Disease Control at
about $8.8 billion this year, and that is above the hundreds of millions more in
research grants to other bio-medical institutions, public and private. This is
money well spent for important work to ensure Americans the best knowledge in
protecting health by fighting disease; but surely by now we ought to recognize
that the best offense against many diseases is the defense provided by a healthy
and adequate diet. Yet barely a pittance of CDC money goes for any kind of preventive care research.
In 2008, the Department of Homeland Security approved spending $450
million for a new National Bio and Agro-Defense Facility at Kansas State University, in addition to the existing Biosecurity Research Institute already there. Again,
money well spent to protect our food supply from the potential of a terrorist
attack. But note that these hundreds of millions are being spent to protect us
from a threat that may never materialize, while we seem to trivialize the very real
and material threat that is upon us right now: the threat of malnourishment and
undernourishment of very significant numbers of our citizens.
Government programs under the overwhelmed and overburdened departments of Agriculture and of Health and Human Services do their best to serve
their many masters, but in the end, government farm and food policies are most
often at odds between the needs of the young, the old, the sick, and the poor versus the wants of the super-industry that agriculture has become.
By and large, the government’s funding of nutritional health comes down to
spending millions on studies to tell us what we ought to eat without in any way
guaranteeing that many people will be able to find or afford the foods they recommend. For instance, food stamps ensure only that poor people can buy food;
they cannot ensure that, in the food deserts that America’s inner cities have
become, there will be any good food to buy.
We need a national nutrition plan that is not just another entitlement, that is
not a matter of shipping surplus calories to schools, senior centers, and veterans’
homes. We need a plan that encourages a return to the best practices of both
farming and marketing, that rewards the grower who protects the environment
and his customers by nourishing his soil with compost instead of chemicals and
who ships his goods the shortest distance, not the longest.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 979

20

25

6/18/12 3:13 PM

980

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

If the main purpose of government is to provide for the common security of
its citizens, surely ensuring the security of their food system must be among its
paramount duties. And if among our rights are life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness, we are denied all those rights if our cities become prisons of poverty
and malnutrition.
As an African-American farmer, I am calling on the first African-American
president of the United States to lead us quickly away from this deepening crisis.
Demand, President Obama, that Congress and your own Administration begin
without delay the process of reforming our farm and food policies. Start now by
correcting the omission in your economic stimulus and recovery act that prevented significant spending on creating new and sustainable jobs for the poor in
our urban centers as well as rural farm communities.
It will be an irony, certainly, but a sweet one, if millions of African-Americans
whose grandparents left the farms of the South for the factories of the North,
only to see those factories close, should now find fulfillment in learning once
again to live close to the soil and to the food it gives to all of us.
I would hope that we can move along a continuum to make sure that all our
citizens have access to the same fresh, safe, affordable good food regardless of
their cultural, social, or economic situation.

30

Questions
1. Where does Will Allen lay blame for the conditions that he describes in paragraph 4?
2. What does Allen suggest are “unsustainable practices” (para. 5)?
3. Allen writes, “To many people, this might sound a bit hysterical” (para. 7). Does it
to you? Why or why not?
4. What does Allen mean by “subsidizing health” (para. 11)? What current practices
does he identify as unhealthy? Do you agree with him? Explain your response.
5. Allen suggests that access to “fresh, safe, affordable good food” (para. 30) is a right
that all Americans should have. Do you agree? How can we work to bring such a
condition about?

7. Farm to Table
How Our Restaurant Gets Its Food to Your Plate
A. J. Jacobs
The following piece appeared in the men’s magazine Esquire in March 2011.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 980

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CONvERSATION

981

In the spring, the asparagus is planted in a field just three
hundred yards down the road. It is allowed to grow
without interference from pesticide, fungicide, herbicide,
cell-phone radiation, traffic noises, or human eye contact.

We wait.

At just the right time, the asparagus spear is gently handpicked
by a well-compensated Latin American earth worker,
but only after it has been subjected to Ericksonian hypnosis
to minimize the pain.

A short bereavement service follows, incorporating Jewish,
Christian, and Shinto textual elements, acknowledging
the asparagus is sacrificing its life for our consumption.

The asparagus spear is transported directly and swiftly to the
kitchen by an Ivy League–educated barefoot runner
trained by Mexico’s Tarahumara tribe.

It is washed in the morning dew that gathers on the
staff ’s yurts.

The asparagus spear then rests in silence.

Our executive chef cooks the asparagus for thirty seconds by
holding it ten feet from a fire of recycled cypress chips.

The asparagus is served to you, the diner, by hormone-free,
locally grown waiters. Instead of plates, we use
hardened clumps of dirt from the restaurant’s backyard,
inspired by the ancient menarche ceremony of
the local Chippewa tribe.

After the meal, it is customary for diners to walk to the
asparagus field, squat, and fertilize the vegetables with their
own organic matter, starting the whole beautiful process anew!

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 981

6/18/12 3:13 PM

982

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

Questions
1. What stereotypes about restaurants and food does A. J. Jacobs address?
2. What contribution do the visuals make to the piece?
3. How does Jacobs’s tone affect your response to the piece?
4. How would you paraphrase the serious argument that Jacobs delivers? How persuasive is it?

8. from Test-Tube Burgers
Michael Specter
In the following essay published in May 2011 in the New Yorker, author
Michael Specter discusses the developing science of meat production.

Meat supplies a variety of nutrients — among them iron, zinc, and Vitamin B12 —
that are not readily found in plants. We can survive without it; millions of vegetarians choose to do so, and billions of others have that choice imposed upon them
by poverty. But for at least two million years animals have provided our most
consistent source of protein. For most of that time, the economic, social, and
health benefits of raising and eating livestock were hard to dispute. The evolutionary biologist Richard Wrangham argues, in his book Catching Fire: How
Cooking Made Us Human, that the development of a brain that could conceive of
cooking meat — a singularly efficient way to consume protein — has defined our
species more clearly than any other characteristic. Animals have always been
essential to human development. Sir Albert Howard, who is often viewed as the
founder of the modern organic-farming movement, put it succinctly in his 1940
mission statement, An Agricultural Testament: “Mother earth never attempts to
farm without livestock.”
For many people, the idea of divorcing beef from a cow or pork from a pig
will seem even more unsettling than the controversial yet utterly routine practice
of modifying crops with the tools of molecular biology. The Food and Drug
Administration currently has before it an application, which has already caused
rancorous debate, to engineer salmon with a hormone that will force the fish to
grow twice as fast as normal. Clearly, making meat without animals would be a
more fundamental departure. How we grow, prepare, and eat our food is a deeply
emotional issue, and lab-grown meat raises powerful questions about what most
people see as the boundaries of nature and the basic definitions of life. Can something be called chicken or pork if it was born in a flask and produced in a vat?
Questions like that have rarely been asked and have never been answered.
Still, the idea itself is not new. On January 17, 1912, the Nobel Prize–winning
biologist Alexis Carrel placed tissue from an embryonic chicken heart in a bath of
nutrients. He kept it beating in his laboratory, at the Rockefeller Institute, for

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 982

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CONvERSATION

983

more than twenty years, demonstrating that it was possible to keep muscle tissue
alive outside the body for an extended period. Laboratory meat has also long
been the subject of dystopian fantasy and literary imagination. In 1931, Winston
Churchill published an essay, “Fifty Years Hence,” in which he described what he
saw as the inevitable future of food: “We shall escape the absurdity of growing
a whole chicken in order to eat the breast or wing.” He added, “Synthetic food
will, of course, also be used in the future. Nor need the pleasure of the table be
banished. . . . The new foods will from the outset be practically indistinguishable
from the natural products.” The idea has often been touched on in science fiction.
In Neuromancer, William Gibson’s 1984 novel, artificial meat — called vat-grown
flesh — is sold at lower prices than the meat from living animals. In Margaret
Atwood’s Oryx and Crake, published in 2003, “Chickie-Nobs” are engineered to
have many breasts and no brains.
Past discussions have largely been theoretical, but our patterns of meat
consumption have become increasingly dangerous for both individuals and the
planet. According to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, the
global livestock industry is responsible for nearly twenty per cent of humanity’s
greenhouse-gas emissions. That is more than all cars, trains, ships, and planes
combined. Cattle consume nearly ten per cent of the world’s freshwater resources,
and eighty per cent of all farmland is devoted to the production of meat. By 2030,
the world will likely consume seventy percent more meat than it did in 2000. The
ecological implications are daunting, and so are the implications for animal welfare: billions of cows, pigs, and chickens spend their entire lives crated, boxed, or
force-fed grain in repulsive conditions on factory farms. These animals are born
solely to be killed, and between the two events they are treated like interchangeable parts in a machine, as if a chicken were a sparkplug, and a cow a drill bit.
The consequences of eating meat, and our increasing reliance on factory
farms, are almost as disturbing for human health. According to a report issued
recently by the American Public Health Association, animal waste from industrial
farms “often contains pathogens, including antibiotic-resistant bacteria, dust,
arsenic, dioxin and other persistent organic pollutants.” Seventy per cent of all
antibiotics and related drugs consumed in the United States are fed to hogs, poultry, and beef. In most cases, they are used solely to promote growth, and not for
any therapeutic reason. By eating animals, humans have exposed themselves to
SARS, avian influenza, and AIDS, among many other viruses. The World Health
Organization has attributed a third of the world’s deaths to the twin epidemics of
diabetes and cardiovascular disease, both greatly influenced by excessive consumption of animal fats.
“We have an opportunity to reverse the terribly damaging impact that eating
animals has had on our lives and on this planet,” Mark Post, a professor in the
physiology department at Maastricht University, in the Netherlands, told me.
“The goal is to take the meat from one animal and create the volume previously
provided by a million animals.” Post, who is a vascular biologist and a surgeon,

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 983

5

6/18/12 3:13 PM

984

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

also has a doctorate in pulmonary pharmacology. His area of expertise is angiogenesis — the growth of new blood vessels. Until recently, he had dedicated himself to creating arteries that could replace and repair those in a diseased human
heart. Like many of his colleagues, he was reluctant to shift from biomedicine to
the meat project. “I am a scientist, and my family always respected me for that,”
he said. “When I started basically spending my time trying to make the beginning
of a hamburger, they would give me a pitiful look, as if to say, You have completely
degraded yourself.”
We met recently at the Eindhoven University of Technology, where he served
on the faculty for years and remains a vice-dean. “First, people ask, ‘Why would
anyone want to do this?’ ” he said. “The initial position often seems to be a reflex:
nobody will ever eat this meat. But in the end I don’t think that will be true. If
people visited a slaughterhouse, then visited a lab, they would realize this approach
is so much healthier.” He added, “I have noticed that when people are exposed to
the facts, to the state of the science, and why we need to look for alternatives to
what we have now, the opposition is not so intense.”
Post, a trim fifty-three-year-old man in rimless glasses and a polo shirt,
stressed, too, that scientific advances have been robust. “If what you want is to
grow muscle cells and produce a useful source of animal protein in a lab, well, we
can do that today,” he said — an assertion echoed by Mironov, in South Carolina,
and by many other scientists in the field. To grow ground meat — which accounts
for half the meat sold in the United States — one needs essentially to roll sheets of
two-dimensional muscle cells together and mold them into food. A steak would
be much harder. That’s because before scientists can manufacture meat that looks
as if it came from a butcher, they will have to design the network of blood vessels
and arteries required to ferry nutrients to the cells. Even then, no producer with
a label that said “Born in cell culture, raised in a vat” would be commercially
viable until the costs fall.
Scientific advances necessarily predate the broad adoption of any technology —
often by years. Post points to the first general-purpose computer, Eniac. Built
during the Second World War, and designed to calculate artillery-firing ranges,
the computer cost millions of dollars and occupied a giant room in the U.S.
Army’s Ballistic Research Laboratory. “Today, any cell phone or five-dollar watch
has a more powerful computer,” Post noted. In the late nineteen-eighties, as the
Human Genome Project got under way, researchers estimated that sequencing
the genome of a single individual would take fifteen years and cost three billion
dollars. The same work can now be done in twenty-four hours for about a thousand dollars.
Those numbers will continue to fall as personal genomics becomes more
relevant, and, as would be the case with laboratory meat, it will become more
relevant if the price keeps falling. “The first hamburger will be incredibly expensive,” Post said. “Somebody calculated five thousand dollars. The skills you need
to grow a small amount of meat in a laboratory are not necessarily those that

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 984

10

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CONvERSATION

985

would permit you to churn out ground beef by the ton. To do that will require
money and public interest. We don’t have enough of either right now. That I do
not understand, because, while I am no businessman, there certainly seems to be
a market out there.”
Meat and poultry dominate American agriculture, with sales that exceeded a
hundred and fifty billion dollars in 2009. It is unlikely that the industry would
cheer on competitors who could directly challenge its profits. Yet, if even a small
percentage of customers switched their allegiance from animals to vats, the market would be huge. After all, the world consumes two hundred and eighty-five
million tons of meat every year — ninety pounds per person. The global population is expected to rise from seven billion to more than nine billion by the
year 2050. This increase will be accompanied by a doubling of the demand for
meat and a steep climb in the greenhouse-gas emissions for which animals are
responsible. Owing to higher incomes, urbanization, and growing populations —
particularly in emerging economies — demand for meat is stronger than it has
ever been. In countries like China and India, moving from a heavily plant-based
diet to one dominated by meat has become an essential symbol of a middleclass life.
Cultured meat, if it were cheap and plentiful, could dispense with many of
these liabilities by providing new sources of protein without inflicting harm on
animals or posing health risks to humans. One study, completed last year by
researchers at Oxford and the University of Amsterdam, reported that the production of cultured meat could consume roughly half the energy and occupy just
two per cent of the land now devoted to the world’s meat industry. The greenhouse gases emitted by livestock, now so punishing, would be negligible. The
possible health benefits would also be considerable. Eating meat that was engineered rather than taken from an animal might even be good for you. Instead of
committing slow suicide by overdosing on saturated fat, we could begin to consume meat infused with omega-3 fatty acids — which have been demonstrated to
prevent the type of heart disease caused by animal fats. “I can well envision a
scenario where your doctor would prescribe hamburgers rather than prohibit
them,” Post said. “The science is not simple and there are hurdles that remain. But
I have no doubt we will get there.”

Questions
1. Michael Specter writes, “For many people, the idea of divorcing beef from a cow or
pork from a pig will seem even more unsettling than the controversial yet utterly
routine practice of modifying crops with the tools of molecular biology” (para. 2).
Why do you think that would be the case? Do you think this is a valid comparison?
Explain your response.
2. In paragraph 2, Specter asks, “Can something be called chicken or pork if it was
born in a flask and produced in a vat?” What is your answer to that question?

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 985

6/18/12 3:13 PM

986

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

3. Specter reports that ground meat accounts for half the meat sold in the United
States (para. 8). How does this surprising fact influence your perspective regarding
sustainable eating?
4. In paragraph 7, Specter quotes scientist Mark Post: “‘The initial position often
seems to be a reflex: nobody will ever eat this meat. But in the end I don’t think
that will be true. If people visited a slaughterhouse, then visited a lab, they would
realize this approach is so much healthier.’” Do you find Post’s argument convincing? Is there another argument that you think people would find more convincing,
or do you think people would never accept lab-grown meat? Explain.
5. How persuasive is the case that Specter makes in paragraph 12 for lab-grown meat
as a partial solution to the sustainable eating issue?
6. Specter interviewed Princeton philosopher Peter Singer, author of “The Singer
Solution to World Poverty” (p. 369), who is considered by many to be the father of
the animal rights movement. Speaking of in-vitro meat, Singer said, “It seems all
pluses and no minuses to me.” What are some pluses in your view? And minuses?
Do you think that one outweighs the other? Explain.

Making Connections
1. How might the supermarket described by Michael Pollan be different if we
followed the three rules suggested by Nicolette Hahn Niman?
2. How might Jonathan Safran Foer’s “global table” be affected by in-vitro meat
production as Michael Specter describes it?
3. Compare Hahn Niman’s perspective on factory farms with that of Safran Foer.
Then compare her position on the eating of meat with that of Safran Foer and
James McWilliams. How would Safran Foer respond to Hahn Niman? How
would Hahn Niman respond to McWilliams? Refer to their texts in your
answers.
4. Several of the writers in the Conversation support the locavore movement.
How effectively does McWilliams refute their positions? Support your response
with examples.
5. Which writer develops the most persuasive argument regarding factory farms?
Safran Foer? Hahn Niman? Specter? Will Allen? Choose two or three, and
compare them with one another.
6. Do you think that Safran Foer’s position on eating meat would change if we
were to grow in-vitro meat successfully? Why or why not?
7. In “A Good Food Manifesto for America,” Will Allen writes, “For years I have
argued that our food system is broken . . .” (para. 3). Which two writers in the
Conversation present the most convincing arguments concerning how to “fix”
the system Allen discusses? Explain with reference to their texts.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 986

6/18/12 3:13 PM

CONvERSATION

987

8. Which of the writers in the Conversation would most likely find “Farm to
Table” funny? Which of them might find Jacobs’s piece offensive? Explain your
answers.
9. Which of the arguments presented in the Conversation are supported by the
visual and textual information in the photo essay by Peter Menzel?

Entering the Conversation
As you respond to the following prompts, support your argument with references to
at least three of the sources in this Conversation on Sustainable Eating. For help using
sources, see Chapter 4.

1. Write a letter about sustainable eating to your local school board regarding the
food offered in school cafeterias. Consider the factors that the board should
consider before making dietary decisions for students.
2. Each of the writers in this Conversation is a contemporary, living writer. Write
a letter addressed to one of them in which you defend, challenge, or qualify his
or her position regarding sustainable eating. Refer to three of the other sources
to support your position.
3. Imagine that your school’s environmental club wants to place posters of animals in a factory farm in the hallways of the elementary, middle, and high
schools in your district. Compose a speech that you would deliver to your
school board in order to defend or challenge that practice. Refer to three of the
sources in the Conversation to support your position.
4. Go back to E. O. Wilson’s essay from The Future of Life (p. 945). Following his
lead, write two opposing arguments in which you stereotype the extreme positions that might be taken by vegetarians and carnivores regarding sustainable
eating.
5. Imagine that there is a grassroots campaign developing that wants Congress to
legislate against in-vitro meat production. Write an editorial for your school
newspaper that supports or challenges this proposed ban. Refer to three of the
sources in the Conversation as you support your argument.
6. Imagine that the largest employer in your town is what many of these writers
would call a “factory farm.” In the voice of the owner of the farm, write a
defense of your business, addressed to one of the writers in the Conversation.
Refer to three of the other sources in your letter.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 987

6/18/12 3:13 PM

988

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

Student Writing
Visual Rhetoric: Analyzing a Photo Essay
Ali Hazel, an eleventh-grade AP English Language student, analyzed the
visual texts on pages 958–61 and wrote the essay below in response to this
prompt:
Look carefully at the series of photos from Hungry Planet, a photo essay by Peter
Menzel, and carefully consider the information that accompanies each photo. What
is Menzel suggesting about food consumption by combining visual and textual information? Write an essay that analyzes how effectively the photo sequence conveys an
important point about global food consumption and sustainable eating, and develops a position on those issues. Refer to the perspectives conveyed by the photos as
you develop your position.

As you read Ali’s essay, consider the techniques that she uses to do a close reading
of the visual texts. Then answer the questions about how she conducts her analysis and develops her argument.

Hard to Swallow
Ali Hazel
Life, especially family life, revolves around food, Earth’s most precious and
indispensable resource. For many of us, including myself (a middle-class American),
food is easy to come by, always accessible, and always on-hand. Unfortunately, this
accessibility allows us consumers to take food for granted, to misuse and mistreat the
life-sustaining gift of our planet. We often assume our right to have food; we grumble
until it’s ours, we take more than is necessary, and we throw the remains and the
packaging into the trash. This frivolous consumption can only last so long; how much
more can the human race afford to waste before we completely devour all of Earth’s
resources? These six pictures offer an answer to this grisly question, but the suggestion
may be hard for consumers to swallow. The series of images shocks its audience with
an effective combination of realism and indisputable facts. Each of the six families,
representing diverse cultures and countries, displays the food they consume in one week.
Accompanying each image are two brief statements, describing the total weekly food
expenditure, as well as the family’s favorite foods or favorite recipes. Clearly, the
quantity of food displayed in several images suggests a dire need to change our attitude
toward consumption. Moreover, images of the types of food and of the family members
themselves, and the juxtaposition of textual information all combine to convey a sense
of urgency to the audience; the images offer a wakeup call for consumers who are willing
to stop, listen, and act.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 988

6/18/12 3:13 PM

STUDENT WRITING

989

With its factories of mass-production and its hoards of processed food, America
breeds consumers of packaged and plastic-wrapped goodies. If an American family wants
to eat nutritiously, aiming for an organic and sustainable lifestyle, they must have
money. Eating fresh is expensive; the recent “locavore” movement caters to the well off.
Unfortunately, the processed and packaged foodstuffs available at any grocery store are
significantly cheaper than the fare at your local farm-stand. Perhaps this explains why
the Caven family’s kitchen is filled with familiar, shiny, synthetic packaging: vanilla
wafers, raisin bran, frozen pizza, and pretzels. Perhaps, also, this image provokes the
audience, causing them to consider the eventual fate of the colorful packaging. A
significant factor of the current environmental crisis is the sheer amount of waste that
packaged goods produce. In the forefront of the Cavens’ kitchen, three dull, unhappy
pieces of broccoli represent the family’s greens. For this California family, who typically
spends about $40 a person per week, fresh veggies may be expensive to come by.
Whether the Caven family simply chooses to omit vegetables from their diet or not, the
expense of fresh fare is undeniable. Ironically, on the other end of the spectrum, the
Namgay family of Bhutan and the Ayme family of Ecuador spend about $0.40 and $3.51
per person on food per week, respectively. Their diet consists almost exclusively of
unpackaged fresh vegetables and fruits; in fact, the greens displayed by the Namgays are
much more appetizing than the Cavens’ broccoli. These images suggest that in
commercialized countries, eating fresh from the Earth requires excessive amounts of
income; in less-developed, non-commercialized countries, a family can sustain itself on
harvested food for next to nothing. The Cavens feed themselves for $160 a week,
producing an enormous amount of waste in the process. If one California family can use
that much packaging in one week, consider the amount of trash generated in one year.
Now multiply that pile of waste by ten families, by twenty, by a million.
A common thread that connects families who spend more on food, like those in
Kuwait, Germany, and the United States, is the consumption of animal products. The
Melander family of Germany spends weekly an astounding $125 per person on food;
featured prominently in their diet are meats and cheese, seen in the center left and the
bottom of the picture. Although in Kuwait the family members spend significantly less
than their German counterparts — $28 per person each week — the Al Haggan family also
consumes a large amount of animal products, especially eggs (left, center). The images
suggest that the more resources consumed from animals, the higher the weekly food
expenditure. The series of pictures begs an important question: if the family in Bhutan
can feed thirteen members with the products of the Earth, then why can’t the family
in Germany feed their family of four for less than $100 per person? Animals represent a
precious and endangered aspect of our food supply; these images indicate that, regarding
animal-product consumption, humans need to exercise moderation. This practice will
prove to be healthy, economical, and environmentally sound.
The quantity and type of food consumed by each family reinforce the images’
foreboding message of wastefulness; however, the pictures not only depict the resources

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 989

6/18/12 3:13 PM

990

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

a family consumes, but also the family members themselves. The individuals, their age,
expression, and demeanor, are critical rhetorical devices. We can connect a body with the
food it consumes. Take, for instance, the family of six in the Breidjing Camp in Chad. The
appalling scarcity of food for this close-knit family is evident at first glance; however,
consider the body language of the six individuals. The family, leaning, grasping, and
supporting one another, clearly shares a close and dependent relationship. Consider also
the age of the members, another significant aspect of the image. Excluding the woman to
the far left, holding the small baby girl, the family is made up of children. The family in
Bhutan houses several generations. At first glance, one might even miss the child hiding
next to the eggplant. Similarly, the family in Ecuador is composed of a mother and
father, and seven small children. The countenances of these kids sharply contrast with the
faces of the two children from the family of four in Germany; clearly, more meat, dairy,
and microwavable pizza do not guarantee one’s happiness. Is it a coincidence that the
children of the Caven family look equally unenthused and disjoined from their parents?
Is this disparity a result of the consumerism that marks these two societies? Clearly, the
food that each family displays is not the only aspect of the images that tells a story.
The textual information that accompanies each image acts as rhetorical pathos,
catalyzing an emotional reaction from the audience. Besides providing the viewer with a
clear number for food expenditure, the foods and recipes give the audience a personal
insight into each highlighted family; we understand more about the solemn German
children through their favorite meals (you are what you eat, right?). Through this
information, the image becomes more real, and the message of the series truly hits
home. For example, consider the image of the Namgay family of Bhutan. The additional
information describes a special family recipe, comprised of mushroom, cheese, and pork.
The viewer again returns to the image. Where is the cheese? Where is the pork? Unlike
the favorite foods of the Caven and Melander families, the information suggests that this
Bhutanese family does not always have the resources necessary to make their prized
meals. The Namgay family has no freezer for ice cream, berry yogurt sundaes, or vanilla
pudding. In a global context, the favorite foods of the well-off German and American
families seem shamefully extravagant compared to “potato soup with cabbage” and
“soup with fresh sheep meat.”
This particular series of images encompasses a global crisis in six illustrations.
The images successfully catalyze an emotional reaction from the viewer; they describe
the wasteful excesses of processed foods and the dire need for an even distribution of
resources. Don Delillo’s postmodern novel White Noise addresses similar concerns. An
analysis of contemporary consumer society, White Noise describes the responses and
reactions of American Jack Gladney to a complex, industrial world. In one particularly
vivid scene, Jack digs through his family’s garbage bin, considers the waste, and
questions, “Was this ours? Did it belong to us? Had we created it?” (Delillo 247). Jack is
disgusted by his own trash, humiliated and slightly overwhelmed at the garbage that
contains the “shameful secrets” of humanity. Waste, like the waste that the Gladney
household produces, is a universal problem. Consider the enormous amounts of packaging

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 990

5

6/18/12 3:13 PM

GRAMMAR AS RHETORIC AND STYLE

991

needed to supply the Al Haggan, Melander, and Caven families their weekly amount of
food; besides produce, every item is carefully wrapped in precious material. The
beverages alone (water, liquor, and soda) require copious amounts of glass and plastic.
The images send a critical message to an audience who may be too full to hear: we, as
consumers and stewards of the Earth, must respect and revere the food our planet
produces. Keeping in mind the families that have so little, we must discard our excessive
habits and grow into a global community, a modern society where no child is left
without his or her meal. We must acknowledge the gifts that Earth gives us and decrease
our consumption of wasteful, processed, and packaged items.

Works Cited
Delillo, Don. White Noise. New York: Viking, 1985. Print.
Menzel, Peter. “Hungry Planet: What the World Eats.” The Language of Composition. 2nd
ed. Ed. Shea, Renée H., Lawrence Scanlon, and Robin Dissin Aufses. Boston: Bedford,
2013. Print.

Questions
1. How effectively does Ali analyze the presentation of food in the series of photos?
What rhetorical techniques does she use to do so?
2. How effectively does she analyze the presentation of the families themselves? What
rhetorical techniques does she use to do so?
3. List several examples of specific details that Ali uses to support her argument. How
does each of the specific details contribute to the development of the essay?
4. Note references to the text that accompanies the photos. How does Ali use the
combination of visual and textual information to support her argument?
5. Select three examples of Ali’s vivid writing. Explain their effect on the essay as a
whole.
6. How effective is the argument that Ali develops? Do you find it convincing?
Explain your response.
7. Imagine that you are Ali’s editor and that you have to trim this essay by 20 percent.
Revise the essay so that it is still clear and cogent, while cutting one-fifth. Explain
the reasons for your edits.

Grammar as Rhetoric and Style
Cumulative, Periodic, and Inverted Sentences
Most of the time, writers of English use the following standard sentence patterns:
Subject/Verb (SV)
My father cried.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 991

— Terry Tempest Williams

6/18/12 3:13 PM

992

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

Subject/Verb/Subject complement (SVC)
Even the streams were now lifeless.

— Rachel Carson

Subject/Verb/Direct object (SVO)
We believed her.

— Terry Tempest Williams

To make longer sentences, writers often coordinate two or more of the standard sentence patterns or subordinate one sentence pattern to another. (See the
grammar lesson about subordination on p. 1124.) Here are examples of both
techniques.
Coordinating patterns
S
V
C
Yet every one of these disasters has actually happened somewhere, and many
S
V
O
real communities have already suffered a substantial number of them.
— Rachel Carson

Subordinating one pattern to another
S
V
S
V
O
And when they arrived on the edge of Mercury, they carried all the butterI
flies of a summer day in their wombs.
— Terry Tempest Williams

The downside to sticking with standard sentence patterns, coordinating
them, or subordinating them is that too many standard sentences in a row become
monotonous. So writers break out of the standard patterns now and then by
using a more unusual pattern, such as the cumulative sentence, the periodic sentence, or the inverted sentence.
When you use one of these sentence patterns, you call attention to that sentence because its pattern contrasts significantly with the pattern of the sentences
surrounding it. You can use unusual sentence patterns to emphasize a point, as
well as to control sentence rhythm, increase tension, or create a dramatic impact.
In other words, using the unusual pattern helps you avoid monotony in your
writing.

Cumulative Sentence
The cumulative, or so-called loose, sentence begins with a standard sentence pattern (shown here in blue) and adds multiple details after it. The details can take
the form of subordinate clauses or different kinds of phrases. These details accumulate, or pile up — hence, the name cumulative.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 992

6/18/12 3:13 PM

GRAMMAR AS RHETORIC AND STYLE

993

The women moved through the streets as winged messengers, twirling around each
other in slow motion, peeking inside homes and watching the easy sleep of men and
women.
— Terry Tempest Williams

Here’s another cumulative sentence, this one from Michael Pollan.
Venture farther, though, and you come to regions of the supermarket where the very
notion of species seems increasingly obscure: the canyons of breakfast cereals and
condiments; the freezer cases stacked with “home meal replacements” and bagged
platonic peas; the broad expanses of soft drinks and towering cliffs of snacks; the
unclassifiable Pop-Tarts and Lunchables; the frankly synthetic coffee whiteners and
the Linnaeus-defying Twinkie.

Look closely at this cumulative sentence by Lewis Thomas:
We have grown into everywhere, spreading like a new growth over the entire surface,
touching and affecting every other kind of life, incorporating ourselves.

The independent clause in the sentence focuses on the growth of humanity. Then
the sentence accumulates a string of modifiers about the extent of that growth.
Using a cumulative sentence allows Thomas to include all of these modifiers in
one smooth sentence, rather than using a series of shorter sentences that repeat
grown. Furthermore, this accumulation of modifiers takes the reader into the
scene just as the writer experiences it, one detail at a time.

Periodic Sentence
The periodic sentence begins with multiple details and holds off a standard
sentence pattern — or at least its predicate (shown here in blue) — until the end.
The following periodic sentence by Lewis Thomas presents its subject, human
beings, followed by an accumulation of modifiers, with the predicate coming at
the end.
Human beings, large terrestrial metazoans, fired by energy from microbial symbionts
lodged in their cells, instructed by tapes of nucleic acid stretching back to the earliest
live membranes, informed by neurons essentially the same as all the other neurons
on earth, sharing structures with mastodons and lichens, living off the sun, are now
in charge, running the place, for better or worse.

In the following periodic sentence, Ralph Waldo Emerson packs the front of the
sentence with phrases providing elaborate detail:
Crossing a bare common, in snow puddles, at twilight, under a clouded sky, without
having in my thoughts any occurrence of special good fortune, I have enjoyed a
perfect exhilaration.

The vivid descriptions engage us, so that by the end of the sentence we can feel
(or at least imagine) the exhilaration Emerson feels. By placing the descriptions

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 993

6/18/12 3:13 PM

994

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

at the beginning of the sentence, Emerson demonstrates how nature can ascend
from the physical (“snow puddles,” “clouded sky”) to the psychological (“without . . . thoughts of . . . good fortune”), and finally to the spiritual (“perfect
exhilaration”).
Could Emerson have written this as a cumulative sentence? He probably
could have by moving things around — “I have enjoyed a perfect exhilaration as I
was crossing . . .” — and then providing the details. In some ways, the impact of
the descriptive detail would be similar.
Whether you choose to place detail at the beginning or end of a sentence
often depends on the surrounding sentences. Unless you have a good reason,
though, you probably should not put one cumulative sentence after another or
one periodic sentence after another. Instead, by shifting sentence patterns, you
can vary sentence length and change the rhythm of your sentences.
Finally, perhaps the most famous example of the periodic sentence in
modern English prose is the fourth sentence in paragraph 14 of Martin Luther
King Jr.’s “Letter from Birmingham Jail” (p. 280):
But when you have seen vicious mobs lynch your mothers and fathers at will and
drown your sisters and brothers at whim; when you have seen hate-filled policemen
curse, kick, and even kill your black brothers and sisters; when you see the vast majority of your twenty million Negro brothers smothering in an airtight cage of poverty
in the midst of an affluent society; when you suddenly find your tongue twisted and
your speech stammering as you seek to explain to your six-year-old daughter why she
can’t go to the public amusement park that has just been advertised on television, and
see tears welling up in her eyes when she is told that Funtown is closed to colored
children, and see ominous clouds of inferiority beginning to form in her little mental
sky, and see her beginning to distort her personality by developing an unconscious
bitterness toward white people; when you have to concoct an answer for a five-yearold son who is asking, “Daddy, why do white people treat colored people so mean?”;
when you take a cross-country drive and find it necessary to sleep night after night in
the uncomfortable corners of your automobile because no motel will accept you;
when you are humiliated day in and day out by nagging signs reading “white” and
“colored”; when your first name becomes “nigger,” your middle name becomes “boy”
(however old you are) and your last name becomes “John,” and your wife and mother
are never given the respected title “Mrs.”; when you are harried by day and haunted
by night by the fact that you are a Negro, living constantly at tiptoe stance, never quite
knowing what to expect next, and are plagued with inner fears and outer resentments; when you are forever fighting a degenerating sense of “nobodiness” — then
you will understand why we find it difficult to wait.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 994

6/18/12 3:13 PM

GRAMMAR AS RHETORIC AND STYLE

995

Inverted Sentence
In every standard English sentence pattern, the subject comes before the verb
(SV). But if a writer chooses, he or she can invert the standard sentence pattern
and put the verb before the subject (VS). This is called an inverted sentence. Here
is an example:
Everywhere was a shadow of death.
Controlled exponential growth is what you’d really like to see.

— Rachel Carson
— Joy Williams

What’s at stake as they busy themselves are your tax dollars and mine, and ultimately
our freedom too.
— E. O. Wilson

The inverted sentence pattern slows the reader down, because it is simply more
difficult to comprehend inverted word order. Take this example from Emerson’s
“Nature”:
V
S
In the woods, is perpetual youth.
In this example, Emerson calls attention to “woods” and “youth,” minimizing the
verb “is” and juxtaposing a place (“woods”) with a state of being (“youth”). Consider the difference if he had written:
S V
Perpetual youth is in the woods.
This “revised” version is easier to read quickly, and even though the meaning is
essentially the same, the emphasis is different. In fact, to understand the full
impact, we need to consider the sentence in its context. If you look back at Emerson’s essay “Nature,” you’ll see that his sentence is a short one among longer, more
complex sentences. That combination of inversion and contrasting length makes
the sentence — and the idea it conveys — stand out.

A Word about Punctuation
It is important to follow the normal rules of comma usage when punctuating
unusual sentence patterns. In a cumulative sentence, the descriptors that follow
the main clause need to be set off from it and from one another with commas, as
in the example from Terry Tempest Williams on page 927. Likewise, in a periodic
sentence, the series of clauses or phrases that precede the subject should be set off
from the subject and from one another by commas, as in the Emerson example
on page 897. When writing an inverted sentence, you may be tempted to insert a
comma between the verb and the subject because of the unusual order — but don’t.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 995

6/18/12 3:13 PM

996

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

• ExERCISE 1 •
For each of the following, craft a periodic, cumulative, or inverted sentence
by filling in the blanks.
1. Among the tangle of weeds and brush were
.
2. Hoping, knowing
, but realizing
,
the candidate
.
3. All his life he would remember that fateful moment when the fish
,
,
.
4. If you
and if you
, then
.
5. Into the clouds soared
.
6. Only when
will
.

• ExERCISE 2 •
In the following paragraph from The End of Nature by Bill McKibben, the
cumulative sentences are in blue. Rewrite them as periodic sentences. How
does the sentence structure affect the focus, tone, and meaning of each of
the three sentences? Discuss the rhetorical effectiveness of the way that
McKibben decided to write them.
In the end, I understand perfectly well that defiance may mean prosperity
and a sort of security — that more dams will help the people of Phoenix, and that genetic engineering will help the sick, and that there is so
much progress that can still be made against human misery. And I have
no great desire to limit my way of life. If I thought we could put off the
decision, foist it on our grandchildren, I’d be willing. As it is, I have no
plans to live in a cave, or even an unheated cabin. If it took ten thousand
years to get where we are, it will take a few generations to climb back
down. But this could be the epoch when people decide at least to go no
farther down the path we’ve been following — when we make not only the
necessary technological adjustments to preserve the world from overheating but also the necessary mental adjustments to ensure that we’ll never
again put our good ahead of everything else’s. This is the path I choose, for
it offers at least a shred of hope for a living, eternal, meaningful world.
(para. 20)

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 996

6/18/12 3:13 PM

GRAMMAR AS RHETORIC AND STYLE

997

• ExERCISE 3 •
The following paragraph from The Future of Life by E. O. Wilson consists of
three sentences: a simple declarative sentence, then a periodic sentence, and
finally a cumulative sentence. Keep the first one as it is; then rewrite the
periodic sentence as cumulative and the cumulative as periodic. Compare
the two paragraphs. Discuss the relationship among the sentences in each
paragraph and the rhetorical effect of syntax on meaning and tone.
The guiding principles of a united environmental movement must be, and
eventually will be, chiefly long-term. If two hundred years of history of
environmentalism have taught us anything, it is that a change of heart
occurs when people look beyond themselves to others, and then to the rest
of life. It is strengthened when they also expand their view of landscape,
from parish to nation and beyond, and their sweep of time from their own
life spans to multiple generations and finally to the extended future history of humankind. (para. 18)

• ExERCISE 4 •
Identify each of the following sentences as periodic, cumulative, or inverted,
and discuss the impact of using that pattern. (Each sentence is a direct quotation from essays in this chapter, so you might want to check the context of
the sentence to appreciate its impact more fully. Note that some sentences
use more than one unusual pattern.)
1. Similarly, chemicals sprayed on croplands or forests or gardens lie
long in soil, entering into living organisms, passing from one to
another in a chain of poisoning and death.
— Rachel Carson, para. 12
2. Among them are many that are used in man’s war against nature.
— Rachel Carson, para. 16
3. I see the spectacle of morning from the hill-top over against my
house, from day-break to sun-rise, with emotions which an angel
might share.
— Ralph Waldo Emerson, para. 16
4. Not less excellent, except for our less susceptibility in the afternoon,
was the charm, last evening, of a January sunset.
— Ralph Waldo Emerson, para. 17
5. When a noble act is done, — perchance in a scene of great natural
beauty; when Leonidas and his three hundred martyrs consume one

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 997

6/18/12 3:13 PM

998

CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT

day in dying, and the sun and moon come each and look at them
once in the steep defile of Thermopylæ; when Arnold Winkelried, in
the high Alps, under the shadow of the avalanche, gathers in his side
a sheaf of Austrian spears to break the line for his comrades, are not
these heroes entitled to add the beauty of the scene to the beauty of
the deed?
— Ralph Waldo Emerson, para. 20
6. Regret maybe you’ll consider.
— Joy Williams, para. 1
7. The oldest, easiest to swallow idea was that the earth was man’s personal property, a combination of garden, zoo, bank vault and energy
source, placed at our disposal to be consumed, ornamented or pulled
apart as we wished.
— Lewis Thomas, para. 4
8. How to get power? is what they’re thinking.
— E. O. Wilson, para. 13
9. This might turn out to be a special phase in the morphogenesis of
the earth when it is necessary to have something like us, for a time
anyway, to fetch and carry energy, look after new symbiotic arrangements, store up information for some future season, do a certain
amount of ornamenting, maybe even carry seeds around the solar
system.
— Lewis Thomas, para. 14
10. Though not in our time, and not in the time of our children, or their
children, if we now, today, limited our numbers and our desires and
our ambitions, perhaps nature could someday resume its independent working.
— Bill McKibben, para. 24
11. Every good argument — the argument that fossil fuels cause the greenhouse effect; the argument that in a drier, hotter world we’ll need more
water; the argument that as our margin of security dwindles we
must act to restore it — will lead us to more La Grande projects, more
dams on the Colorado, more “management.” Every argument — that
the warmer weather and increased ultraviolet is killing plants and
causing cancer; that the new weather is causing food shortages —
will have us looking to genetic engineering for salvation.
— Bill McKibben, para. 12
12. What’s at stake as they busy themselves are your tax dollars and
mine, and ultimately our freedom too.
— E. O. Wilson, para. 13

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 998

6/18/12 3:13 PM

GRAMMAR AS RHETORIC AND STYLE

999

13. When I started trying to follow the industrial food chain — the one
that now feeds most of us most of the time and typically culminates
either in a supermarket or fast-food meal — I expected that my
investigations would lead me to a wide variety of places.
— Michael Pollan, para. 8
14. Hidden from immediate view in the butterfly-bright meadow, in the
dusky thicket, in the oak and holly wood, are the surveyors’ stakes,
for someone wants to build a mall exactly there — some gas stations
and supermarkets, some pizza and video shops, a health club, maybe
a bulimia treatment center.
— Joy Williams, para. 1

• ExERCISE 5 •
The following selection is from paragraph 11 of “A Naturalist in the Supermarket” by Michael Pollan. Read the paragraph carefully, and identify
whether the underlined sentences are cumulative or periodic. Discuss the
effect of the syntax in each case. Then, imitating the structure of each, write
a sentence of your own on an environmental issue.
To wash down your chicken nuggets with virtually any soft drink in the
supermarket is to have some corn with your corn. Since the 1980s virtually all the sodas and most of the fruit drinks sold in the supermarket have
been sweetened with high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS) — after water,
corn sweetener is their principal ingredient. Grab a beer for your beverage
instead and you’d still be drinking corn, in the form of alcohol fermented
from glucose refined from corn. Read the ingredients on the label of any
processed food and, provided you know the chemical names it travels
under, corn is what you will find. For modified or unmodified starch, for
glucose syrup and maltodextrin, for crystalline fructose and ascorbic acid,
for lecithin and dextrose, lactic acid and lysine, for maltose and HFCS, for
MSG and polyols, for the caramel color and xanthan gum, read: corn.
Corn is in the coffee whitener and Cheez Whiz, the frozen yogurt and TV
dinner, the canned fruit and ketchup and candies, the soups and snacks
and cake mixes, the frosting and gravy and frozen waffles, the syrups and
hot sauces, the mayonnaise and mustard, the hot dogs and the bologna,
the margarine and shortening, the salad dressings and the relishes and
even the vitamins. (Yes, it’s in the Twinkie, too.) There are some forty-five
thousand items in the average American supermarket and more than a
quarter of them now contain corn. This goes for the nonfood items as
well — everything from thetoothpaste and cosmetics to the disposable
diapers, trash bags, cleansers, charcoal briquettes, matches, and batteries,

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 999

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1000 CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT
right down to the shine on the cover of the magazine that catches your
eye by the checkout: corn. Even in Produce on a day when there’s ostensibly no corn for sale you’ll nevertheless find plenty of corn: in the vegetable wax that gives the cucumbers their sheen, in the pesticide responsible
for the produce’s perfection, even in the coating on the cardboard it
was shipped in. Indeed, the supermarket itself — the wallboard and joint
compound, the linoleum and fiberglass and adhesives out of which the
building itself has been built — is in no small measure a manifestation of
corn.

• ExERCISE 6 •
Following are five examples of unusual sentence patterns. Choose two or
three; then write your own sentences, using each example as a model.
1. Neither in its clearness, its colour, its fantasy of motion, its calmness of
space, depth, and reflection or its wrath, can water be conceived by a
low-lander, out of sight of sea.
— John Ruskin, Modern Painters
2. There are hills, rounded, blunt, burned, squeezed up out of chaos,
chrome and vermilion painted, aspiring to the snow-line.
— Mary Austin, “The Land of Little Rain”
3. The yucca bristles with bayonet-pointed leaves, dull green, growing
shaggy with age, tipped with panicles of fetid, greenish bloom.
— Mary Austin, “The Land of Little Rain”
4. Scores of millions of years before man had risen from the shores of the
ocean to perceive its grandeur and to venture forth upon its turbulent
waves, this eternal sea existed, larger than any other of the earth’s features, vaster than the sister oceans combined, wild, terrifying in its
immensity and imperative in its universal role.
— James Michener, Hawaii
5. Something will have gone out of us as a people if we ever let the remaining wilderness be destroyed; if we permit the last virgin forests to be
turned into comic books and plastic cigarette cases; if we drive the few
remaining members of the wild species into zoos or to extinction; if we
pollute the last clear air and dirty the last clean streams and push our
paved roads through the last of the silence, so that never again will
Americans be free in their own country from the noise, the exhausts,
the stinks of human and automotive waste. And so that never again can
we have the chance to see ourselves single, separate, vertical and individual in the world, part of the environment of trees and rocks and soil,

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 1000

6/18/12 3:13 PM

SUGGESTIONS FOR WRITING 1001

brother to the other animals, part of the natural world and competent
to belong in it.
— Wallace Stegner, “Wilderness Letter”

Suggestions for Writing
The Environment
Now that you have examined a number of readings and other texts focusing on
nature, explore one dimension of this topic by synthesizing your own ideas and
the selections. You might want to do more research or use readings from other
classes as you prepare for the following projects.
1. Take a walk in a favorite natural place close to where you live — in the woods,
or out on the prairie, or along the beach, or in the desert. Then write to one
of the authors in this chapter, comparing your impressions of nature with
those he or she presents.
2. Research a local environmental issue — the development of open land, hunting or fishing regulations, wildlife protection, auto emissions, or another
important concern. Then write a letter to the editor of your local newspaper
in which you take a position on the issue. Refer to at least three sources from
the chapter to support your position.
3. Write an essay in which you compare the ways in which two authors in this
chapter use research to support their arguments.
4. Write a personal essay that answers this chapter’s essential question: What is
our responsibility to the natural environment? Refer in your essay to at least
three sources from the chapter for support.
5. Write an essay evaluating and comparing the classic appeals to ethos, pathos,
and logos used by two or more of the authors in this chapter.
6. Write an essay explaining how one of the visual texts illustrates a major idea
espoused by one of the authors in the chapter.
7. Imagine what a person living fifty years in the future might say to us now
about the effect we have had on the environment. Employing both exposition and argument, write a “report from the future” warning our society
about the consequences of our treatment of the natural world.
8. Select one of the following statements about nature and the environment,
and write an essay that explores its validity. To support your essay, refer to
your personal experience and to the selections in this chapter.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 1001

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1002 CHApTER 12 • THE ENvIRONMENT
• The West of which I speak is but another name for the Wild; and what
I have been preparing to say is, that in Wildness is the preservation of
the World.
— Henry David Thoreau

• Sometimes we forget that nature also means us. Termites build mounds;
we build cities. All of our being — juices, flesh and spirit — is nature.
— Diane Ackerman

• A true conservationist is a man who knows that the world is not given
by his fathers but borrowed from his children.
— John James Audubon

• To waste, to destroy our natural resources, to skin and exhaust the land
instead of using it so as to increase its usefulness, will result in undermining in the days of our children the very prosperity which we ought
by right to hand down to them amplified and developed.
— Theodore Roosevelt

• We seem to be in a period in which the conservation of anything is
disparaged — the conservation of books, the conservation of ideas, the
conservation of time, the conservation of darkness, the conservation
of love, the conservation of intelligence — it all gets very short shrift in
contemporary society. And I think that in the environmental movement,
in the curious way in which it overlaps the women’s movement and other
social movements of the late twentieth century, what we are really seeing
is an insistence on the moral dimension of life. When I say the moral
dimension, I mean issues of integrity and dignity and responsibility.
— Barry Lopez

9. View former vice president Al Gore’s documentary film An Inconvenient
Truth. Write a review of the film in the voice of one of the writers you’ve read
in this chapter.
10. View one of the following three films — Fast Food Nation; Supersize Me; or
Food, Inc. — and compare it with the voices you have read in the Conversation on Sustainable Eating.
11. View the documentary film No Impact Man. Do you find its argument persuasive? How does it address this chapter’s essential question?
12. In 1977, artist Andy Warhol said, “I’m a city boy. In the big cities, they’ve set
it up so you can go to a park and be in a miniature countryside; but in the
countryside they don’t have any patches of big city, so I get very homesick.”
Write an essay on “the end of nature” in which you consider Warhol’s perspective in relation to those of Bill McKibben, Aldo Leopold, and others
included in this chapter.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 1002

6/18/12 3:13 PM

SUGGESTIONS FOR WRITING 1003

13. Writers Aldo Leopold, Lewis Thomas, Bill McKibben, and E. O. Wilson all
discuss a “choice” that confronts humanity regarding the environment. Indicate each of the choices they discuss, and evaluate which one makes the most
sense and offers the best solution.
14. “The ethical solution is to diagnose and disconnect extraneous political ideology, then shed it in order to move toward the common ground where economic progress and conservation are treated as one and the same goal,”
writes E. O. Wilson in The Future of Life (para. 12). Having read the selections
included in this chapter, how likely do you think it is that we will achieve the
ethical solution that Wilson suggests? Refer specifically to at least three of the
texts to support your answer.
15. ExxonMobil, self-described as “the world’s largest publicly traded international oil and gas company, providing energy that helps underpin growing
economies and improve living standards around the world,” makes the following statements on its Web site:
Managing long-term climate risks
Rising greenhouse-gas emissions pose significant risks to society and ecosystems.
Since most of these emissions are energy-related, any integrated approach to meeting the world’s growing energy needs over the coming decades must incorporate
strategies to address the risk of climate change.
Managing climate change risks
Our strategy to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions is focused on increasing energy
efficiency in the short term, implementing proven emission-reducing technologies
in the near and medium term, and developing breakthrough, game-changing technologies for the long term. Technological innovation will play a central role in our
ability to increase supply, improve efficiency, and reduce emissions. Approximately
90 percent of the greenhouse-gas emissions generated by petroleum products are
released when customers use our products, and the remaining 10 percent are generated by industry operations. Therefore, technology is also needed to reduce
energy-related emissions by end users.

In a time when we still hear many people — even some public officials —
questioning the reality of climate change and global warming, it might seem
surprising to discover the perspective above coming from a large energy
company. What do these statements suggest about climate change? About
global warming? About the relationship between economic concerns and
environmental protection? Finally, what do they suggest about the essential
question posed at the beginning of this chapter: What is our responsibility
to the natural environment? Refer to several texts from this chapter as you
answer these questions.

12_SHE_67650_Ch12_887_1004.indd 1003

6/18/12 3:13 PM

this page left intentionally blank

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 36

6/18/12 3:09 PM

13
Politics
What is the relationship between the citizen and the state?

P

olitics, the process by which groups make decisions, plays a part in all human
interactions. When we study history, the social sciences, religion, or busi­
ness, we learn about politics; whenever we read the newspaper or watch the news on
television, we see politics in action; and when we discuss issues with our classmates
and friends or involve ourselves in our community, we engage in politics. Politics is
as much the context for our daily lives as it is for government legislation and inter­
national affairs. Thus, one could argue that politics is the cause of all social change.
Democratic governments, such as the one under which we live, exercise power
through the will of the people. With that power comes responsibility, even the
responsibility to dissent if necessary. So what is the nature of patriotism in a
democracy? Is it loyalty to the government or loyalty to the ideals of the nation?
How is American patriotism colored by the fact that our country was born out of
a revolution? In this chapter, writers on American politics ranging from Henry
David Thoreau to Tim O’Brien examine the rights of citizens to resist and remind
us of the connection between political action and social change.
In America, a former subject of colonial power, colonialism is an especially
interesting subject. Looking at the effects of colonialism elsewhere gives us a
more informed view of our own nation’s experience as well as that of other
nations and peoples. Is our view of colonialism affected by our nation’s origin?
Does colonialism ever have positive benefits? And how does patriotism work
when the government is a foreign power? The selections in this chapter raise
those questions and also remind us of the effects of both colonialism and post­
colonialism on language, culture, social change, and global politics.
Educated citizens — the root of the word politics is the Greek word for citizen —
must know about the politics of the world as well as the politics of their own
country. This chapter presents a variety of voices and perspectives on national
and world politics. The selections examine the interrelationships among citizens,
their states, and the world. Here you will read classic voices delivering sardonic
criticism and lofty idealism; you will encounter the immediacy of personal reflec­
tions on the nature and experience of war; and you will read contemporary
reflections on the lingering effects of colonialism in the modern world.

1005

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1005

6/18/12 3:13 PM

On Seeing England for the First Time
Jamaica Kincaid
Jamaica Kincaid was born in 1949 on the Caribbean island of Antigua, then a British colony. She came to the United States as a teenager to work as an au pair in New York City, where she then attended
the New School for Social Research. Kincaid became a staff writer
for the New Yorker in 1975 and published much of her short work
there. Perhaps her most widely known works are “Girl” from At the
Bottom of the River (1985), a collection of short stories, and Annie
John (1985), a novel. A Small Place (1988), her book-length essay
on the tensions between tourists and the native people of the Caribbean, followed. Among her later books are My Garden (1999), the novel Mr.
Potter (2002), and the nonfiction Among Flowers: A Walk in the Himalaya (2005).
The autobiographical essay included here originally appeared in Transition in
1991 and later that year was excerpted in Harper’s.

W

hen I saw England for the first time, I was a child in school sitting at a
desk. The England I was looking at was laid out on a map gently, beau­
tifully, delicately, a very special jewel: it lay on a bed of sky blue — the background
of the map — its yellow form mysterious, because though it looked like a leg of
mutton, it could not really look like anything so familiar as a leg of mutton
because it was England — with shadings of pink and green, unlike any shadings
of pink and green I had seen before, squiggly veins of red running in every direc­
tion. England was a special jewel all right, and only special people got to wear it.
The people who got to wear England were English people. They wore it well and
they wore it everywhere: in jungles, in deserts, on plains, on top of the highest
mountains, on all the oceans, on all the seas, in places where they were not wel­
come, in places they should not have been. When my teacher had pinned this
map up on the blackboard, she said, “This is England” — and she said it with
authority, seriousness, and adoration, and we all sat up. It was as if she had said,
“This is Jerusalem, the place you will go to when you die but only if you have been
good.” We understood then — we were meant to understand then — that England
was to be our source of myth and the source from which we got our sense of
reality, our sense of what was meaningful, our sense of what was meaningless —
and much about our own lives and much about the very idea of us headed that
last list.
At the time I was a child sitting at my desk seeing England for the first time,
I was already very familiar with the greatness of it. Each morning before I left for
school, I ate a breakfast of half a grapefruit, an egg, bread and butter and a slice of

1006

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1006

6/18/12 3:13 PM

KiNCAid • ON SeeiNG eNGlANd fOR The fiRST Time 1007

cheese, and a cup of cocoa; or half a grapefruit, a bowl of oat porridge, bread and
butter and a slice of cheese, and a cup of cocoa. The can of cocoa was often left on
the table in front of me. It had written on it the name of the company, the year the
company was established, and the words “Made in England.” Those words, “Made
in England,” were written on the box the oats came in too. They would also have
been written on the box the shoes I was wearing came in; a bolt of gray linen cloth
lying on the shelf of a store from which my mother had bought three yards to
make the uniform that I was wearing had written along its edge those three words.
The shoes I wore were made in England; so were my socks and cotton under­
garments and the satin ribbons I wore tied at the end of two plaits of my hair. My
father, who might have sat next to me at breakfast, was a carpenter and cabinet
maker. The shoes he wore to work would have been made in England, as were his
khaki shirt and trousers, his underpants and undershirt, his socks and brown felt
hat. Felt was not the proper material from which a hat that was expected to pro­
vide shade from the hot sun should be made, but my father must have seen and
admired a picture of an Englishman wearing such a hat in England, and this pic­
ture that he saw must have been so compelling that it caused him to wear the
wrong hat for a hot climate most of his long life. And this hat — a brown felt
hat — became so central to his character that it was the first thing he put on in the
morning as he stepped out of bed and the last thing he took off before he stepped
back into bed at night. As we sat at breakfast a car might go by. The car, a Hillman
or a Zephyr, was made in England. The very idea of the meal itself, breakfast, and
its substantial quality and quantity was an idea from England; we somehow knew
that in England they began the day with this meal called breakfast and a proper
breakfast was a big breakfast. No one I knew liked eating so much food so early in
the day; it made us feel sleepy, tired. But this breakfast business was Made in
England like almost everything else that surrounded us, the exceptions being the
sea, the sky, and the air we breathed.
At the time I saw this map — seeing England for the first time — I did not say
to myself, “Ah, so that’s what it looks like,” because there was no longing in me to
put a shape to those three words that ran through every part of my life, no matter
how small; for me to have had such a longing would have meant that I lived in a
certain atmosphere, an atmosphere in which those three words were felt as a bur­
den. But I did not live in such an atmosphere. My father’s brown felt hat would
develop a hole in its crown, the lining would separate from the hat itself, and six
weeks before he thought that he could not be seen wearing it — he was a very vain
man — he would order another hat from England. And my mother taught me to
eat my food in the English way: the knife in the right hand, the fork in the left, my
elbows held still close to my side, the food carefully balanced on my fork and then
brought up to my mouth. When I had finally mastered it, I overheard her saying
to a friend, “Did you see how nicely she can eat?” But I knew then that I enjoyed
my food more when I ate it with my bare hands, and I continued to do so when
she wasn’t looking. And when my teacher showed us the map, she asked us to

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1007

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1008 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
study it carefully, because no test we would ever take would be complete without
this statement: “Draw a map of England.”
I did not know then that the statement “Draw a map of England” was some­
thing far worse than a declaration of war, for in fact a flat­out declaration of war
would have put me on alert, and again in fact, there was no need for war — I had
long ago been conquered. I did not know then that this statement was part of a
process that would result in my erasure, not my physical erasure, but my erasure
all the same. I did not know then that this statement was meant to make me feel
in awe and small whenever I heard the word “England”: awe at its existence, small
because I was not from it. I did not know very much of anything then — certainly
not what a blessing it was that I was unable to draw a map of England correctly.
After that there were many times of seeing England for the first time. I saw
England in history. I knew the names of all the kings of England. I knew the
names of their children, their wives, their disappointments, their triumphs, the
names of people who betrayed them; I knew the dates on which they were born
and the dates they died. I knew their conquests and was made to feel glad if I
figured in them; I knew their defeats. I knew the details of the year 1066 (the
Battle of Hastings, the end of the reign of the Anglo­Saxon kings) before I knew
the details of the year 1832 (the year slavery was abolished). It wasn’t as bad as I
make it sound now; it was worse. I did like so much hearing again and again how
Alfred the Great, traveling in disguise, had been left to watch cakes, and because
he wasn’t used to this the cakes got burned, and Alfred burned his hands pulling
them out of the fire, and the woman who had left him to watch the cakes screamed
at him. I loved King Alfred. My grandfather was named after him; his son, my
uncle, was named after King Alfred; my brother is named after King Alfred. And
so there are three people in my family named after a man they have never met, a
man who died over ten centuries ago. The first view I got of England then was not
unlike the first view received by the person who named my grandfather.
This view, though — the naming of the kings, their deeds, their disappoint­
ments — was the vivid view, the forceful view. There were other views, subtler
ones, softer, almost not there — but these were the ones that made the most last­
ing impression on me, these were the ones that made me really feel like nothing.
“When morning touched the sky” was one phrase, for no morning touched the
sky where I lived. The mornings where I lived came on abruptly, with a shock of
heat and loud noises. “Evening approaches” was another, but the evenings where
I lived did not approach; in fact, I had no evening — I had night and I had day and
they came and went in a mechanical way: on, off; on, off. And then there were
gentle mountains and low blue skies and moors over which people took walks for
nothing but pleasure, when where I lived a walk was an act of labor, a burden,
something only death or the automobile could relieve. And there were things that
a small turn of a head could convey — entire worlds, whole lives would depend
on this thing, a certain turn of a head. Everyday life could be quite tiring, more
tiring than anything I was told not to do. I was told not to gossip, but they did that

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1008

5

6/18/12 3:13 PM

KiNCAid • ON SeeiNG eNGlANd fOR The fiRST Time 1009

all the time. And they ate so much food, violating another of those rules they
taught me: do not indulge in gluttony. And the foods they ate actually: if only
sometime I could eat cold cuts after theater, cold cuts of lamb and mint sauce,
and Yorkshire pudding and scones, and clotted cream, and sausages that came
from up­country (imagine, “up­country”). And having troubling thoughts at
twilight, a good time to have troubling thoughts, apparently; and servants who
stole and left in the middle of a crisis, who were born with a limp or some other
kind of deformity, not nourished properly in their mother’s womb (that last part
I figured out for myself; the point was, oh to have an untrustworthy servant); and
wonderful cobbled streets onto which solid front doors opened; and people
whose eyes were blue and who had fair skins and who smelled only of lavender,
or sometimes sweet pea or primrose. And those flowers with those names: del­
phiniums, foxgloves, tulips, daffodils, floribunda, peonies; in bloom, a striking
display, being cut and placed in large glass bowls, crystal, decorating rooms so
large twenty families the size of mine could fit in comfortably but used only for
passing through. And the weather was so remarkable because the rain fell gently
always, only occasionally in deep gusts, and it colored the air various shades of
gray, each an appealing shade for a dress to be worn when a portrait was being
painted; and when it rained at twilight, wonderful things happened: people
bumped into each other unexpectedly and that would lead to all sorts of turns of
events — a plot, the mere weather caused plots. I saw that people rushed: they
rushed to catch trains, they rushed toward each other and away from each other;
they rushed and rushed and rushed. That word: rushed! I did not know what it
was to do that. It was too hot to do that, and so I came to envy people who would
rush, even though it had no meaning to me to do such a thing. But there they are
again. They loved their children; their children were sent to their own rooms as a
punishment, rooms larger than my entire house. They were special, everything
about them said so, even their clothes; their clothes rustled, swished, soothed.
The world was theirs, not mine; everything told me so.
If now as I speak of all this I give the impression of someone on the outside
looking in, nose pressed up against a glass window, that is wrong. My nose was
pressed up against a glass window all right, but there was an iron vise at the back
of my neck forcing my head to stay in place. To avert my gaze was to fall back into
something from which I had been rescued, a hole filled with nothing, and that
was the word for everything about me, nothing. The reality of my life was con­
quests, subjugation, humiliation, enforced amnesia. I was forced to forget. Just
for instance, this: I lived in a part of St. John’s, Antigua, called Ovals. Ovals was
made up of five streets, each of them named after a famous English seaman —
to be quite frank, an officially sanctioned criminal: Rodney Street (after George
Rodney), Nelson Street (after Horatio Nelson), Drake Street (after Francis Drake),
Hood Street, and Hawkins Street (after John Hawkins). But John Hawkins was
knighted after a trip he made to Africa, opening up a new trade, the slave trade.
He was then entitled to wear as his crest a Negro bound with a cord. Every single

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1009

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1010 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
person living on Hawkins Street was descended from a slave. John Hawkins’s
ship, the one in which he transported the people he had bought and kidnapped,
was called The Jesus. He later became the treasurer of the Royal Navy and rear
admiral.
Again, the reality of my life, the life I led at the time I was being shown these
views of England for the first time, for the second time, for the one­hundred­
millionth time, was this: the sun shone with what sometimes seemed to be a
deliberate cruelty; we must have done something to deserve that. My dresses did
not rustle in the evening air as I strolled to the theater (I had no evening, I had no
theater; my dresses were made of a cheap cotton, the weave of which would give
way after not too many washings). I got up in the morning, I did my chores
(fetched water from the public pipe for my mother, swept the yard), I washed
myself, I went to a woman to have my hair combed freshly every day (because
before we were allowed into our classroom our teachers would inspect us, and
children who had not bathed that day, or had dirt under their fingernails, or
whose hair had not been combed anew that day, might not be allowed to attend
class). I ate that breakfast. I walked to school. At school we gathered in an audito­
rium and sang a hymn, “All Things Bright and Beautiful,” and looking down on
us as we sang were portraits of the Queen of England and her husband; they wore
jewels and medals and they smiled. I was a Brownie. At each meeting we would
form a little group around a flagpole, and after raising the Union Jack, we would
say, “I promise to do my best, to do my duty to God and the Queen; to help other
people every day and obey the scouts’ law.”
Who were these people and why had I never seen them, I mean really seen
them, in the place where they lived? I had never been to England. No one I knew
had ever been to England, or I should say, no one I knew had ever been and
returned to tell me about it. All the people I knew who had gone to England had
stayed there. Sometimes they left behind them their small children, never to see
them again. England! I had seen England’s representatives. I had seen the gover­
nor general at the public grounds at a ceremony celebrating the Queen’s birthday.
I had seen an old princess and I had seen a young princess. They had both been
extremely not beautiful, but who of us would have told them that? I had never
seen England, really seen it, I had only met a representative, seen a picture, read
books, memorized its history. I had never set foot, my own foot, in it.

Y
The space between the idea of something and its reality is always wide and deep
and dark. The longer they are kept apart — idea of thing, reality of thing — the
wider the width, the deeper the depth, the thicker and darker the darkness. This
space starts out empty, there is nothing in it, but it rapidly becomes filled up with
obsession or desire or hatred or love — sometimes all of these things, sometimes
some of these things, sometimes only one of these things. The existence of the
world as I came to know it was a result of this: idea of thing over here, reality of

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1010

10

6/18/12 3:13 PM

KiNCAid • ON SeeiNG eNGlANd fOR The fiRST Time 1011

thing way, way over there. There was Christopher Columbus, an unlikable man,
an unpleasant man, a liar (and so, of course, a thief) surrounded by maps and
schemes and plans, and there was the reality on the other side of that width, that
depth, that darkness. He became obsessed, he became filled with desire, the hatred
came later, love was never a part of it. Eventually, his idea met the longed­for real­
ity. That the idea of something and its reality are often two completely different
things is something no one ever remembers; and so when they meet and find that
they are not compatible, the weaker of the two, idea or reality, dies. That idea
Christopher Columbus had was more powerful than the reality he met, and so
the reality he met died.
And so finally, when I was a grown­up woman, the mother of two children,
the wife of someone, a person who resides in a powerful country that takes up
more than its fair share of a continent, the owner of a house with many rooms in
it and of two automobiles, with the desire and will (which I very much act upon)
to take from the world more than I give back to it, more than I deserve, more than
I need, finally then, I saw England, the real England, not a picture, not a painting,
not through a story in a book, but England, for the first time. In me, the space
between the idea of it and its reality had become filled with hatred, and so when
at last I saw it I wanted to take it into my hands and tear it into little pieces and
then crumble it up as if it were clay, child’s clay. That was impossible, and so I
could only indulge in not­favorable opinions.
There were monuments everywhere; they commemorated victories, battles
fought between them and the people who lived across the sea from them, all vile
people, fought over which of them would have dominion over the people who
looked like me. The monuments were useless to them now, people sat on them
and ate their lunch. They were like markers on an old useless trail, like a piece of
old string tied to a finger to jog the memory, like old decoration in an old house,
dirty, useless, in the way. Their skins were so pale, it made them look so fragile, so
weak, so ugly. What if I had the power to simply banish them from their land,
send boat after boatload of them on a voyage that in fact had no destination, force
them to live in a place where the sun’s presence was a constant? This would rid
them of their pale complexion and make them look more like me, make them
look more like the people I love and treasure and hold dear, and more like the
people who occupy the near and far reaches of my imagination, my history, my
geography, and reduce them and everything they have ever known to figurines as
evidence that I was in divine favor, what if all this was in my power? Could I resist
it? No one ever has.
And they were rude, they were rude to each other. They didn’t like each other
very much. They didn’t like each other in the way they didn’t like me, and it
occurred to me that their dislike for me was one of the few things they agreed on.
I was on a train in England with a friend, an English woman. Before we were
in England she liked me very much. In England she didn’t like me at all. She didn’t
like the claim I said I had on England, she didn’t like the views I had of England.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1011

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1012 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
I didn’t like England, she didn’t like England, but she didn’t like me not liking it
too. She said, “I want to show you my England, I want to show you the England
that I know and love.” I had told her many times before that I knew England and
I didn’t want to love it anyway. She no longer lived in England; it was her own
country, but it had not been kind to her, so she left. On the train, the conductor
was rude to her; she asked something, and he responded in a rude way. She
became ashamed. She was ashamed at the way he treated her; she was ashamed at
the way he behaved. “This is the new England,” she said. But I liked the conductor
being rude; his behavior seemed quite appropriate. Earlier this had happened: we
had gone to a store to buy a shirt for my husband; it was meant to be a special
present, a special shirt to wear on special occasions. This was a store where the
Prince of Wales has his shirts made, but the shirts sold in this store are beautiful
all the same. I found a shirt I thought my husband would like and I wanted to buy
him a tie to go with it. When I couldn’t decide which one to choose, the salesman
showed me a new set. He was very pleased with these, he said, because they bore
the crest of the Prince of Wales, and the Prince of Wales had never allowed his
crest to decorate an article of clothing before. There was something in the way he
said it; his tone was slavish, reverential, awed. It made me feel angry; I wanted to
hit him. I didn’t do that. I said, my husband and I hate princes, my husband
would never wear anything that had a prince’s anything on it. My friend stiffened.
The salesman stiffened. They both drew themselves in, away from me. My friend
told me that the prince was a symbol of her Englishness, and I could see that I had
caused offense. I looked at her. She was an English person, the sort of English
person I used to know at home, the sort who was nobody in England but some­
body when they came to live among the people like me. There were many people
I could have seen England with; that I was seeing it with this particular person, a
person who reminded me of the people who showed me England long ago as I sat
in church or at my desk, made me feel silent and afraid, for I wondered if, all these
years of our friendship, I had had a friend or had been in the thrall of a racial
memory.
I went to Bath — we, my friend and I, did this, but though we were together,
I was no longer with her. The landscape was almost as familiar as my own hand,
but I had never been in this place before, so how could that be again? And the
streets of Bath were familiar, too, but I had never walked on them before. It was
all those years of reading, starting with Roman Britain. Why did I have to know
about Roman Britain? It was of no real use to me, a person living on a hot,
drought­ridden island, and it is of no use to me now, and yet my head is filled
with this nonsense, Roman Britain. In Bath, I drank tea in a room I had read
about in a novel written in the eighteenth century. In this very same room, young
women wearing those dresses that rustled and so on danced and flirted and
sometimes disgraced themselves with young men, soldiers, sailors, who were on
their way to Bristol or someplace like that, so many places like that where so many
adventures, the outcome of which was not good for me, began. Bristol, England.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1012

15

6/18/12 3:13 PM

KiNCAid • ON SeeiNG eNGlANd fOR The fiRST Time 1013

A sentence that began “That night the ship sailed from Bristol, England” would
end not so good for me. And then I was driving through the countryside in an
English motorcar, on narrow winding roads, and they were so familiar, though I
had never been on them before; and through little villages the names of which I
somehow knew so well though I had never been there before. And the country­
side did have all those hedges and hedges, fields hedged in. I was marveling at all
the toil of it, the planting of the hedges to begin with and then the care of it, all
that clipping, year after year of clipping, and I wondered at the lives of the people
who would have to do this, because wherever I see and feel the hands that hold up
the world, I see and feel myself and all the people who look like me. And I said,
“Those hedges” and my friend said that someone, a woman named Mrs. Rothchild,
worried that the hedges weren’t being taken care of properly; the farmers couldn’t
afford or find the help to keep up the hedges, and often they replaced them with
wire fencing. I might have said to that, well if Mrs. Rothchild doesn’t like the wire
fencing, why doesn’t she take care of the hedges herself, but I didn’t. And then in
those fields that were now hemmed in by wire fencing that a privileged woman
didn’t like was planted a vile yellow flowering bush that produced an oil, and my
friend said that Mrs. Rothchild didn’t like this either; it ruined the English coun­
tryside, it ruined the traditional look of the English countryside.
It was not at that moment that I wished every sentence, everything I knew,
that began with England would end with “and then it all died; we don’t know
how, it just all died.” At that moment, I was thinking, who are these people who
forced me to think of them all the time, who forced me to think that the world I
knew was incomplete, or without substance, or did not measure up because it was
not England; that I was incomplete, or without substance, and did not measure
up because I was not English. Who were these people? The person sitting next to
me couldn’t give me a clue; no one person could. In any case, if I had said to her,
I find England ugly, I hate England; the weather is like a jail sentence, the English
are a very ugly people, the food in England is like a jail sentence, the hair of
English people is so straight, so dead looking, the English have an unbearable
smell so different from the smell of people I know, real people of course, she
would have said that I was a person full of prejudice. Apart from the fact that it is
I — that is, the people who look like me — who made her aware of the unpleas­
antness of such a thing, the idea of such a thing, prejudice, she would have been
only partly right, sort of right: I may be capable of prejudice, but my prejudices
have no weight to them, my prejudices have no force behind them, my prejudices
remain opinions, my prejudices remain my personal opinion. And a great feeling
of rage and disappointment came over me as I looked at England, my head full of
personal opinions that could not have public, my public, approval. The people I
come from are powerless to do evil on grand scale.
The moment I wished every sentence, everything I knew, that began with
England would end with “and then it all died; we don’t know how, it just all died”
was when I saw the white cliffs of Dover. I had sung hymns and recited poems

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1013

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1014 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
that were about a longing to see the white cliffs of Dover again. At the time I sang
the hymns and recited the poems, I could really long to see them again because I
had never seen them at all, nor had anyone around me at the time. But there we
were, groups of people longing for something we had never seen. And so there
they were, the white cliffs, but they were not that pearly majestic thing I used to
sing about, that thing that created such a feeling in these people that when they
died in the place where I lived they had themselves buried facing a direction that
would allow them to see the white cliffs of Dover when they were resurrected, as
surely they would be. The white cliffs of Dover, when finally I saw them, were
cliffs, but they were not white; you would only call them that if the word “white”
meant something special to you; they were dirty and they were steep; they were so
steep, the correct height from which all my views of England, starting with the
map before me in my classroom and ending with the trip I had just taken, should
jump and die and disappear forever.

Questions for Discussion
1. What is ironic about the essay’s title, “On Seeing England for the First Time”?
2. In paragraph 4, Jamaica Kincaid says, “I had long ago been conquered.” What does
she mean?
3. How does Kincaid regard the British influence under which she was raised? Refer
to specific passages.
4. How do Kincaid’s childhood memories of school compare with your own?
5. In paragraph 10, Kincaid writes, “The space between the idea of something and its
reality is always wide and deep and dark.” What does she mean?
6. At the end of paragraph 12, Kincaid says, in reference to power, “No one ever has
[resisted it].” Do you think this is true? Explain.
7. What is the effect of the shirt­shopping example Kincaid provides (para. 14)?
What does it contribute to your understanding of Kincaid’s attitude toward
England?
8. Where in the essay does Kincaid’s epiphany occur? Support your claim with evi­
dence from the text.
9. Having read the essay, how do you regard Kincaid?

Questions on Rhetoric and Style
1. In the opening paragraph, how does Kincaid build up detail to develop a clearly
ironic tone?
2. How does the use of parallelism serve Kincaid’s rhetorical purpose in the first
paragraph?
3. What is the effect of the mutton simile that Kincaid uses in paragraph 1? What is
the effect of retracting that simile within the same clause?

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1014

6/18/12 3:13 PM

KiNCAid • ON SeeiNG eNGlANd fOR The fiRST Time 1015

4. In paragraphs 1 and 2, Kincaid uses listing as a technique. What is the effect? How
does this effect serve her purpose?
5. Kincaid writes in paragraph 5 that “there were many times of seeing England for
the first time.” What is her purpose for developing this paradox?
6. Kincaid uses the phrases “extremely not beautiful” (para. 9) and “not­favorable”
(para. 11). Why not simply say “ugly” or “homely” or “unfavorable”? How does
Kincaid’s diction contribute to her purpose?
7. In paragraph 11, Kincaid says she has “the desire and will . . . to take from the
world more than I give back to it, more than I deserve, more than I need.” What
effect does such a statement have on the reader?
8. Kincaid uses repetition in paragraph 16. She mentions “my prejudices” four
times. What is the effect of the repetition as she confesses to the reader?
9. What is the rhetorical effect of the phrase “as surely they would be” in para­
graph 17?
10. What is the effect of Kincaid’s attitude toward her friend? How does her descrip­
tion of this relationship affect her ethos?
11. Throughout the essay Kincaid conveys her anger and her sense of injustice with
various appeals to pathos. How does she also appeal to logos? Identify specific
examples.

Suggestions for Writing
1. Reread paragraph 10, which begins, “The space between the idea of something and
its reality is always wide and deep and dark.” Has there ever been a time in your life
when an idea and reality have come into conflict? Write an essay explaining how
your experience supports Kincaid’s observation.
2. Many readers note the bitter voice in this essay. Does Kincaid present a narrator
who becomes bitter as the piece develops, or is the speaker’s voice consistently bit­
ter from the beginning? Use specific references to support your answer.
3. We consider education as a liberating process, a “leading out,” according to its
etymology. This essay presents a different view. Explain how Kincaid uses her
youthful experience to present education as an oppressive rather than a generative
force.
4. Has there ever been a time in your life when you saw something “for the first time”
many times? Write an essay explaining that experience.
5. Read carefully paragraphs 12 and 16, noting particularly where Kincaid comments
on the universality of power and prejudice as she concludes each paragraph. Write
an essay supporting or challenging her analysis.
6. Some readers may consider Kincaid’s criticism of England and its people as
extreme and may characterize her essay as polemical. Write an essay that discusses
Kincaid’s views of England, and evaluate the success of her argument.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1015

6/18/12 3:13 PM

On the Duty of Civil Disobedience
Henry David Thoreau
henry david Thoreau (1817–1862) was a philosopher, poet, essayist, and naturalist as well as an outspoken social critic. Born in Concord, massachusetts, he was educated at harvard and worked at a
variety of professions, from land surveyor to teacher to pencil maker.
Strongly influenced by his neighbor and friend Ralph Waldo emerson,
Thoreau considered himself a fierce patriot who honored his country
and its ideals, if not always its government. he spoke out against
the war with mexico and criticized the fugitive Slave Act, and he
defended the abolitionist John Brown. Thoreau is best known for Walden, or Life
in the Woods (p. 296), published in 1854, which presents his account of living in
a cabin on Walden Pond for two years. Originally delivered as a lecture, “On the
duty of Civil disobedience” is Thoreau’s response to his arrest and incarceration
for not paying a poll tax. its influence has been enormous, deeply affecting such
twentieth-century figures as Gandhi and martin luther King Jr.

I

heartily accept the motto, — “That government is best which governs
least”; and I should like to see it acted up to more rapidly and systemati­
cally. Carried out, it finally amounts to this, which I also believe, — “That govern­
ment is best which governs not at all”; and when men are prepared for it, that will
be the kind of government which they will have. Government is at best but an
expedient; but most governments are usually, and all governments are some­
times, inexpedient. The objections which have been brought against a standing
army, and they are many and weighty, and deserve to prevail, may also at last be
brought against a standing government. The standing army is only an arm of the
standing government. The government itself, which is only the mode which the
people have chosen to execute their will, is equally liable to be abused and per­
verted before the people can act through it. Witness the present Mexican war, the
work of comparatively a few individuals using the standing government as their
tool; for, in the outset, the people would not have consented to this measure.
This American government, — what is it but a tradition, though a recent one,
endeavoring to transmit itself unimpaired to posterity, but each instant losing
some of its integrity? It has not the vitality and force of a single living man; for a
single man can bend it to his will. It is a sort of wooden gun to the people them­
selves. But it is not the less necessary for this; for the people must have some
complicated machinery or other, and hear its din, to satisfy that idea of govern­
ment which they have. Governments show thus how successfully men can be
imposed on, even impose on themselves, for their own advantage. It is excellent,
we must all allow. Yet this government never of itself furthered any enterprise, but

1016

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1016

6/18/12 3:13 PM

ThOReAU • ON The dUTY Of Civil diSOBedieNCe 1017

by the alacrity with which it got out of its way. It does not keep the country free.
It does not settle the West. It does not educate. The character inherent in the
American people has done all that has been accomplished; and it would have done
somewhat more, if the government had not sometimes got in its way. For govern­
ment is an expedient by which men would fain succeed in letting one another
alone; and, as has been said, when it is most expedient, the governed are most let
alone by it. Trade and commerce, if they were not made of India­rubber, would
never manage to bounce over the obstacles which legislators are continually put­
ting in their way; and, if one were to judge these men wholly by the effects of their
actions and not partly by their intentions, they would deserve to be classed and
punished with those mischievous persons who put obstructions on railroads.
But, to speak practically and as a citizen, unlike those who call themselves
no­government men, I ask for, not at once no government, but at once a better
government. Let every man make known what kind of government would com­
mand his respect, and that will be one step toward obtaining it.
After all, the practical reason why, when the power is once in the hands of the
people, a majority are permitted, and for a long period continue, to rule, is not
because they are most likely to be in the right, nor because this seems fairest to the
minority, but because they are physically the strongest. But a government in
which the majority rule in all cases cannot be based on justice, even as far as men
understand it. Can there not be a government in which majorities do not virtu­
ally decide right and wrong, but conscience? — in which majorities decide only
those questions to which the rule of expediency is applicable? Must the citizen
ever for a moment, or in the least degree, resign his conscience to the legislator?
Why has every man a conscience, then? I think that we should be men first, and
subjects afterward. It is not desirable to cultivate a respect for the law, so much as
for the right. The only obligation which I have the right to assume, is to do at any
time what I think right. It is truly enough said, that a corporation has no con­
science; but a corporation of conscientious men is a corporation with a con­
science. Law never made men a whit more just; and, by means of their respect for
it, even the well­disposed are daily made the agents of injustice. A common and
natural result of an undue respect for law is, that you may see a file of soldiers,
colonel, captain, corporal, privates, powder­monkeys, and all, marching in admi­
rable order over hill and dale to the wars, against their wills, ay, against their com­
mon sense and consciences, which makes it very steep marching indeed, and
produces a palpitation of the heart. They have no doubt that it is a damnable
business in which they are concerned; they are all peaceably inclined. Now, what
are they? Men at all? or small movable forts and magazines, at the service of some
unscrupulous man in power? Visit the Navy­Yard, and behold a marine, such a
man as an American government can make, or such as it can make a man with its
black arts, — a mere shadow and reminiscence of humanity, a man laid out alive
and standing, and already, as one may say, buried under arms with funeral accom­
paniments, though it may be, —

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1017

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1018 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
Not a drum was heard, not a funeral note.
As his corse to the rampart we hurried;
Not a soldier discharged his farewell shot
O’er the grave where our hero we buried.1

The mass of men serve the state thus, not as men mainly, but as machines,
with their bodies. They are the standing army, and the militia, jailers, constables,
posse comitatus, &c. In most cases there is no free exercise whatever of the judg­
ment or of the moral sense; but they put themselves on a level with wood and
earth and stones; and wooden men can perhaps be manufactured that will serve
the purpose as well. Such command no more respect than men of straw or a lump
of dirt. They have the same sort of worth only as horses and dogs. Yet such as
these even are commonly esteemed good citizens. Others, — as most legislators,
politicians, lawyers, ministers, and office­holders, — serve the state chiefly with
their heads; and, as they rarely make any moral distinctions, they are as likely to
serve the Devil, without intending it, as God. A very few, as heroes, patriots, mar­
tyrs, reformers in the great sense, and men, serve the state with their consciences
also, and so necessarily resist it for the most part; and they are commonly treated
as enemies by it. A wise man will only be useful as a man, and will not submit to
be “clay,” and “stop a hole to keep the wind away,”2 but leave that office to his dust
at least: —

5

I am too high­born to be propertied,
To be a secondary at control,
Or useful serving­man and instrument
To any sovereign state throughout the world.3

He who gives himself entirely to his fellow­men appears to them useless and
selfish; but he who gives himself partially to them is pronounced a benefactor and
philanthropist.
How does it become a man to behave toward this American government
today? I answer, that he cannot without disgrace be associated with it. I cannot for
an instant recognize that political organization as my government which is the
slave’s government also.
All men recognize the right of revolution; that is, the right to refuse alle­
giance to, and to resist, the government, when its tyranny or its inefficiency are
great and unendurable. But almost all say that such is not the case now. But such
was the case, they think, in the Revolution of ’75. If one were to tell me that this
was a bad government because it taxed certain foreign commodities brought to
its ports, it is most probable that I should not make an ado about it, for I can do
without them. All machines have their friction; and possibly this does enough
1From an early nineteenth­century song. — Eds.
2Hamlet 5.1.236–237. — Eds.
3King John 5.1.79–82. — Eds.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1018

6/18/12 3:13 PM

ThOReAU • ON The dUTY Of Civil diSOBedieNCe 1019

good to counterbalance the evil. At any rate, it is a great evil to make a stir about
it. But when the friction comes to have its machine, and oppression and robbery
are organized, I say, let us not have such a machine any longer. In other words,
when a sixth of the population of a nation which has undertaken to be the refuge
of liberty are slaves, and a whole country is unjustly overrun and conquered by a
foreign army, and subjected to military law, I think that it is not too soon for hon­
est men to rebel and revolutionize. What makes this duty the more urgent is the
fact, that the country so overrun is not our own, but ours is the invading army.
[William] Paley, a common authority with many on moral questions, in his
chapter on the “Duty of Submission to Civil Government,” resolves all civil obli­
gation into expediency; and he proceeds to say, “that so long as the interest of the
whole society requires it, that is, so long as the established government cannot be
resisted or changed without public inconveniency, it is the will of God that the
established government be obeyed, and no longer.” — “This principle being
admitted, the justice of every particular case of resistance is reduced to a compu­
tation of the quantity of the danger and grievance on the one side, and of the
probability and expense of redressing it on the other.” Of this, he says, every man
shall judge for himself. But Paley appears never to have contemplated those cases
to which the rule of expediency does not apply, in which a people, as well as an
individual, must do justice, cost what it may. If I have unjustly wrested a plank
from a drowning man, I must restore it to him though I drown myself. This,
according to Paley, would be inconvenient. But he that would save his life, in such
a case, shall lose it. This people must cease to hold slaves, and to make war on
Mexico, though it cost them their existence as a people.
In their practice, nations agree with Paley; but does any one think that Mas­
sachusetts does exactly what is right at the present crisis?

10

A drab of state, a cloth­’o­silver slut,
To have her train borne up, and her soul trail in the dirt.4

Practically speaking, the opponents to a reform in Massachusetts are not a hun­
dred thousand politicians at the South, but a hundred thousand merchants and
farmers here, who are more interested in commerce and agriculture than they are
in humanity, and are not prepared to do justice to the slave and to Mexico, cost
what it may. I quarrel not with far­off foes, but with those who, near at home,
cooperate with, and do the bidding of, those far away, and without whom the lat­
ter would be harmless. We are accustomed to say, that the mass of men are unpre­
pared; but improvement is slow, because the few are not materially wiser or better
than the many. It is not so important that many should be as good as you, as that
there be some absolute goodness somewhere; for that will leaven the whole lump.
There are thousands who are in opinion opposed to slavery and to the war, who
yet in effect do nothing to put an end to them; who, esteeming themselves children
4From a work by Cyril Tourneur (c. 1575–1626). — Eds.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1019

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1020 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
of Washington and Franklin, sit down with their hands in their pockets, and say
that they know not what to do, and do nothing; who even postpone the question
of freedom to the question of free­trade, and quietly read the prices­current
along with the latest advices from Mexico, after dinner, and, it may be, fall asleep
over them both. What is the price­current of an honest man and a patriot today?
They hesitate, and they regret, and sometimes they petition; but they do nothing
in earnest and with effect. They will wait, well disposed, for others to remedy the
evil, that they may no longer have it to regret. At most, they give only a cheap vote,
and a feeble countenance and God­speed, to the right, as it goes by them. There
are nine hundred and ninety­nine patrons of virtue to one virtuous man. But it
is easier to deal with the real possessor of a thing than with the temporary guard­
ian of it.
All voting is a sort of gaming, like checkers or backgammon, with a slight
moral tinge to it, a playing with right and wrong, with moral questions; and bet­
ting naturally accompanies it. The character of the voters is not staked. I cast my
vote, perchance, as I think right; but I am not vitally concerned that that right
should prevail. I am willing to leave it to the majority. Its obligation, therefore,
never exceeds that of expediency. Even voting for the right is doing nothing for it.
It is only expressing to men feebly your desire that it should prevail. A wise man
will not leave the right to the mercy of chance, nor wish it to prevail through the
power of the majority. There is but little virtue in the action of masses of men.
When the majority shall at length vote for the abolition of slavery, it will be
because they are indifferent to slavery, or because there is but little slavery left to
be abolished by their vote. They will then be the only slaves. Only his vote can
hasten the abolition of slavery who asserts his own freedom by his vote.
I hear of a convention to be held at Baltimore, or elsewhere, for the selection
of a candidate for the Presidency, made up chiefly of editors, and men who are
politicans by profession; but I think, what is it to any independent, intelligent,
and respectable man what decision they may come to? Shall we not have the
advantage of his wisdom and honesty, nevertheless? Can we not count upon
some independent votes? Are there not many individuals in the country who do
not attend conventions? But no: I find that the respectable man, so called, has
immediately drifted from his position, and despairs of his country, when his
country has more reason to despair of him. He forthwith adopts one of the can­
didates thus selected as the only available one, thus proving that he is himself
available for any purposes of the demagogue. His vote is of no more worth than
that of any unprincipled foreigner or hireling native, who may have been bought.
O for a man who is a man, and, as my neighbor says, has a bone in his back which
you cannot pass your hand through! Our statistics are at fault: The population
has been returned too large. How many men are there to a square thousand miles
in this country? Hardly one. Does not America offer any inducement for men to
settle here? The American has dwindled into an Odd Fellow, — one who may be
known by the development of his organ of gregariousness, and a manifest lack of

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1020

6/18/12 3:13 PM

ThOReAU • ON The dUTY Of Civil diSOBedieNCe 1021

intellect and cheerful self­reliance; whose first and chief concern, on coming into
the world, is to see that the Almshouses are in good repair; and, before yet he has
lawfully donned the virile garb, to collect a fund for the support of the widows
and orphans that may be; who, in short, ventures to live only by the aid of the
Mutual Insurance company, which has promised to bury him decently.
It is not a man’s duty, as a matter of course, to devote himself to the eradica­
tion of any, even the most enormous wrong; he may still properly have other
concerns to engage him; but it is his duty, at least, to wash his hands of it, and, if
he gives it no thought longer, not to give it practically his support. If I devote
myself to other pursuits and contemplations, I must first see, at least, that I do not
pursue them sitting upon another man’s shoulders. I must get off him first, that
he may pursue his contemplations too. See what gross inconsistency is tolerated.
I have heard some of my townsmen say, “I should like to have them order me out
to help put down an insurrection of the slaves, or to march to Mexico; — see if I
would go”; and yet these very men have each, directly by their allegiance, and so
indirectly, at least, by their money, furnished a substitute. The soldier is applauded
who refuses to serve in an unjust war by those who do not refuse to sustain the
unjust government which makes the war; is applauded by those whose own act
and authority he disregards and sets at naught; as if the State were penitent to that
degree that it hired one to scourge it while it sinned, but not to that degree that it
left off sinning for a moment. Thus, under the name of Order and Civil Govern­
ment, we are all made at last to pay homage to and support our own meanness.
After the first blush of sin comes its indifference; and from immoral it becomes,
as it were, unmoral, and not quite unnecessary to that life which we have made.
The broadest and most prevalent error requires the most disinterested virtue
to sustain it. The slight reproach to which the virtue of patriotism is commonly
liable, the noble are most likely to incur. Those who, while they disapprove of the
character and measures of a government, yield to it their allegiance and support,
are undoubtedly its most conscientious supporters, and so frequently the most seri­
ous obstacles to reform. Some are petitioning the State to dissolve the Union, to
disregard the requisitions of the President. Why do they not dissolve it themselves, —
the union between themselves and the States, — and refuse to pay their quota into
its treasury? Do not they stand in the same relation to the State, that the State
does to the Union? And have not the same reasons prevented the State from
resisting the Union, which have prevented them from resisting the State?
How can a man be satisfied to entertain an opinion merely, and enjoy it? Is
there any enjoyment in it, if his opinion is that he is aggrieved? If you are cheated
out of a single dollar by your neighbor, you do not rest satisfied with knowing
that you are cheated, or with saying that you are cheated, or even with petitioning
him to pay you your due; but you take effectual steps at once to obtain the full
amount, and see that you are never cheated again. Action from principle, the
perception and the performance of right, changes things and relations; it is essen­
tially revolutionary, and does not consist wholly with anything which was. It not

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1021

15

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1022 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
only divides states and churches, it divides families; ay, it divides the individual,
separating the diabolical in him from the divine.
Unjust laws exist: Shall we be content to obey them, or shall we endeavor to
amend them, and obey them until we have succeeded, or shall we transgress them
at once? Men generally, under such a government as this, think that they ought to
wait until they have persuaded the majority to alter them. They think that, if they
should resist, the remedy would be worse than the evil. But it is the fault of the
government itself that the remedy is worse than the evil. It makes it worse. Why is
it not more apt to anticipate and provide for reform? Why does it not cherish its
wise minority? Why does it cry and resist before it is hurt? Why does it not
encourage its citizens to be on the alert to point out its faults, and do better than
it would have them? Why does it always crucify Christ, and excommunicate
Copernicus and Luther, and pronounce Washington and Franklin rebels?
One would think, that a deliberate and practical denial of its authority was
the only offence never contemplated by government; else, why has it not assigned
its definite, its suitable and proportionate penalty? If a man who has no property
refuses but once to earn nine shillings for the State, he is put in prison for a period
unlimited by any law that I know, and determined only by the discretion of those
who placed him there; but if he should steal ninety times nine shillings from the
State, he is soon permitted to go at large again.
If the injustice is part of the necessary friction of the machine of government,
let it go, let it go: Perchance it will wear smooth, — certainly the machine will
wear out. If the injustice has a spring, or a pulley, or a rope, or a crank, exclusively
for itself, then perhaps you may consider whether the remedy will not be worse
than the evil; but if it is of such a nature that it requires you to be the agent of
injustice to another, then, I say, break the law. Let your life be a counter friction to
stop the machine. What I have to do is to see, at any rate, that I do not lend myself
to the wrong which I condemn.
As for adopting the ways which the State has provided for remedying the evil,
I know not of such ways. They take too much time, and a man’s life will be gone.
I have other affairs to attend to. I came into this world, not chiefly to make this a
good place to live in, but to live in it, be it good or bad. A man has not everything
to do, but something; and because he cannot do everything, it is not necessary
that he should do something wrong. It is not my business to be petitioning the
Governor or the Legislature any more than it is theirs to petition me; and, if they
should not hear my petition, what should I do then? But in this case the State has
provided no way: Its very Constitution is the evil. This may seem to be harsh and
stubborn and unconciliatory; but it is to treat with the utmost kindness and con­
sideration the only spirit that can appreciate or deserves it. So is all change for the
better, like birth and death, which convulse the body.
I do not hesitate to say, that those who call themselves Abolitionists should at
once effectually withdraw their support, both in person and property, from the
government of Massachusetts, and not wait till they constitute a majority of one,

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1022

20

6/18/12 3:13 PM

ThOReAU • ON The dUTY Of Civil diSOBedieNCe 1023

before they suffer the right to prevail through them. I think that it is enough if
they have God on their side, without waiting for that other one. Moreover, any
man more right than his neighbors constitutes a majority of one already.5
I meet this American government, or its representative, the State govern­
ment, directly, and face to face, once a year — no more — in the person of its tax­
gatherer; this is the only mode in which a man situated as I am necessarily meets
it; and it then says distinctly, Recognize me; and the simplest, the most effectual,
and, in the present posture of affairs, the indispensablest mode of treating with it
on this head, of expressing your little satisfaction with and love for it, is to deny it
then. My civil neighbor, the tax­gatherer, is the very man I have to deal with, —
for it is, after all, with men and not with parchment that I quarrel, — and he has
voluntarily chosen to be an agent of the government. How shall he ever know well
what he is and does as an officer of the government, or as a man, until he is
obliged to consider whether he shall treat me, his neighbor, for whom he has
respect, as a neighbor and well­disposed man, or as a maniac and disturber of the
peace, and see if he can get over this obstruction to his neighborliness without a
ruder and more impetuous thought or speech corresponding with his action. I
know this well, that if one thousand, if one hundred, if ten men whom I could
name, — if ten honest men only, — ay, if one honest man, in this State of Massa­
chusetts, ceasing to hold slaves, were actually to withdraw from this copartnership,
and be locked upon the county jail therefor, it would be the abolition of slavery
in America. For it matters not how small the beginning may seem to be: What is
once well done is done forever. But we love better to talk about it. That we say is
our mission. Reform keeps many scores of newspapers in its service, but not one
man. If my esteemed neighbor, the State’s ambassador, who will devote his days
to the settlement of the question of human rights in the Council Chamber,
instead of being threatened with the prisons of Carolina, were to sit down the
prisoner of Massachusetts, that State which is so anxious to foist the sin of slavery
upon her sister, — though at present she can discover only an act of inhospitality
to be the ground of a quarrel with her, — the Legislature would not wholly waive
the subject the following winter.
Under a government which imprisons any unjustly, the true place for a just
man is also a prison. The proper place today, the only place which Massachusetts
has provided for her freer and less desponding spirits, is in her prisons, to be put
out and locked out of the State by her own act, as they have already put them­
selves out by their principles. It is there that the fugitive slave, and the Mexican
prisoner on parole, and the Indian come to plead the wrongs of his race, should
find them; on that separate, but more free and honorable ground, where the State
places those who are not with her, but against her, — the only house in a slave
State in which a free man can abide with honor. If any think that their influence
5An allusion to a statement by John Knox (1505?–1572), a religious reformer, who said, “A man
with God is always in the majority.” — Eds.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1023

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1024 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
would be lost there, and their voices no longer afflict the ear of the State, that they
would not be as an enemy within its walls, they do not know by how much truth
is stronger than error, nor how much more eloquently and effectively he can
combat injustice who has experienced a little in his own person. Cast your whole
vote, not a strip of paper merely, but your whole influence. A minority is power­
less while it conforms to the majority; it is not even a minority then; but it is
irresistible when it clogs by its whole weight. If the alternative is to keep all just
men in prison, or give up war and slavery, the State will not hesitate which to
choose. If a thousand men were not to pay their tax­bills this year, that would not
be a violent and bloody measure, as it would be to pay them, and enable the State
to commit violence and shed innocent blood. This is, in fact, the definition of a
peaceable revolution, if any such is possible. If the tax­gatherer, or any other pub­
lic officer, asks me, as one has done, “But what shall I do?” my answer is, “If you
really wish to do anything, resign your office.” When the subject has refused alle­
giance, and the officer has resigned his office, then the revolution is accomplished.
But even suppose blood should flow. Is there not a sort of blood shed when the
conscience is wounded? Through this wound a man’s real manhood and immor­
tality flow out, and he bleeds to an everlasting death. I see this blood flowing now.
I have contemplated the imprisonment of the offender, rather than the seizure
of his goods, — though both will serve the same purpose, — because they who
assert the purest right, and consequently are most dangerous to a corrupt State,
commonly have not spent much time in accumulating property. To such the State
renders comparatively small service, and a slight tax is wont to appear exorbi­
tant, particularly if they are obliged to earn it by special labor with their hands. If
there were one who lived wholly without the use of money, the State itself would
hesitate to demand it of him. But the rich man, — not to make any invidious
comparison, — is always sold to the institution which makes him rich. Absolutely
speaking, the more money, the less virtue; for money comes between a man and
his objects, and obtains them for him; and it was certainly no great virtue to
obtain it. It puts to rest many questions which he would otherwise be taxed to
answer; while the only new question which it puts is the hard but superfluous one,
how to spend it. Thus his moral ground is taken from under his feet. The oppor­
tunities of living are diminished in proportion as what are called the “means” are
increased. The best thing a man can do for his culture when he is rich is to endeavor
to carry out those schemes which he entertained when he was poor. Christ answered
the Herodians according to their condition. “Show me the tribute­money,” said
he; — and one took a penny out of his pocket; — if you use money which has the
image of Caesar on it, and which he has made current and valuable, that is, if you
are men of the State, and gladly enjoy the advantages of Caesar’s government, then
pay him back some of his own when he demands it; “Render therefore to Caesar
that which is Caesar’s, and to God those things which are God’s,”6 — leaving them
no wiser than before as to which was which; for they did not wish to know.
6Matt. 22:16–21. — Eds.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1024

6/18/12 3:13 PM

ThOReAU • ON The dUTY Of Civil diSOBedieNCe 1025

When I converse with the freest of my neighbors, I perceive that, whatever
they may say about the magnitude and seriousness of the question, and their
regard for the public tranquility, the long and the short of the matter is, that they
cannot spare the protection of the existing government, and they dread the con­
sequences to their property and families of disobedience to it. For my own part, I
should not like to think that I ever rely on the protection of the State. But, if I
deny the authority of the State when it presents its tax­bill, it will soon take and
waste all my property, and so harass me and my children without end. This is
hard. This makes it impossible for a man to live honestly, and at the same time
comfortably, in outward respects. It will not be worth the while to accumulate
property; that would be sure to go again. You must hire or squat somewhere, and
raise but a small crop, and eat that soon. You must live within yourself, and
depend upon yourself always tucked up and ready for a start, and not have many
affairs. A man may grow rich in Turkey even, if he will be in all respects a good
subject of the Turkish government. Confucius said: “If a state is governed by the
principles of reason, poverty and misery are subjects of shame; if a state is not
governed by the principles of reason, riches and honors are the subjects of shame.”
No: Until I want the protection of Massachusetts to be extended to me in some
distant Southern port, where my liberty is endangered, or until I am bent solely
on building up an estate at home by peaceful enterprise, I can afford to refuse
allegiance to Massachusetts, and her right to my property and life. It costs me less
in every sense to incur the penalty of disobedience to the State, than it would to
obey. I should feel as if I were worth less in that case.
Some years ago, the State met me in behalf of the Church and commanded
me to pay a certain sum toward the support of a clergyman whose preaching my
father attended, but never I myself. “Pay,” it said, “or be locked up in the jail.” I
declined to pay. But, unfortunately, another man saw fit to pay it. I did not see
why the schoolmaster should be taxed to support the priest, and not the priest the
schoolmaster; for I was not the State’s schoolmaster, but I supported myself by
voluntary subscription. I did not see why the lyceum should not present its tax­
bill, and have the State to back its demand, as well as the Church. However, at the
request of the selectmen, I condescended to make some such statement as this in
writing: — “Know all men by these presents, that I, Henry Thoreau, do not wish
to be regarded as a member of any incorporated society which I have not joined.”
This I gave to the town clerk; and he has it. The State, having thus learned that I
did not wish to be regarded as a member of that church, has never made a like
demand on me since; though it said that it must adhere to its original presump­
tion that time. If I had known how to name them, I should then have signed off
in detail from all the societies which I never signed on to; but I did not know
where to find a complete list.
I have paid no poll­tax for six years. I was put into a jail once on this account,
for one night; and, as I stood considering the walls of solid stone, two or three feet
thick, the door of wood and iron, a foot thick, and the iron grating which strained
the light, I could not help being struck with the foolishness of that institution

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1025

25

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1026 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
which treated me as if I were mere flesh and blood and bones, to be locked up. I
wondered that it should have concluded at length that this was the best use it
could put me to, and had never thought to avail itself of my services in some way.
I saw that, if there was a wall of stone between me and my townsmen, there was a
still more difficult one to climb or break through, before they could get to be as
free as I was. I did not for a moment feel confined, and the walls seemed a great
waste of stone and mortar. I felt as if I alone of all my townsmen had paid my tax.
They plainly did not know how to treat me, but behaved like persons who are
underbred. In every threat and in every compliment there was a blunder; for they
thought that my chief desire was to stand the other side of that stone wall, I could
not but smile to see how industriously they locked the door on my meditations,
which followed them out again without let or hindrance, and they were really all
that was dangerous. As they could not reach me, they had resolved to punish my
body; just as boys, if they cannot come at some person against whom they have a
spite, will abuse his dog. I saw that the State was half­witted, that it was timid as a
lone woman with her silver spoons, and that it did not know its friends from its
foes, and I lost all my remaining respect for it, and pitied it.
Thus the State never intentionally confronts a man’s sense, intellectual or
moral, but only his body, his senses. It is not armed with superior wit or honesty,
but with superior physical strength. I was not born to be forced. I will breathe
after my own fashion. Let us see who is the strongest. What force has a multitude?
They only can force me who obey a higher law than I. They force me to become
like themselves. I do not hear of men being forced to live this way or that by masses
of men. What sort of life were that to live? When I meet a government which says
to me, “Your money or your life,” why should I be in haste to give it my money? It
may be in a great strait, and not know what to do: I cannot help that. It must help
itself; do as I do. It is not worth the while to snivel about it. I am not responsible
for the successful working of the machinery of society. I am not the son of the
engineer. I perceive that, when an acorn and a chestnut fall side by side, the one
does not remain inert to make way for the other, but both obey their own laws,
and spring and grow and flourish as best they can, till one, perchance, over­
shadows and destroys the other. If a plant cannot live according to its nature, it
dies; and so a man.

Y
The night in prison was novel and interesting enough. The prisoners in their
shirt­sleeves were enjoying a chat and the evening air in the doorway, when I
entered. But the jailer said, “Come, boys, it is time to lock up”; and so they dis­
persed, and I heard the sound of their steps returning into the hollow apartments.
My roommate was introduced to me by the jailer, as “a first­rate fellow and a
clever man.” When the door was locked, he showed me where to hang my hat, and
how he managed matters there. The rooms were white­washed once a month;
and this one, at least, was the whitest, most simply furnished, and probably the

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1026

6/18/12 3:13 PM

ThOReAU • ON The dUTY Of Civil diSOBedieNCe 1027

neatest apartment in the town. He naturally wanted to know where I came from,
and what brought me there; and, when I had told him, I asked him in my turn
how he came there, presuming him to be an honest man, of course; and, as the
world goes, I believe he was. “Why,” said he, “they accuse me of burning a barn;
but I never did it.” As near as I could discover, he had probably gone to bed in a
barn when drunk, and smoked his pipe there; and so a barn was burnt. He had
the reputation of being a clever man, had been there some three months waiting
for his trial to come on, and would have to wait as much longer; but he was quite
domesticated and contented, since he got his board for nothing, and thought that
he was well­treated.
He occupied one window, and I the other; and I saw, that, if one stayed there
long, his principal business would be to look out the window. I had soon read all
the tracts that were left there, and examined where former prisoners had broken
out, and where a grate had been sawed off, and heard the history of the various
occupants of that room; for I found that even here there was a history and a gos­
sip which never circulated beyond the walls of the jail. Probably this is the only
house in the town where verses are composed, which are afterward printed in a
circular form, but not published. I was shown quite a long list of verses which
were composed by some young men who had been detected in an attempt to
escape, who avenged themselves by singing them.
I pumped my fellow­prisoner as dry as I could, for fear I should never see
him again; but at length he showed me which was my bed, and left me to blow out
the lamp.
It was like travelling into a far country, such as I had never expected to behold,
to lie there for one night. It seemed to me that I never had heard the town­clock
strike before, nor the evening sounds of the village; for we slept with the windows
open, which were inside the grating. It was to see my native village in the light of
the Middle Ages, and our Concord was turned into a Rhine stream, and visions
of knights and castles passed before me. They were the voices of old burghers that
I heard in the streets. I was an involuntary spectator and auditor of whatever was
done and said in the kitchen of the adjacent village­inn, — a wholly new and rare
experience to me. It was a closer view of my native town. I was fairly inside of it.
I never had seen its institutions before. This is one of its peculiar institutions; for
it is a shire town. I began to comprehend what its inhabitants were about.
In the morning, our breakfasts were put through the hole in the door, in
small oblong­square tin pans, made to fit, and holding a pint of chocolate, with
brown bread, and an iron spoon. When they called for the vessels again, I was green
enough to return what bread I had left; but my comrade seized it, and said that I
should lay that up for lunch or dinner. Soon after he was let out to work at haying
in a neighboring field, whither he went every day, and would not be back till
noon; so he bade me good­day, saying that he doubted if he should see me again.
When I came out of prison, — for some one interfered, and paid that tax, — I
did not perceive that great changes had taken place on the common, such as he

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1027

30

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1028 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
observed who went in a youth, and emerged a tottering and gray­headed man;
and yet a change had to my eyes come over the scene, — the town, a State, and
country, — greater than any mere time could effect. I saw yet more distinctly the
State in which I lived. I saw to what extent the people among whom I lived could
be trusted as good neighbors and friends; that their friendship was for summer
weather only; that they did not greatly propose to do right; that they were a dis­
tinct race from me by their prejudices and superstitions, as the Chinamen and
Malays are; that, in their sacrifices to humanity, they ran no risks, not even to
their property; that, after all, they were not so noble but they treated the thief as
he had treated them, and hoped, by a certain outward observance and a few
prayers, and by walking in a particular straight though useless path from time to
time, to save their souls. This may be to judge my neighbors harshly; for I believe
that many of them are not aware that they have such an institution as the jail in
their village.
It was formerly the custom in our village, when a poor debtor came out of
jail, for his acquaintances to salute him, looking through their fingers, which were
crossed to represent the grating of a jail window. “How do ye do?” My neighbors
did not thus salute me, but first looked at me, and then at one another, as if I had
returned from a long journey. I was put into jail as I was going to the shoemaker’s
to get a shoe which was mended. When I was let out the next morning, I pro­
ceeded to finish my errand, and having put on my mended shoe, joined a huckle­
berry party, who were impatient to put themselves under my conduct; and in half
an hour, — for the horse was soon tackled, — was in the midst of a huckleberry
field, on one of our highest hills, two miles off, and then the State was nowhere to
be seen.
This is the whole history of “My Prisons.”

35

Y
I have never declined paying the highway tax, because I am as desirous of being a
good neighbor as I am of being a bad subject; and, as for supporting schools, I am
doing my part to educate my fellow­countrymen now. It is for no particular item
in the tax­bill that I refuse to pay it. I simply wish to refuse allegiance to the State,
to withdraw and stand aloof from it effectually. I do not care to trace the course
of my dollar, if I could, till it buys a man or a musket to shoot one with, — the
dollar is innocent, — but I am concerned to trace the effects of my allegiance. In
fact, I quietly declare war with the State, after my fashion, though I will still make
what use and get what advantage of her I can, as is usual in such cases.
If others pay the tax which is demanded of me, from a sympathy with the
State, they do but what they have already done in their own case, or rather they
abet injustice to a greater extent than the State requires. If they pay the tax from a
mistaken interest in the individual taxed, to save his property, or prevent his going
to jail, it is because they have not considered wisely how far they let their private
feelings interfere with the public good.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1028

6/18/12 3:13 PM

ThOReAU • ON The dUTY Of Civil diSOBedieNCe 1029

This, then, is my position at present. But one cannot be too much on his guard
in such a case, lest his action be biased by obstinacy, or an undue regard for the opin­
ions of men. Let him see that he does only what belongs to himself and to the hour.
I think sometimes, Why, this people mean well; they are only ignorant; they
would do better if they knew how; why give your neighbors this pain to treat you
as they are not inclined to? But I think again, this is no reason why I should do as
they do, or permit others to suffer much greater pain of a different kind. Again, I
sometimes say to myself, When many millions of men, without heat, without ill
will, without personal feeling of any kind, demand of you a few shillings only,
without the possibility, such is their constitution, of retracing or altering their
present demand, and without the possibility, on your side, of appeal to any other
millions, why expose yourself to this overwhelming brute force? You do not resist
cold and hunger, the winds and the waves, thus obstinately; you quietly submit to
a thousand similar necessities. You do not put your head into the fire. But just in
proportion as I regard this as not wholly a brute force, partly a human force, and
consider that I have relations to those millions as to so many millions of men,
and not of mere brute or inanimate things, I see that appeal is possible, first and
instantaneously, from them to the Maker of them, and, secondly, from them to
themselves. But, if I put my head deliberately into the fire, there is no appeal to
fire or to the Maker of fire, and I have only myself to blame. If I could convince
myself that I have any right to be satisfied with men as they are, and to treat them
according, and not according, in some respects, to my requisitions and expecta­
tions of what they and I ought to be, then, like a good Mussulman7 and fatalist, I
should endeavor to be satisfied with things as they are, and say it is the will of
God. And, above all, there is this difference between resisting this and a purely
brute or natural force, that I can resist this with some effect; but I cannot expect,
like Orpheus, to change the nature of the rocks and trees and beasts.
I do not wish to quarrel with any man or nation. I do not wish to split hairs,
to make fine distinctions, or set myself up as better than my neighbors. I seek
rather, I may say, even an excuse for conforming to the laws of the land. I am but
too ready to conform to them. Indeed, I have reason to suspect myself on this
head; and each year, as the tax­gatherer comes round, I find myself disposed to
review the acts and position of the general and State governments, and the spirit
of the people, to discover a pretext for conformity.

40

We must affect our country as our parents;
And if at any time we alienate
Our love or industry from doing it honor.
We must respect effects and teach the soul
Matter of conscience and religion.
And not desire of rule or benefit.

7Muslim. — Eds.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1029

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1030 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
I believe that the State will soon be able to take all my work of this sort out of my
hands, and then I shall be no better a patriot than my fellow­countrymen. Seen
from a lower point of view, the Constitution, with all its faults, is very good; the law
and the courts are very respectable; even this State and this American government
are, in many respects, very admirable and rare things, to be thankful for, such as
a great many have described them; but seen from a point of view a little higher,
they are what I have described them; seen from a higher still, and the highest, who
shall say what they are, or that they are worth looking at or thinking of at all?
However, the government does not concern me much, and I shall bestow the
fewest possible thoughts on it. It is not many moments that I live under a govern­
ment, even in this world. If a man is thought­free, fancy­free, imagination­free,
that which is not never for a long time appearing to be to him, unwise rulers or
reformers cannot fatally interrupt him.
I know that most men think differently from myself; but those whose lives
are by profession devoted to the study of these or kindred subjects, content me as
little as any. Statesmen and legislators, standing so completely within the institu­
tion, never distinctly and nakedly behold it. They speak of moving society, but
have no resting­place without it. They may be men of a certain experience and
discrimination, and have no doubt invented ingenious and even useful systems,
for which we sincerely thank them; but all their wit and usefulness lie within cer­
tain not very wide limits. They are wont to forget that the world is not governed
by policy and expediency. Webster never goes behind government, and so cannot
speak with authority about it. His words are wisdoms to those legislators who
contemplate no essential reform in the existing government; but for thinkers, and
those who legislate for all time, he never once glances at the subject. I know of
those whose serene and wise speculations on this theme would soon reveal the
limits of his mind’s range and hospitality. Yet, compared with the cheap profes­
sions of most reformers, and the still cheaper wisdom and eloquence of politi­
cians in general, his are almost the only sensible and valuable words, and we
thank Heaven for him. Comparatively, he is always strong, original, and, above all,
practical. Still his quality is not wisdom, but prudence. The lawyer’s truth is not
Truth, but consistency, or a consistent expediency. Truth is always in harmony
with herself, and is not concerned chiefly to reveal the justice that may consist
with wrong­doing. He well deserves to be called, as he has been called, the
Defender of the Constitution. There are really no blows to be given by him but
defensive ones. He is not a leader, but a follower. His leaders are the men of ’87. “I
have never made an effort,” he says, “and never propose to make an effort; I have
never countenanced an effort, and never mean to countenance an effort, to dis­
turb the arrangement as originally made, by which the various States came into
the Union.”8 Still thinking of the sanction which the Constitution gives to slavery,
8From an 1845 speech given by Daniel Webster about the admission of Texas to the United
States. — Eds.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1030

6/18/12 3:13 PM

ThOReAU • ON The dUTY Of Civil diSOBedieNCe 1031

he says, “Because it was a part of the original compact, — let it stand.” Notwith­
standing his special acuteness and ability, he is unable to take a fact out of its
merely political relations, and behold it as it lies absolutely to be disposed of by
the intellect, — what, for instance, it behooves a man to do here in America today
with regard to slavery, but ventures, or is driven, to make some such desperate
answer as the following, while professing to speak absolutely, and as a private
man, — from which what new and singular code of social duties might be in­
ferred? “The manner,” says he, “in which the governments of those States where
slavery exists are to regulate it, is for their own consideration, under their respon­
sibility to their constituents, to the general laws of propriety, humanity, and jus­
tice, and to God. Associations formed elsewhere, springing from a feeling of
humanity, or any other cause, have nothing whatever to do with it. They have
never received any encouragement from me, and they never will.”
They who know of no purer sources of truth, who have traced up its stream
no higher, stand, and wisely stand, by the Bible and the Constitution, and drink
at it there with reverence and humility; but they who behold where it comes
trickling into this lake or that pool, gird up their loins once more, and continue
their pilgrimage toward its fountain­head.
No man with a genius for legislation has appeared in America. They are rare
in the history of the world. There are orators, politicians, and eloquent men, by
the thousand; but the speaker has not yet opened his mouth to speak, who is
capable of settling the much­vexed questions of the day. We love eloquence for its
own sake, and not for any truth which it may utter, or any heroism it may inspire.
Our legislators have not yet learned the comparative value of free­trade and of
freedom, of union, and of rectitude, to a nation. They have no genius or talent for
comparatively humble questions of taxation and finance, commerce and manu­
factures and agriculture. If we were left solely to the wordy wit of legislators in
Congress for our guidance, uncorrected by the seasonable experience and the
effectual complaints of the people, America would not long retain her rank
among the nations. For eighteen hundred years, though perchance I have no right
to say it, the New Testament has been written; yet where is the legislator who has
wisdom and practical talent enough to avail himself of the light which it sheds on
the science of legislation?
The authority of government, even such as I am willing to submit to, — for I
will cheerfully obey those who know and can do better than I, and in many things
even those who neither know nor can do so well, — is still an impure one: To be
strictly just, it must have the sanction and consent of the governed. It can have no
pure right over my person and property but what I concede to it. The progress
from an absolute to a limited monarchy, from a limited monarchy to a democ­
racy, is a progress toward a true respect for the individual. Even the Chinese phi­
losopher was wise enough to regard the individual as the basis of the empire. Is
a democracy, such as we know it, the last improvement possible in government?
Is it not possible to take a step further towards recognizing and organizing the

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1031

45

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1032 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
rights of man? There will never be a really free and enlightened State, until the
State comes to recognize the individual as a higher and independent power, from
which all its own power and authority are derived, and treats him accordingly. I
please myself with imagining a State at last which can afford to be just to all men,
and to treat the individual with respect as a neighbor; which even would not
think it inconsistent with its own repose, if a few were to live aloof from it, not
meddling with it, nor embraced by it, who fulfilled all the duties of neighbors and
fellowmen. A State which bore this kind of fruit, and suffered it to drop off as fast
as it ripened, would prepare the way for a still more perfect and glorious State,
which also I have imagined, but not yet anywhere seen.

Questions for Discussion
1. In paragraph 1, what distinction does Henry David Thoreau make between the
government and the people? Why does he begin the essay this way? Why does
Thoreau not begin the essay with his stay in jail?
2. Why does Thoreau refer to civil disobedience not merely as a right but as a duty?
3. What are the two government policies Thoreau most objects to? Explain his
objection.
4. Thoreau writes, “When the majority shall at length vote for the abolition of slav­
ery, it will be because they are indifferent to slavery, or because there is but little
slavery left to be abolished by their vote” (para. 11). What does this statement
imply about the voting populace? Do you think that Thoreau is accurate in his
characterization of the populace? Why or why not?
5. In paragraph 20, Thoreau states that “any man more right than his neighbors con­
stitutes a majority of one already.” What does he mean by this? How does this
statement support his thesis?
6. In paragraph 23, Thoreau discusses the effects of wealth on character. Paraphrase
that discussion. Do you agree with his analysis? Why or why not?
7. What did Thoreau learn from his night in jail (paras. 26–35)? Explain using spe­
cific reference to the text.
8. In paragraph 36, Thoreau distinguishes among different types of taxes. Why? In
the same paragraph he says, “I do not care to trace the course of my dollar, if I
could, till it buys a man or a musket to shoot one with, — the dollar is innocent, —
but I am concerned to trace the effects of my allegiance.” What might our dollars
buy today that would cause such a reflection and response?
9. Under the circumstances Thoreau describes, do you believe civil disobedience is a
duty, as he says? What circumstances in our own society would justify civil disobe­
dience? Explain how Thoreau’s essay speaks to our own time. Is the essay dated? Is
it still relevant?

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1032

6/18/12 3:13 PM

ThOReAU • ON The dUTY Of Civil diSOBedieNCe 1033

Questions on Rhetoric and Style
1. Describe the tone Thoreau establishes in paragraph 2. How does it contribute to
the rhetorical effect of the paragraph?
2. What is the effect of the metaphor about friction in paragraphs 8 and 18?
3. Thoreau develops many analogies to support his arguments (e.g., in paras. 8
and 9). Select three, and explain whether you find them convincing. How effec­
tively does each one support the claim Thoreau is using it to support?
4. One characteristic of Thoreau’s style is the use of aphorism. For example, in
paragraph 4, he writes, “It is not desirable to cultivate a respect for the law, so
much as for the right.” Find other examples of Thoreau’s aphorisms. You might
find some in paragraphs 9–10 and 20–22. What is the rhetorical effect of such
statements?
5. How would you describe Thoreau’s tone in paragraph 12? How does it contribute
to his position?
6. Thoreau uses several rhetorical questions in the essay. Identify three, and explain
how each one contributes to the paragraph in which it is found.
7. Which of the three classic rhetorical appeals dominates in paragraph 21, where
Thoreau gives the government a human face? Defend your answer.
8. Note how Thoreau qualifies his argument in paragraph 40. How does using this
strategy serve his rhetorical purpose?

Suggestions for Writing
1. “There are nine hundred and ninety­nine patrons of virtue to one virtuous man,”
states Thoreau (para. 10). Do you agree? Can you think of a “virtuous man” in
American public life today? Write an essay about someone you regard as a virtuous
man or woman according to Thoreau’s characterization of such a person. Refer
specifically to the text of Thoreau’s essay.
2. Compare and contrast Thoreau’s “On the Duty of Civil Disobedience” with Martin
Luther King Jr.’s “Letter from Birmingham Jail” (p. 280) by focusing on one of the
following: purpose, definition of a just law, or figurative language.
3. Thoreau writes, “We love eloquence for its own sake, and not for any truth which
it may utter, or any heroism it may inspire” (para. 44). Do you believe that is true?
Defend, challenge, or qualify the accuracy of that statement as it applies to con­
temporary society. Use examples of public voices from such institutions as the
schools, government, religion, industry, or finance to support your position.
4. Thoreau says, “No man with a genius for legislation has appeared in America.
They are rare in the history of the world. There are orators, politicians, and elo­
quent men, by the thousand; but the speaker has not opened his mouth to speak,
who is capable of settling the much­vexed questions of the day” (para. 44). Surely
there are many who would disagree. Write an essay that defends, challenges, or
qualifies Thoreau’s statement as it applies to his time or our own.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1033

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1034 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
5. Think of a contemporary issue that would justify the kind of civil disobedience
that Thoreau discusses. Write a letter to your local newspaper making the case for
civil disobedience in protest of what you regard as injustice in our society. Be sure
to explain the gravity of the situation and the justification for your recommended
actions.
6. Think of a contemporary issue that some people in our society regard as justifica­
tion for civil disobedience. Write an editorial piece that explains why civil disobe­
dience would be wrong and offers alternative solutions.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1034

6/18/12 3:13 PM

The Gettysburg Address
Abraham Lincoln
Abraham lincoln (1809–1865) was the sixteenth president of the United States of
America. he was born in rural Kentucky, was raised in rural indiana, and settled
in illinois, where he held various jobs before becoming a self-taught lawyer and a
member of the state legislature. he was elected president in 1860 and re-elected
in 1864 in the midst of the Civil War, which broke out in 1861. On January 1,
1863, lincoln signed the emancipation Proclamation, proclaiming the freeing of
slaves in America — something he would not live to see. he was assassinated in
1865. Shortly before his death lincoln delivered the Gettysburg Address, a speech
that many people regard as the most powerful and most significant one by an
American, to commemorate the dead and wounded soldiers at the site of the battle
in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania. in addition to being one of the greatest American
presidents, lincoln also was a skilled writer and rhetorician.

F

our score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent
a new nation, conceived in liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that
all men are created equal.
Now we are engaged in a great civil war, testing whether that nation, or any
nation, so conceived and so dedicated, can long endure. We are met on a great
battle­field of that war. We have come to dedicate a portion of that field, as a final
resting place for those who here gave their lives that that nation might live. It is
altogether fitting and proper that we should do this.
But, in a larger sense, we can not dedicate, we can not consecrate, we can not
hallow this ground. The brave men, living and dead, who struggled here, have con­
secrated it, far above our poor power to add or detract. The world will little note,
nor long remember what we say here, but it can never forget what they did here.
It is for us the living, rather, to be dedicated here to the unfinished work which
they who fought here have thus far so nobly advanced. It is rather for us to be here
dedicated to the great task remaining before us — that from these honored dead
we take increased devotion to that cause for which they gave the last full measure of
devotion — that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain —
that this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom — and that govern­
ment of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth.

Exploring the Text
1. What does Abraham Lincoln refer to in the first sentence? Explain the effect of
this reference.

1035

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1035

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1036 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
2. How would you describe the tone of this speech?
3. When Lincoln delivered the Gettysburg Address, the audience was quite sur­
prised by how short it was: a mere 272 words. Do you think it should have been
longer? Why or why not? Notice what he does not mention; for instance, there is
no mention of the enemy. Discuss the rhetorical effect of such brevity.
4. Indicate examples of repeated diction. What is the purpose and effect of these
repetitions?
5. Identify examples of diction that relate to life and to death. What is the effect of
such language?
6. Indicate as many examples of parallel structures, juxtapositions, and antitheses
that you can find. Explain their effect.
7. Note the rhetorical shift indicated by “But . . .” in sentence 6. What is its purpose
and effect?
8. What is the “great task remaining before us” that Lincoln mentions in sen­
tence 10?
9. In such a short speech, the final sentence is notable for its length (eighty­two
words, roughly 30 percent of the total) and complexity. How do the style and
rhetoric of the final sentence contribute to the speech as a whole?
10. Considering the importance of the speech, note how ironic it is that Lincoln said,
“The world will little note, nor long remember what we say here” (sentence 8).
Why do you think this speech has endured?
11. The historian Gary Wills titled his historical and rhetorical analysis of the Get­
tysburg Address Lincoln at Gettysburg: The Words That Remade America (1992).
That title, and the book as a whole, makes a mighty strong claim about the speech.
Do you think that it is a reasonable claim? Drawing on your knowledge of U.S.
history, discuss the extent to which Wills’s title accurately characterizes the im­
portance of the speech.
12. Read “The Gettysburg PowerPoint Presentation” by Peter Norvig. It can be found
online. What is the object of Norvig’s satire? Do you find it effective? Refer to
Lincoln’s speech as well as your own experience with PowerPoint demonstrations
to support your answer.

Thoughts on Peace in an Air Raid
Virginia Woolf
A prolific novelist, critic, and essayist, virginia Woolf (1882–1941) was born in
london. her novels, particularly Mrs. Dalloway (1925) and To the Lighthouse
(1927), are renowned for their penetrating psychological insight. Woolf’s works
are noted for the interior monologue, or stream of consciousness. She is also
known for her nonfiction, especially for such major works as The Common Reader
(1925), A Room of One’s Own (1929), and Three Guineas (1938). Severely

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1036

6/18/12 3:13 PM

WOOlf • ThOUGhTS ON PeACe iN AN AiR RAid 1037

depressed over the war in europe and anxious about her own sanity, she drowned
herself in 1941. Woolf wrote the following essay in 1940 and published it in her
Collected Essays, volume four. it also appears in The Death of a Moth and Other
Essays (1942).

T

he Germans were over this house last night and the night before that.
Here they are again. It is a queer experience, lying in the dark and listen­
ing to the zoom of a hornet, which may at any moment sting you to death. It is a
sound that interrupts cool and consecutive thinking about peace. Yet it is a
sound — far more than prayers and anthems — that should compel one to think
about peace. Unless we can think peace into existence we — not this one body in
this one bed but millions of bodies yet to be born — will lie in the same darkness
and hear the same death rattle overhead. Let us think what we can do to create the
only efficient air­raid shelter while the guns on the hill go pop pop pop and the
searchlights finger the clouds and now and then, sometimes close at hand, some­
times far away, a bomb drops.
Up there in the sky young Englishmen and young German men are fighting
each other. The defenders are men, the attackers men. Arms are not given to En­
glishwomen either to fight the enemy or to defend herself. She must lie weaponless
tonight. Yet if she believes that the fight going on up in the sky is a fight by the
English to protect freedom, by the Germans to destroy freedom, she must fight,
so far as she can, on the side of the English. How far can she fight for freedom
without firearms? By making arms, or clothes or food. But there is another way of
fighting for freedom without arms: we can fight with the mind. We can make
ideas that will help the young Englishman who is fighting up in the sky to defeat
the enemy.
But to make ideas effective, we must be able to fire them off. We must put
them into action. And the hornet in the sky rouses another hornet in the mind.
There was one zooming in The Times this morning — a woman’s voice saying,
“Women have not a word to say in politics.” There is no woman in the Cabinet;
nor in any responsible post. All the idea­makers who are in a position to make
ideas effective are men. That is a thought that damps thinking, and encourages
irresponsibility. Why not bury the head in the pillow, plug the ears, and cease
this futile activity of idea­making? Because there are other tables besides officer
tables and conference tables. Are we not leaving the young Englishman without a
weapon that might be of value to him if we give up private thinking, tea­table
thinking, because it seems useless? Are we not stressing our disability because our
ability exposes us perhaps to abuse, perhaps to contempt? “I will not cease from
mental fight,” Blake wrote. Mental fight means thinking against the current, not
with it.
That current flows fast and furious. It issues in a spate of words from the
loudspeakers and the politicians. Every day they tell us that we are a free people,

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1037

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1038 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
fighting to defend freedom. That is the current that has whirled the young airman
up into the sky and keeps him circling there among the clouds. Down here, with
a roof to cover us and a gas­mask handy, it is our business to puncture gas­bags
and discover seeds of truth. It is not true that we are free. We are both prisoners
tonight — he boxed up in his machine with a gun handy; we lying in the dark
with a gas­mask handy. If we were free we should be out in the open, dancing, at
the play, or sitting at the window talking together. What is it that prevents us?
“Hitler!” the loudspeakers cry with one voice. Who is Hitler? What is he? Aggres­
siveness, tyranny, the insane love of power made manifest, they reply. Destroy
that, and you will be free.
The drone of the planes is now like the sawing of a branch overhead. Round
and round it goes, sawing and sawing at a branch directly above the house.
Another sound begins sawing its way in the brain. “Women of ability” — it was
Lady Astor1 speaking in The Times this morning — “are held down because of a
subconscious Hitlerism in the hearts of men.” Certainly we are held down. We are
equally prisoners tonight — the Englishmen in their planes, the Englishwomen in
their beds. But if he stops to think he may be killed; and we too. So let us think for
him. Let us try to drag up into consciousness the subconscious Hitlerism that
holds us down. It is the desire for aggression; the desire to dominate and enslave.
Even in the darkness we can see that made visible. We can see shop windows blaz­
ing; and women gazing; painted women; dressed­up women; women with crim­
son lips and crimson fingernails. They are slaves who are trying to enslave. If we
could free ourselves from slavery we should free men from tyranny. Hitlers are
bred by slaves.
A bomb drops. All the windows rattle. The anti­aircraft guns are getting
active. Up there on the hill under a net tagged with strips of green and brown
stuff to imitate the hues of autumn leaves guns are concealed. Now they all fire at
once. On the nine o’clock radio we shall be told “Forty­four enemy planes were
shot down during the night, ten of them by anti­aircraft fire.” And one of the
terms of peace, the loudspeakers say, is to be disarmament. There are to be no
more guns, no army, no navy, no air force in the future. No more young men will
be trained to fight with arms. That rouses another mind­hornet in the chambers
of the brain — another quotation. “To fight against a real enemy, to earn undying
honour and glory by shooting total strangers, and to come home with my breast
covered with medals and decorations, that was the summit of my hope. . . . It was
for this that my whole life so far had been dedicated, my education, training,
everything. . . .”
Those were the words of a young Englishman who fought in the last war. In
the face of them, do the current thinkers honestly believe that by writing “Dis­
armament” on a sheet of paper at a conference table they will have done all that

5

1Nancy Witcher Astor (1879–1964), Viscountess Astor, first woman to serve in the British
House of Commons. — Eds.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1038

6/18/12 3:13 PM

WOOlf • ThOUGhTS ON PeACe iN AN AiR RAid 1039

is needful? Othello’s occupation will be gone; but he will remain Othello.2 The
young airman up in the sky is driven not only by the voices of loudspeakers; he is
driven by voices in himself — ancient instincts, instincts fostered and cherished
by education and tradition. Is he to be blamed for those instincts? Could we
switch off the maternal instinct at the command of a table full of politicians?
Suppose that imperative among the peace terms was: “Child­bearing is to be
restricted to a very small class of specially selected women,” would we submit?
Should we not say, “The maternal instinct is a woman’s glory. It was for this that
my whole life has been dedicated, my education, training, everything. . . .” But if
it were necessary, for the sake of humanity, for the peace of the world, that child­
bearing should be restricted, the maternal instinct subdued; women would attempt
it. Men would help them. They would honour them for their refusal to bear chil­
dren. They would give them other openings for their creative power. That too
must make part of our fight for freedom. We must help the young Englishmen to
root out from themselves the love of medals and decorations. We must create
more honourable activities for those who try to conquer in themselves their
fighting instinct, their subconscious Hitlerism. We must compensate the man for
the loss of his gun.
The sound of sawing overhead has increased. All the searchlights are erect.
They point at a spot exactly above this roof. At any moment a bomb may fall on
this very room. One, two, three, four, five, six . . . the seconds pass. The bomb did
not fall. But during those seconds of suspense all thinking stopped. All feeling,
save one dull dread, ceased. A nail fixed the whole being to one hard board. The
emotion of fear and of hate is therefore sterile, unfertile. Directly that fear passes,
the mind reaches out and instinctively revives itself by trying to create. Since the
room is dark it can create only from memory. It reaches out to the memory of
other Augusts — in Bayreuth, listening to Wagner; in Rome, walking over the
Campagna; in London. Friends’ voices come back. Scraps of poetry return. Each
of those thoughts, even in memory, was far more positive, reviving, healing, and
creative than the dull dread made of fear and hate. Therefore if we are to compen­
sate the young man for the loss of his glory and of his gun, we must give him
access to the creative feelings. We must make happiness. We must free him from
the machine. We must bring him out of his prison into the open air. But what is
the use of freeing the young Englishman if the young German and the young Ital­
ian remain slaves?
The searchlights, wavering across the flat, have picked up the plane now.
From this window one can see a little silver insect turning and twisting in the
light. The guns go pop pop pop. Then they cease. Probably the raider was brought
down behind the hill. One of the pilots landed safe in a field near here the other
day. He said to his captors, speaking fairly good English, “How glad I am that the

2Venetian general, title character in Othello by William Shakespeare. — Eds.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1039

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1040 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
fight is over!” Then an Englishman gave him a cigarette, and an Englishwoman
made him a cup of tea. That would seem to show that if you can free the man
from the machine, the seed does not fall upon altogether stony ground. The seed
may be fertile.
At last all the guns have stopped firing. All the searchlights have been extin­
guished. The natural darkness of a summer’s night returns. The innocent sounds
of the country are heard again. An apple thuds to the ground. An owl hoots,
winging its way from tree to tree. And some half­forgotten words of an old En­
glish writer come to mind: “The huntsmen are up in America. . . .”3 Let us send
these fragmentary notes to the huntsmen who are up in America, to the men and
women whose sleep has not yet been broken by machine­gun fire, and in the
belief that they will rethink them generously and charitably, perhaps shape them
into something serviceable. And now, in the shadowed half of the world, to sleep.

10

Exploring the Text
1. What is the effect of beginning the essay in the first­person plural, present tense?
2. In paragraph 2, what kind of fighting does Virginia Woolf call on women to do?
3. How do the hornet metaphor (para. 3) and the sawing simile (para. 5) serve
Woolf ’s purpose as she argues for women to fight against the war?
4. Woolf includes a quotation from the Times in paragraph 3 and offers examples to
support its validity. How would the change in women’s social and political status
in England since 1940 affect Woolf ’s thesis today?
5. In paragraph 5, Woolf writes, “Hitlers are bred by slaves.” How can such a para­
doxical statement be accurate? What is the effect of following that short sentence
with the abrupt three­word sentence in paragraph 6?
6. What are the purpose and effect of the rhetorical questions in paragraph 7? Woolf
concludes paragraph 7 with the aphoristic statement “We must compensate the
man for the loss of his gun.” What does she mean?
7. In paragraph 8, Woolf refers to “this roof ” and “this very room” and counts the
seconds. What is the effect of such details?
8. What is Woolf ’s attitude toward war and peace as revealed in the last two para­
graphs? How does Woolf try to appeal to Americans?
9. Woolf writes of the English fighters. Does her essay speak to the American fight­
ers as well? And even to the German fighters?
10. Explain whether you believe that Woolf ’s suggestions about the relationship
between gender and warfare, between gender and aggression, are still relevant.

3“The huntsmen are up in America, and they are already past their first sleep in Persia.” — Sir

Thomas Browne (1605–1682), from “The Garden of Cyrus.” — Eds.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1040

6/18/12 3:13 PM

hedGeS • The deSTRUCTiON Of CUlTURe 1041

The Destruction of Culture
Chris Hedges
educated at Colgate University and at the harvard divinity School, Chris hedges
(b. 1956) has worked as a foreign correspondent for over two decades, witnessing wars in the Balkans, Central America, and the middle east. in 2002, he shared
the Pulitzer Prize for coverage of global terrorism. his most recent books include
The World as It Is (2011) and Death of the Liberal Class (2011). The selection
included here is taken from the chapter entitled “The destruction of Culture” in his
book War Is a Force That Gives Us Meaning (2002). Referring to the book, General Wesley K. Clark — former NATO Supreme Allied Commander in europe —
says, “War is a culture of its own, [hedges] warns, and it can undercut and
ultimately destroy the civil societies that engage in it.”

The first casualty when war comes is truth.
— Senator Hiram Johnson, 1917

I

n wartime the state seeks to destroy its own culture. It is only when this
destruction has been completed that the state can begin to exterminate the
culture of its opponents. In times of conflict authentic culture is subversive. As
the cause championed by the state comes to define national identity, as the myth
of war entices a nation to glory and sacrifice, those who question the value of the
cause and the veracity of the myths are branded internal enemies.
Art takes on a whole new significance in wartime. War and the nationalist
myth that fuels it are the purveyors of low culture — folklore, quasi­historical
dramas, kitsch, sentimental doggerel, and theater and film that portray the glory
of soldiers in past wars or current wars dying nobly for the homeland. This is why
so little of what moves us during wartime has any currency once war is over. The
songs, books, poems, and films that arouse us in war are awkward and embarrass­
ing when the conflict ends, useful only to summon up the nostalgia of war’s com­
radeship.
States at war silence their own authentic and humane culture. When this
destruction is well advanced they find the lack of critical and moral restraint use­
ful in the campaign to exterminate the culture of their opponents. By destroying
authentic culture — that which allows us to question and examine ourselves and
our society — the state erodes the moral fabric. It is replaced with a warped ver­
sion of reality. The enemy is dehumanized; the universe starkly divided between
the forces of light and the forces of darkness. The cause is celebrated, often in
overt religious forms, as a manifestation of divine or historical will. All is dedi­
cated to promoting and glorifying the myth, the nation, the cause.
The works of the writers in Serbia, such as Danilo Kis and Milovan Djilas,
were mostly unavailable during the war. It remains hard even now to find their

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1041

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1042 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
books. In Croatia the biting satires of Miroslav Krleža, who wrote one of the most
searing portraits of Balkan despots, were forgotten. Writers and artists were
inconvenient. They wrote about social undercurrents that were ignored by a new
crop of self­appointed nationalist historians, political scientists, and economists.
National symbols — flags, patriotic songs, sentimental dedications — invade
and take over cultural space. Art becomes infected with the platitudes of patriot­
ism. More important, the use of a nation’s cultural resources to back up the war
effort is essential to mask the contradictions and lies that mount over time in the
drive to sustain war. Cultural or national symbols that do not support the crusade
are often ruthlessly removed.
In Bosnia the ethnic warlords worked hard to wipe out all the records of
cohabitation between ethnic groups. The symbols of the old communist regime —
one whose slogan was “Brotherhood and Unity” — were defaced or torn down.
The monuments to partisan fighters who died fighting the Germans in World
War II, the lists of names clearly showing a mix of ethnic groups, were blown up
in Croatia. The works of Ivo Andrić, who wrote some of the most lyrical passages
about a multiethnic Bosnia, were edited by the Bosnian Serbs and selectively
quoted to support ethnic cleansing.
All groups looked at themselves as victims — the Croats, the Muslims, and
the Serbs. They ignored the excesses of their own and highlighted the excesses of
the other in gross distortions that fueled the war. The cultivation of victimhood
is essential fodder for any conflict. It is studiously crafted by the state. All cultural
life is directed to broadcast the injustices carried out against us. Cultural life soon
becomes little more than the drivel of agitprop. The message that the nation is
good, the cause just, and the war noble is pounded into the heads of citizens in
everything from late­night talk shows to morning news programs to films and
popular novels. The nation is soon thrown into a trance from which it does not
awake until the conflict ends. In parts of the world where the conflict remains
unresolved, this trance can last for generations.
I walked one morning a few years ago down the deserted asphalt tract that
slices through the center of the world’s last divided capital, Nicosia, on the island
of Cyprus. At one spot on the asphalt dividing line was a small painted triangle.
For fifteen minutes each hour, Turkish troops, who control the northern part of
the island, were allowed to move from their border posts and stand inside the
white triangular lines. The arrangement was part of a deal laboriously negotiated
by the United Nations to give Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots access to sev­
eral disputed areas along the 110­mile border that separates the north from the
south. The triangle was a potent reminder that once the folly of war is over, folly
itself is often all that remains. . . .
War, just as it tears down old monuments, demands new ones. These new
monuments glorify the state’s uniform and unwavering call for self­sacrifice and
ultimately self­annihilation. Those who find meaning in the particular, who
embrace affirmation not through the collective of the nation but through the love

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1042

5

6/18/12 3:13 PM

hedGeS • The deSTRUCTiON Of CUlTURe 1043

of another individual regardless of ethnic or national identity, are dangerous to
the emotional and physical domination demanded by the state. Only one mes­
sage is acceptable.
A soldier who is able to see the humanity of the enemy makes a troubled and
ineffective killer. To achieve corporate action, self­awareness and especially self­
criticism must be obliterated. We must be transformed into agents of a divinely
inspired will, as defined by the state, just as those we fight must be transformed
into the personification of unmitigated evil. There is little room for individuality
in war.
The effectiveness of the myths peddled in war is powerful. We often come to
doubt our own perceptions. We hide these doubts, like troubled believers, sure
that no one else feels them. We feel guilty. The myths have determined not only
how we should speak but how we should think. The doubts we carry, the scenes
we see that do not conform to the myth are hazy, difficult to express, unsettling.
And as the atrocities mount, as civil liberties are stripped away (something, with
the “War on Terror,” already happening to hundreds of thousands of immigrants
in the United States), we struggle uncomfortably with the jargon and clichés. But
we have trouble expressing our discomfort because the collective shout has made
it hard for us to give words to our thoughts.
This self­doubt is aided by the monstrosity of war. We gape and wonder at
the collapsing towers of the World Trade Center. They crumble before us, and yet
we cannot quite comprehend it. What, really, did we see? In wartime an attack on
a village where women and children are killed, an attack that does not conform to
the myth peddled by our side, is hard to fathom and articulate. We live in wartime
with a permanent discomfort, for in wartime we see things so grotesque and fan­
tastic that they seem beyond human comprehension. War turns human reality
into a bizarre carnival that does not seem part of our experience. It knocks us off
balance.
On a chilly, rainy day in March 1998 I was in a small Albanian village in
Kosovo, twenty­five miles west of the provincial capital of Pristina. I was waiting
with a few thousand Kosovar Albanian mourners for a red Mercedes truck to
rumble down the dirt road and unload a cargo of fourteen bodies. A group of
distraught women, seated on wooden planks set up on concrete blocks, was in the
dirt yard.
When the truck pulled into the yard I climbed into the back. Before each
corpse, wrapped in bloodstained blankets and rugs, was lifted out for washing
and burial I checked to see if the body was mutilated. I pulled back the cloth to
uncover the faces. The gouged­out eyes, the shattered skulls, the gaping rows of
broken teeth, and the sinewy strands of flayed flesh greeted me. When I could not
see clearly in the fading light I flicked on my Maglite. I jotted each disfigurement
in my notebook.
The bodies were passed silently out of the truck. They were laid on crude
wooden coffin lids placed on the floor of the shed. The corpses were wound in

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1043

10

15

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1044 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
white shrouds by a Muslim cleric in a red turban. The shed was lit by a lone kero­
sene lamp. It threw out a ghastly, uneven, yellowish light. In the hasty effort to con­
fer some dignity on the dead, family members, often weeping, tried to wash away
the bloodstains from the faces. Most could not do it and had to be helped away.
It was not an uncommon event for me. I have seen many such dead. Several
weeks later it would be worse. I would be in a warehouse with fifty­one bodies,
including children, even infants, women, and the elderly from the town of Prekaz.
I had spent time with many of them. I stared into their lifeless faces. I was again
in the twilight zone of war. I could not wholly believe what I saw in front of me.
This sense that we cannot trust what we see in wartime spreads throughout
the society. The lies about the past, the eradication of cultural, historical, and
religious monuments that have been part of a landscape for centuries, all serve to
shift the ground under which we stand. We lose our grip. Whole worlds vanish or
change in ways we cannot fully comprehend. A catastrophic terrorist strike will
have the same effect.
In Bosnia the Serbs, desperately trying to deny the Muslim character of Bos­
nia, dynamited or plowed over libraries, museums, universities, historic monu­
ments, and cemeteries, but most of all mosques. The Serbs, like the Croats, also
got rid of monuments built to honor their own Serb or Croat heroes during the
Communist era. These monuments championed another narrative, a narrative of
unity among ethnic groups that ran contrary to the notion of ancient ethnic
hatreds. The partisan monuments that honored Serb and Croat fighters against
the Nazis honored, in the new narrative, the wrong Serbs and Croats. For this
they had to be erased.
This physical eradication, coupled with intolerance toward any artistic
endeavor that does not champion the myth, formed a new identity. The Serbs,
standing in flattened mud fields, were able to deny that there were ever churches
or mosques on the spot because they had been removed. The town of Zvornik in
Serb­held Bosnia once had a dozen mosques. The 1991 census listed 60 percent
of its residents as Muslim Slavs. By the end of the war the town was 100 percent
Serb. Branko Grujic, the Serb­appointed mayor, informed us: “There never were
any mosques in Zvornik.”
No doubt he did not believe it. He knew that there had been mosques in
Zvornik. But his children and grandchildren would come to be taught the lie.
Serb leaders would turn it into accepted historical fact. There are no shortage of
villages in Russia or Germany or Poland where all memory of the Jewish com­
munity is gone because the physical culture has been destroyed. And, when mixed
with the strange nightmarish quality of war, it is hard to be completely sure of
your own memories.
The destruction of culture sees the state or the group prosecuting the war
take control of the two most important mediums that transmit information to
the nation — the media and the schools. The alleged “war crimes” of the enemy,
real and imagined, are played and replayed night after night, rousing a nation to

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1044

20

6/18/12 3:13 PM

hedGeS • The deSTRUCTiON Of CUlTURe 1045

fury. In the Middle East and the Balkans, along with many other parts of the
world, children are taught to hate. In Egypt pupils are told Jews are interlopers on
Arab land. Israel does not appear on schoolroom maps. In Jordan, children learn
that Christians are “infidels” who “must be forced into submission,” that the Jew­
ish Torah is “perverted,” and that Jews have only “their own evil practices” to
blame for the Holocaust. Syrian schoolbooks exhort students to “holy war” and
paint pictures of Israelis “perpetrating beastly crimes and horrendous massacres,”
burying people alive in battle and dancing drunk in Islamic holy places in Jerusa­
lem. And Israel, despite efforts in secular state schools to present a more balanced
view of Arab history, allows state­funded religious schools to preach that Jewish
rule should extend from the Nile in Egypt to the Euphrates in Iraq and that the
kingdom of Jordan is occupied Jewish land.
The reinterpretation of history and culture is dizzying and dangerous. But it
is the bedrock of the hatred and intolerance that leads to war.
On June 28, 1914, Gavrilo Princip shot and killed Archduke Franz Ferdinand
of Austria in a Sarajevo street, an act that set off World War I. But what that makes
him in Bosnia depends on which lesson plan you pick up.
“A hero and a poet,” says a textbook handed to high school students in the
Serb­controlled region of this divided country. An “assassin trained and instructed
by the Serbs to commit this act of terrorism,” says a text written for Croatian stu­
dents. “A nationalist whose deed sparked anti­Serbian rioting that was only
stopped by the police from all three ethnic groups,” reads the Muslim version of
the event.
In communist Yugoslavia, Princip was a hero. But with the partition of Bos­
nia along ethnic lines, huge swathes of history are reinterpreted. The Muslim
books, for example, portray the Ottoman Empire’s rule over Bosnia, which lasted
500 years, as a golden age of enlightenment; the Serbs and Croats condemn it as
an age of “brutal occupation.”
These texts have at least one thing in common: a distaste for [Marshal] Tito,
the Communist leader who ruled the country from 1945 to 1980 and was a
staunch opponent of the nationalist movements that now hold power. And Tito’s
state pioneered the replacement of history with myth, forcing schoolchildren to
memorize mythical stories about Tito’s life and aphorisms.
By the time today’s books in the Balkans reach recent history, the divergence
takes on ludicrous proportions; each side blames the others for the Bosnian war
and makes no reference to crimes or mistakes committed by its own leaders or
fighters.
The Muslims are taught that the Serbs “attacked our country” and started the
war. The Serbs are told that “Muslims, with the help of mujahadeen fighters from
Pakistan, Iraq and Iran, launched a campaign of genocide against the Serbs that
almost succeeded.”
The Croatian students learn that Croatian forces in “the homeland war”
fought off “Serbian and Muslim aggressors.”

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1045

25

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1046 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
Even the classics get twisted into a political diatribe. I saw a pro­Milošević
production of Hamlet in Belgrade that was scripted to convey the message that
usurping authority, even illegitimate authority, only brings chaos and ruin. Ham­
let was portrayed as a bold and decisive man, constantly training for battle. He
was not consumed by questions about the meaning of existence or a desire to
withdraw from society, but the steely drive to seize power, even if it plunged the
kingdom into chaos. Horatio, usually portrayed as a thoughtful and humane
scholar, was the incarnation of evil.
Hamlet’s treachery was illustrated at the conclusion of the play when Prince
Fortinbras of Norway entered Elsinore to view the carnage. Fortinbras, dressed
to look like the chief European representative at the time in Bosnia, Carl Bildt,
walked onstage with a Nazi marching song as his entrance music. He unfolded
maps showing how, with the collapse of authority, he had now carved up Serbian
territory among foreign powers.
“Here is a Hamlet for our time,” the director, Dejan Krstović, told me. “We
want to show audiences what happens when individuals tamper with power and
refuse to sublimate their own ambitions for the benefit of the community.
“Because of Hamlet, the bodies pile up on the altar of authority and the sys­
tem collapses. Because of Hamlet, the foreign prince, Fortinbras, who for us rep­
resents the new world order, comes in from the outside and seizes control, as has
happened to the Serbs throughout their history.”
Every reporter struggles with how malleable and inaccurate memory can be
when faced with trauma or stress. Witnesses to war, even moments after a killing
or an atrocity, often cannot remember what took place in front of them. They
struggle to connect disparate images. And those who see events with some coher­
ency find there is an irreversible pull to twist the facts to conform to the myth.
Truth, in such moments, is too nuanced and contradictory for most to swallow. It
is best left untouched.
I went one rainy afternoon to the Imperial War Museum in Vienna, mostly to
see the rooms dedicated to the 1878 Bosnian rebellion and the assassination of
Archduke Franz Ferdinand. His car, peppered with bullet holes, and the blood­
stained couch on which he died are on display. But I also wandered through the
other rooms designed to honor the bloodlust and forgotten skirmishes of the
Austro­Hungarian Empire. When I finished with the World War I exhibit I looked
for the room dedicated to World War II. There wasn’t one. And when I inquired
at the desk, I was told there was no such exhibit in the city. World War II, at least
in terms of the collective memory of the Austrian nation, unlike in Germany,
might as well have not existed. Indeed, in one of the great European perversions of
memory, many Austrians had come to think of themselves as victims of that war.
The destruction of culture plays a crucial role in the solidification of a war­
time narrative. When the visible and tangible symbols of one’s past are destroyed
or denied, the past can be recreated to fit the myth. It is left only to those on the
margins to keep the flame of introspection alive, although the destruction of cul­

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1046

30

35

6/18/12 3:13 PM

hedGeS • The deSTRUCTiON Of CUlTURe 1047

ture is often so great that full recovery is impossible. Yugoslavia, a country that
had a vibrant theater and cinema, has seen its cultural life wither, with many of
its best talents living in exile or drinking themselves to death in bars in Belgrade
or Vienna.
Most societies never recover from the self­inflicted wounds made to their
own culture during wartime. War leaves behind not memory but amnesia. Once
wars end, people reach back to the time before the catastrophe. The books, plays,
cinema take up the established cultural topics; authors and themes are often
based on issues and ideas that predated the war. In post­war Germany it was as if
Weimar had never ended, as if the war was just some bad, horrible dream from
which everyone had just awoken and no one wanted to discuss.
This is why the wall of names that is the Vietnam Veterans Memorial is so
important. It was not a project funded or organized by the state but by those who
survived and insisted we not forget. It was part of America’s battle back to truth,
part of our desire for forgiveness. It ultimately held out to us as a nation the
opportunity for redemption, although the state has prodded us back towards the
triumphalism that led us into Vietnam.
But just as the oppressors engage in selective memory and myth, so do the
victims, building unassailable monuments to their own suffering. It becomes
impossible to examine, to dispute, or to criticize the myths that have grown up
around past suffering of nearly all in war. The oppressors are painted by the sur­
vivors as monsters, the victims paint themselves as holy innocents. The oppres­
sors work hard to bury inconvenient facts and brand all in wartime with the pitch
of atrocity. They strive to reduce victims to their moral level. Each side creates its
own narrative. Neither is fully true.
Until there is a common vocabulary and a shared historical memory there is
no peace in any society, only an absence of war. The fighting may have stopped in
Bosnia or Cyprus but this does not mean the war is over. The search for a com­
mon narrative must, at times, be forced upon a society. Few societies seem able
to do this willingly. The temptation, as with the Turks and the Armenian geno­
cide, is to forget or ignore, to wallow in the lie. But reconciliation, self­awareness,
and finally the humility that makes peace possible come only when culture no
longer serves a cause or a myth but the most precious and elusive of all human
narratives — truth.

40

Exploring the Text
1. Why do you suppose Chris Hedges opens his essay with both exposition and
argument? Where in the text does he shift among exposition, narration, and
argument? What is the effect of shifting modes of discourse in this way?
2. Note how Hedges uses transitions. For example, what is the relationship between
paragraphs 12 and 13? Between 15 and 16?

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1047

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1048 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
3. What is the effect of the highly descriptive details in paragraphs 14 and 15? Do
they detract from his argument or strengthen it?
4. Do you agree with Hedges’s claim that “the two most important mediums that
transmit information to the nation [are] the media and the schools” (para. 21)?
Please explain.
5. How do paragraphs 23–29 support the assertion Hedges makes in paragraph 22?
6. What does Hedges mean by culture? Provide examples to support what you think
he means. What does Hedges think the purpose of culture is? Do you agree?
Explain your response.
7. In paragraph 38, Hedges claims that the Vietnam Veterans Memorial is important
because it was funded and organized “by those who survived,” rather than by the
government. Visit the National Park Service Web site for more information about
the memorial. Do you agree that it offers our nation an “opportunity for redemp­
tion”? Please explain. Do you agree with Hedges’s claim that “the state has prod­
ded us back towards the triumphalism that led us into Vietnam”? Why or why not?
8. Reread the final paragraph, and then reread the quotation from Senator Hiram
Johnson with which Hedges begins the chapter. How effectively has Hedges illus­
trated the meaning of Johnson’s assertion?
9. What do you think is Hedges’s most interesting or provocative statement? Why?
10. Has reading this essay affected your thinking regarding culture? Regarding war?
Explain your response.

The Apology
Letters from a Terrorist

Laura Blumenfeld
laura Blumenfeld (b. 1964) is a journalist who covers homeland security and
presidential politics. her work has appeared in the New York Times, Elle, and the
Los Angeles Times. She holds an mA in international affairs from Columbia University. Since 1992 she has been a staff writer for the Washington Post. in 1986, her
father was shot and wounded by a terrorist. later she wrote about the incident and
its aftermath in the book Revenge: A Story of Hope (2002), and in “The Apology:
letters from a Terrorist,” which appeared in the New Yorker on march 4, 2002.

T

he gunman was not at home. “Come in,” his mother said. “Would you
like some orange soda?” My knocking must have shaken her out of a nap;
she was wearing slippers and a pink embroidered bathrobe. Inside, the living
room was full of family members, young and old.
“That’s him,” the woman said, pointing over her grandchildren’s heads to the
gunman’s photograph. “He tried to kill someone,” she said in an easy voice.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1048

6/18/12 3:13 PM

BlUmeNfeld • The APOlOGY 1049

“Who?” I asked.
“Some Jew,” said a boy, who appeared to be about twelve years old. He smiled
crookedly, and added, “I don’t know who — a Mossad agent.”
“I’m not sure he was a Mossad agent,” a man who introduced himself as Saed,
the gunman’s older brother, said. “He was a person from the outside — a leader
from New York. We heard he was doing something against Palestinians. Why else
would they choose him to be shot?”
“Why did he fire only once?” I asked.
“It was in the marketplace,” Saed said.
“After the shooting, he threw the gun in the air, and it fell to the ground,” his
mother said. She began to chuckle and the others joined in.
The attack had taken place in the early spring of 1986. It had been a quiet
time in Jerusalem: people could walk through the Old City without fear. In
March, all that changed when Palestinian terrorists began gunning down foreign
tourists — Americans, British, Germans. Their first target was an American man;
he had been shot as he strolled through the Arab market shortly after sundown.
The gunman had aimed a little too high, and the bullet had grazed his scalp.
Twelve years later, I arrived in Israel for an extended honeymoon with my
husband. While he did part­time legal work, I took a leave of absence from my job
at the Washington Post to do research for a book about the culture of vengeance —
the thirst for settling scores which has created so much turmoil in the Middle East
and throughout the world. My research took me to Albania, Sicily, Iran, and other
countries; between trips I looked for the gunman who had shot the American in
the market. From records in the Jerusalem District Attorney’s office, I learned
that several Palestinians in a pro­Syria breakaway faction of the Palestine Libera­
tion Organization had been convicted in 1986 for the shooting of foreigners. The
man who had shot the American was named Omar Khatib. He had been tried and
convicted in an Israeli court, and was now serving a sentence of twenty­five years
in Shikma Prison, in Ashkelon.
The Khatibs lived in the West Bank, in the last house on a narrow, rutted lane,
which ended at a limestone quarry. Trash and rusty appliances spilled over the
precipice. Their house, which was behind a red gate, was really a number of build­
ings joined together — cement improvisations with raw concrete steps and half­
stacked cinder blocks. In rudimentary Arabic, I introduced myself as an American
journalist.
“Why did he do it?” I asked the gunman’s father, a tall, bony man in a gray
robe.
The father’s response was terse. “He did his duty,” he said. “Every Palestinian
must do it. Then there will be justice.”
Another brother of the gunman came into the room. He introduced himself
as Imad. His mustache and goatee were dyed burnt orange, and he was wearing a
silky red­and­black shirt. He told me that he had been a member of the Popular
Front for the Liberation of Palestine, a radical faction of the P.L.O., and that he

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1049

5

10

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1050 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
had returned to Palestine, after twenty­five years of exile in Jordan, in 1994, the
summer after the Israelis and the Palestinians signed the Oslo peace accords.
“Anybody would do what my brother did under those circumstances,” he said. “If
you pretend to be a Palestinian for five minutes, you’ll feel what we feel.”
“And what about the man he tried to kill?” I asked.
“It wasn’t a personal vendetta,” Imad replied. “It was public relations. It was
like telling the media to pay attention to us.”
“Won’t someone from the victim’s family kill one of your people?” I asked.
“My brother never met the man,” Imad said. “Nothing personal, so no
revenge.”
For me, however, the shooting was personal. The man whom Imad’s brother
had tried to kill was my father.
In March of 1986, when I was an undergraduate at Harvard, my father, in his
capacity as executive director of the New York Holocaust Memorial Commission,
went to Israel to look at the country’s various Holocaust museums. One evening,
after a visit to the Western Wall, in Jerusalem, one of the Holy Land’s most sacred
sites, he was walking back to his hotel when he was shot by an unseen assailant.
He was treated for the head wound in an Israeli hospital, and the story of the
shooting made front­page news.
“Did you ever wonder who the gunman was or what he looked like?” I later
asked my father. “I never thought about it,” he replied. But, for me, putting the
incident out of my mind wasn’t so easy. I understood that people who commit
acts of terrorism are less concerned with what happens to their victims than with
advancing their cause, but I had resolved to find a way to make my father human
in the gunman’s eyes. And I wanted him to see that what he had done was hor­
rible. I thought about introducing myself as the daughter of his victim but dis­
carded the idea, because I did not want him to regard me as “a Jew” or as an
adversary. Given the Palestinians’ eagerness to get their views out to the world, I
reasoned that the best way to gain access to him would be to identify myself to
him and his family simply as an American journalist who was interested in hear­
ing his story.
Several weeks after I met Omar’s family, I went back to their house to return
some clippings about the shooting which they had given me to photocopy. I was
greeted by Omar’s mother and his brother Imad, and led to an upstairs bedroom.
We sat down on the couch where Omar had slept before his imprisonment.
“His head was here, his feet were here,” his mother said, brushing the uphol­
stery with her fingers. She brought out a black attaché case and opened it. Inside
was a karate manual, a picture of Omar in martial­arts dress, executing a kick,
and a black­belt certificate that he had won in 1979. The picture showed a slim
young man with an angry expression on his face. There was also a copy of the
Koran, a book entitled Theories About Revolution and National Liberation, and a
copy of Measure for Measure.
“He was at Bethlehem University, studying English,” Imad pointed out.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1050

15

20

6/18/12 3:13 PM

BlUmeNfeld • The APOlOGY 1051

“And business, too,” his mother said. “He got a ninety­five in public relations.”
I was shown Omar’s report cards, his birth certificate from a hospital on the
Mount of Olives, and a high­school certificate of graduation that read, “The
school administration certifies that Mr. Omar Kamel Said Al Khatib was a stu­
dent in 1980–81. His conduct was very good.” Before saying goodbye, Imad
offered to take a letter from me to his brother in prison. Only immediate relatives
were allowed contact with such prisoners, but Imad agreed to deliver whatever I
wanted to write.
In my first letter to Omar, I explained that I was an American journalist who
was writing a book about the region, and that I was curious about his life in an
Israeli prison. I asked him about his hobbies and his plans for the future. At the
end of the letter, I wrote, “And finally, I would like to hear about the events that
led to your arrest. What happened? When you think back on it, what were your
feelings then? How do you feel about it today?”
Six weeks later, Omar wrote back, in an intricate light­blue scrawl, on eight
sheets of tissue paper:

25

Dear Laura,
I would like first to extend my appreciation and regard for your message, which
I have read with interest and care. This is not a dream, but a real fact we are seeking
to incarnate on land through the long march of our revolution and in accordance
with rules of justice and equality and the right of people to liberate their lands, this
sacred right which was secured by international law. We, as sons to this people, and
part of its past and present, have on our shoulders the burden of holding the diffi­
culty of the liberation road; it’s our mission to let the rifles live.
I would like you to know that our choice in the military struggle is a legitimate
choice on a historical basis that takes into account the fact that the enemy we are fac­
ing is one who stands on a Zionist ideology that is racist in its basis and fascist in its
aims and means. It is an enemy with a huge military destructive machine higher in its
ability than any other superpower state. It’s an enemy that can be faced and defeated
only by force. . . .
There is a huge difference, my dear, between “terror” and the right of self­
determination, between a criminal and a revolutionary. . . . It is hard for us, as pris­
oners, to accept a peace process which does not answer all the questions that the
Israeli/Palestinian conflict has raised. We continue in our efforts to affect what is
going on outside the walls of our prisons.
Sincerely,
Omar Kamel Al Khatib

The letter read more like a manifesto than like an exchange between two
people. I wanted to know Omar as he really was, beneath the layers of ideology,
and the next day I wrote to him again and inquired about what he was currently
reading, what he could tell me about his family’s history, and what, in particular,
had inflamed his feelings against Israel.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1051

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1052 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
A month later, he replied:

30

I love English literature, and have been reading it from the first years of my imprison­
ment; lately I have dedicated my time to the reading of theoretical and philosophical
books. . . . I have read the works of Tolstoy and Dostoevsky. I do suggest that you read
Dostoevsky’s Memoirs from the House of the Dead; it will help you in the work you are
conducting.
My chances of being released now are big because of my deteriorating health
conditions. I suffer from asthma, an illness which puts me very near death. I’m living
in unhealthy conditions, with ten of my friends in a small, cold cell very full of
humidity. They smoke, cook, and do all their daily activities, which brings me a hard
time. You can’t imagine how it feels when you find yourself being chased even by the
breath you breathe.
I don’t know if the Israelis consider me as “having blood on my hands,” but I do
know that there is no meaning in keeping me in prison after more than 13 years. The
term “blood on their hands” is a bad term I do not like to hear. It is a racist term used
to fulfill some political purpose aimed to distort our identity as freedom fighters.

He went on to say that he had been “chosen” to join the rebel Abu Musa faction of
the Palestine Liberation Organization in 1985, with orders to “create a state of
unrest,” whose objective was to put an end to Israel’s occupation of Palestine.
I was young at that time, but since then I have discovered that violence is not in my
personality. Maybe this is the answer to your question of why I shot just one shot at
that man, despite the fact that my pistol was very full of bullets.

When Israel became a state, in 1948, Omar said, his mother’s family had been
forced to leave their home in Jaffa and migrate to Lebanon. Omar’s father was
born in the West Bank, but after his marriage to Omar’s mother he had gone to
live in Jerusalem, where the couple had brought up their children.
He continued:
This city has shaped my identity; she planted in my mind unforgettable memories. I
witnessed the Israeli aggression of the Six­Day War. I was four years old then, but
enough aware to understand what was going on. I remember when my mother used
to hide us with the rest of our neighbors who came to have shelter in our small room.
We were so frightened by the darkness and the sound of guns. Six days, and the his­
tory entered into a new stage, the stage of the occupation.
The resistance movement began, and at the end of the ’60s my brother was
arrested and sent to prison. . . . I saw the painful time that my family went through,
searching to know the fate of my brother. I remember visiting him with my mother
once or twice, but after that he was expelled to Jordan. . . . There he was sent to prison
for no reason but under the pretext of crossing the borders illegally.
We were such a poor family at the time, we didn’t have enough money to eat. . . .
I will never forget the exhaustion and pain of the journey when I accompanied my
mother to visit my brother. . . . Do you know when I saw [my brother] next?! It was
25 years later. This time I was the prisoner, and he was the visitor. After the signing of

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1052

6/18/12 3:13 PM

BlUmeNfeld • The APOlOGY 1053

the Oslo agreement he got the chance to return to his home land. He came to visit me
at Ashkelon prison. It was a very sad meeting, we both couldn’t stop crying. I had no
words to say, I had forgotten everything, but felt the need of touching him, and kiss­
ing him.

For all its self­justifying tone, the letter was more candid on a personal level,
and in my reply I asked Omar to describe how he had felt when he shot the
man in the marketplace. I also asked him what he would say to the man if the
two of them were to meet again. In his next two letters, he dwelled on the hard­
ships of prison life and the satisfaction he felt in taking a college correspondence
course. He said that he had learned French and Hebrew, and that he had written
a book of grammar for his fellow­prisoners entitled The Practical Use of English
Structure. He said that he had six more courses to complete before earning
his B.A.
In my next letter, I again asked Omar why he had shot the American tourist.
Omar wrote back:
With regard to David Blumenfeld — I hope he can understand the reasons behind my
act. If I were him I would. I have thought a lot about meeting him one day. We have
been in a state of war, and now we are passing through a new stage of historical rec­
onciliation where there is no place for hatred and detestation. In this new era and
atmosphere, he is welcome to be my guest in Jerusalem.

The letter hinted that Omar was capable of remorse, though an earlier refer­
ence to my father as a “chosen military site” had made me wince. And Omar’s
lofty talk about “historical reconciliation” made me wonder whether we were
both involved in an elaborate game of manipulation, each for a different purpose.
To give him a better sense of David Blumenfeld, I replied that I had contacted
David, and discovered that his grandparents had been killed in the Holocaust,
and that he had come to Israel to gather material for building a Holocaust
museum in New York. I told him that David was not hostile to the Palestinian
cause but that he was concerned about whether Omar would ever again resort to
violence against anyone, innocent or not. Omar began his next letter with an
account of an examination that he had undergone for his asthma, in the hope of
winning a release from prison on medical grounds:

35

When the van stopped in front of Ramallah hospital, it was as if I were an alien from
another world. Each of the guards took his place around my vehicle. Guns were ready
for use. The door was opened, and all around me I saw people looking at me strangely.
I touched the ground with slow steps because my hands and legs were tied. I took a
deep breath and looked at the sky, feeling the need to fly. . . . And all the people
looked at me with pity and wonder because of my weak appearance.
They led me to an elevator to the main section of the testing area. We waited till
a very beautiful Moroccan girl came to lead us to the examination room. I introduced
myself to her and spoke with her a little about the prison while she conducted the test
three times. She was shocked to see the bad test results.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1053

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1054 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
In his next letter, he wrote:
Back to David, I do admire his talking to you and I appreciate his understanding, his
support for my people. If these feelings are really from the depth of his heart, this
may contribute a lot to our friendship. Of course, my answer to his question [about
committing an act of violence again] is NO.

A few weeks later, I learned that the parole board had rejected Omar’s peti­
tion for release. Two months later, his petition came up again, on appeal to a
higher court. I asked Imad if I could attend the hearing, and he agreed.
The courtroom was packed with defendants and their families — Israelis and
Palestinians together on the benches. Omar’s mother and his brother Imad were
there, along with nine other relatives. I took a seat directly in front of them. Three
judges filed into the room, and finally Omar arrived. Although he was in ankle
chains, his entrance was triumphant. He greeted the other prisoners effusively,
shaking their hands and clapping them on the back. And yet the effects of his
incarceration were visible: the skin on his face was so taut that his cheekbones
cast a skeletal shadow under his eyes; there was a noticeable swelling around his
mouth. His mother rushed over to him and kissed him. Imad ruffled his hair.
Then Imad pointed to me. “Laura is here,” he said.
“Laura!” Omar said, smiling. “I hoped to meet you one day, but not in this
setting.” I couldn’t keep my hands from shaking as I smiled back.
“I need to know if you’re sorry,” I said.
“I will write David a long letter,” he said.
“No, I need to know now,” I said. For a moment our eyes met, and then a
court officer led him away.
Several hours passed before Omar’s lawyer, an energetic Israeli woman, pre­
sented the case to the judges. They listened to the details of Omar’s asthma, and
then gave orders for the petition to be sent back to the medical­parole committee
for further review. As Omar and his family got up to leave, I realized that this was
my last chance to confront him. I stood up and said, “I am David Blumenfeld’s
daughter, Laura Blumenfeld.” For a moment, Omar and his family stared at me.
Then Omar’s mother, Imad, and several other relatives began to weep. I tried to
explain why I had concealed my identity for so long. “I did it for one reason,” I
said. “This conflict is between human beings, and not between disembodied
Arabs and Jews. And we’re people. Not military targets. We’re people with fami­
lies.” I turned to Omar. He looked stunned. “You promised me you would never
hurt anyone again,” I said. He looked at me and said nothing. As he was led away,
his family rushed over to embrace me.
A few weeks later, I received another letter from Omar:

40

A week has passed since the day of the hearing, and all that is in my mind and imag­
ination is the picture of you standing in front of the court, and the echo of your voice.
You made me feel so stupid that once I was the cause of your and your kind
mother’s pain. Sorry and please understand.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1054

6/18/12 3:13 PM

BlUmeNfeld • The APOlOGY 1055

Of course I was shocked to learn that you are David’s daughter. I didn’t sleep for
almost two days. I reread all your precious letters trying to rearrange the whole puzzle
again.

My stay in Israel was nearly over. Before leaving for America, I visited Omar’s
family one last time. The house was full of people, and in honor of my departure
Omar’s mother had laid out plates of vegetables, bread, and cheese. Arabic music
was coming from a tape player, and several of the women and children invited me
to dance with them. Imad presented me with gifts from Omar — two gold neck­
laces, one for me and one for my father, with Omar’s name inscribed on it. I felt
unsure of this display of warmth: only a short while ago, these same people had
condoned the attempted killing of my father, as they might condone other attacks
on innocent bystanders in their struggle with Israel, if the fragile peace process
broke down.
A few weeks after I had returned to America, my father received a letter from
Omar that I have read many times since, in the hope that its sentiments are genuine:

45

Dear David,
Thirteen years have passed. Yes, it’s so late to come and ask you about your inju­
ries, but I would like you to know that I’ve prayed a lot for you. I hope you are well
today.
I admit to having some good feeling toward you from the beginning, a feeling
that made me hope to meet you one day. It seems to me that this good feeling is com­
ing to be a reality. . . . I would like first to express to you my deep pain and sorrow for
what I caused you. I’ve learned many things about you. You are supposed to be a very
close friend to my people. I hope you believe that we both were victims of this long
historical conflict. . . . Laura was the mirror that made me see your face as a human
person deserving to be admired and respected. I apologize for not understanding her
message from the beginning.
If God helps and I get to be released, I hope you accept my invitation to be my
guest in the holy city of peace, Jerusalem.

Exploring the Text
1. Notice how Laura Blumenfeld begins her essay, first with the arresting opening
sentence “The gunman was not at home” and then with ordinary details such as
“orange soda,” “slippers,” and “a pink emboidered bathrobe.” What is the effect of
this juxtaposition of the suspenseful with the mundane in the first paragraph?
2. What is similar in the father’s and brother’s responses to Blumenfeld’s question,
“Why did he do it?” (para. 12)? Why do they claim it was “nothing personal,” as
Imad says (para. 18)?
3. The author keeps her identity as the victim’s daughter secret from the Khatibs,
identifying herself “as an American journalist who was interested in hearing his
[Omar’s] story” (para. 21) and who was also “writing a book about the region”
(para. 27). These claims are broadly true, of course, but do you think she was

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1055

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1056 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
wrong to deceive them? How would the family have reacted had she told the full
truth from the beginning?
4. How would you characterize the style and tone of Omar Khatib’s first letter
(para. 28)? What does Blumenfeld mean by saying that it “read more like a man­
ifesto than like an exchange between two people” (para. 29)? Do you agree with
her? Why or why not? How does that statement connect to Blumenfeld’s purpose
in this essay?
5. Why do you think Omar doesn’t answer Blumenfeld’s questions directly in his
next letter (para. 30), discussing literature and the conditions of his imprison­
ment instead?
6. In Omar’s second letter (para. 30), he talks about “freedom fighters.” In his first
he had written, “There is a huge difference, my dear, between ‘terror’ and the right
of self­determination, between a criminal and a revolutionary.” Read “The War of
Words: A Dispatch from the Front Lines” (p. 770), an editorial by Daniel Okrent.
Evaluate Omar’s position in terms of what Okrent says in his piece.
7. Toward the end of paragraph 30, Blumenfeld uses both paraphrase and direct
quotation to deliver Omar’s communication. Which of the two presents the more
political message? Which the more personal? Why do you suppose the author
chose to present this information in this way?
8. In the letter quoted in paragraph 34, Omar writes, “With regard to David
Blumenfeld — I hope he can understand the reasons behind my act. If I were him
I would.” What leads him to say that? Do you think Omar is right — would David
Blumenfeld indeed understand if their positions were reversed? Explain your
response.
9. Laura Blumenfeld writes, “And Omar’s lofty talk about ‘historical reconciliation’
made me wonder whether we were both involved in an elaborate game of manip­
ulation, each for a different purpose” (para. 35). What causes her to wonder that?
Do you think that is the case? Why or why not?
10. Were you surprised by the warm reception that the author received from the
Khatibs after she revealed her identity to them (para. 43)? Why or why not? Why
were the Khatibs so gracious? Explain your response.
11. In one of his letters (para. 36), Omar refers to “our friendship,” and the essay
concludes with Omar’s words addressed to his victim, David Blumenfeld: “If
God helps and I get to be released, I hope you accept my invitation to be my
guest in the holy city of peace, Jerusalem.” Do you think that the author’s father
would accept? Why or why not? Write a letter from him in response to Omar’s
invitation.
12. Early in the essay, the author reveals her purpose: “I had resolved to find a way to
make my father human in the gunman’s eyes” (para. 21). Referring specifically to
the text of the essay, evaluate the extent to which she has achieved her purpose.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1056

6/18/12 3:13 PM

vOWell • The PARTlY ClOUdY PATRiOT 1057

The Partly Cloudy Patriot
Sarah Vowell
Sarah vowell was born in 1969 in muskogee, Oklahoma. She received a BA from
montana State University in 1993 and an mA in art history from the Art institute of
Chicago in 1996. She has published several books about U.S. history and culture,
including Assassination Vacation (2005), about a road trip to presidential assassination sites; The Wordy Shipmates (2008), about the New england Puritans; and
Unfamiliar Fishes (2011), about the history of hawaii. A performer as well as a
writer, she was the voice of violet Parr in the Pixar animated film The Incredibles
(2004). She has been noted by the New York Times for her “funny querulous voice
and shrewd comic delivery” and by Newsweek as “a cranky stylist with talent to
burn.” Both assessments are validated by the selection included here, the title essay
from The Partly Cloudy Patriot (2002).

I

n the summer of 2000, I went to see the Mel Gibson blockbuster The
Patriot. I enjoyed that movie. Watching a story line like that is always a
relief. Of course the British must be expelled, just as the Confederates must sur­
render, Hitler must be crushed, and yee­haw when the Red Sea swallows those
slave­mongering Egyptians. There were editorials about The Patriot, the kind that
always accompany any historical film, written by professors who insist things
nobody cares about, like Salieri wasn’t that bad a sort or the fact that Roman
gladiators maybe didn’t have Australian accents. A little anachronism is part of
the fun, and I don’t mind if in real life General Cornwallis never lost a battle in
the South as he does rather gloriously in the film. Isn’t art supposed to improve
on life?
Personally, I think there was more than enough historical accuracy in The
Patriot to keep the spoilsports happy. Because I’m part spoilsport on my father’s
side, and I felt nagged with quandaries every few minutes during the nearly three­
hour film. American history is a quagmire, and the more one knows, the quaggier
the mire gets. If you’re paying attention during The Patriot and you know your
history and you have a stake in that history, not to mention a conscience, the
movie is not an entirely cartoonish march to glory. For example, Mel Gibson’s
character, Benjamin Martin, is conflicted. He doesn’t want to fight the British
because he still feels bad about chopping up some Cherokee into little pieces dur­
ing the French and Indian War. Since I’m a part­Cherokee person myself, Gibson
lost a little of the sympathy I’d stored up for him because he’d been underrated in
Conspiracy Theory. And did I mention his character lives in South Carolina? So by
the end of the movie, you look at the youngest Mel junior bundled in his mother’s
arms and think, Mel just risked his life so that that kid’s kids can rape their slaves
and vote to be the first state to secede from the Union.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1057

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1058 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
The Patriot did confirm that I owe George Washington an apology. I always
liked George fine, though I dismissed him as a mere soldier. I prefer the pen to the
sword, so I’ve always been more of a Jeffersonhead. The words of the Declara­
tion of Independence are so right and true that it seems like its poetry alone
would have knocked King George III in the head. Like, he would have read this
beloved passage, “We hold these Truths to be self­evident, that all Men are created
equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights —
that among these are Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness,” and thought
the notion so just, and yet still so wonderfully whimsical, that he would have
dethroned himself on the spot. But no, it took a grueling, six­year­long war to
make independence a fact.
I rarely remember this. In my ninety­five­cent copy of the Declaration of
Independence and the Constitution, the two documents are separated by only a
blank half page. I forget that there are eleven years between them, eleven years of
war and the whole Articles of Confederation debacle. In my head, the two docu­
ments are like the A side and B side of the greatest single ever released that was
recorded in one great drunken night, but no, there’s a lot of bleeding life between
them. Dead boys and dead Indians and Valley Forge.
Anyway, The Patriot. The best part of seeing it was standing in line for tickets.
I remember how jarring it was to hear my fellow moviegoers say that word. “Two
for The Patriot please.” “One for The Patriot at 5:30.” For years, I called it the P
word, because it tended to make nice people flinch. For the better part of the
1990s, it seemed like the only Americans who publicly described themselves as
patriots were scary militia types hiding out in the backwoods of Michigan and
Montana, cleaning their guns. One of the few Americans still celebrating Patriot’s
Day — a nearly forgotten holiday on April 19 commemorating the Revolutionary
War’s first shots at Lexington and Concord — did so in 1995 by murdering 168
people in the federal building in Oklahoma City. In fact, the same week I saw The
Patriot, I was out with some friends for dessert. When I asked a fellow named
Andy why he had chosen a cupcake with a little American flag stuck in the frost­
ing, I expected him to say that he was in a patriotic mood, but he didn’t. He said
that he was “feeling jingoistic.”
Well, that was a long time ago. As I write this, it’s December 2001 in New York
City. The only words one hears more often than variations on patriot are “in the
wake of,” “in the aftermath of,” and “since the events of September 11.” We also
use the word we more. Patriotism as a word and deed has made a comeback. At
Halloween, costume shops did a brisk business in Uncle Sam and Betsy Ross getups.
Teen pop bombshell Britney Spears took a breather during her live telecast from
Vegas’s MGM Grand to sit on a piano bench with her belly ring glinting in the
spotlight and talk about “how proud I am of our nation right now.” Chinese textile
factories are working overtime to fill the consumer demand for American flags.
Immediately after the attack, seeing the flag all over the place was moving,
endearing. So when the newspaper I subscribe to published a full­page, full­color

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1058

5

6/18/12 3:13 PM

vOWell • The PARTlY ClOUdY PATRiOT 1059

flag to clip out and hang in the window, how come I couldn’t? It took me a while
to figure out why I guiltily slid the flag into the recycling bin instead of taping it
up. The meaning had changed; or let’s say it changed back. In the first day or two
the flags were plastered everywhere, seeing them was heartening because they
indicated that we’re all in this sorrow together. The flags were purely emotional.
Once we went to war, once the president announced that we were going to retali­
ate against the “evildoers,” then the flag again represented what it usually repre­
sents, the government. I think that’s when the flags started making me nervous.
The true American patriot is by definition skeptical of the government. Skepti­
cism of the government was actually one of the platforms the current figurehead
of the government ran on. How many times in the campaign did President Bush
proclaim of his opponent, the then vice president, “He trusts the federal govern­
ment and I trust the people”? This deep suspicion of Washington is one of the
most American emotions an American can have. So by the beginning of October,
the ubiquity of the flag came to feel like peer pressure to always stand behind
policies one might not necessarily agree with. And, like any normal citizen, I pre­
fer to make up my mind about the issues of the day on a case by case basis at
3:00 a.m. when I wake up from my Nightline­inspired nightmares.
One Independence Day, when I was in college, I was living in a house with
other students on a street that happened to be one of the main roads leading to
the football stadium where the town’s official Fourth of July fireworks festivities
would be held. I looked out the window and noticed a little American flag stabbed
into my yard. Then I walked outside and saw that all the yards in front of all the
houses on the street had little flags waving above the grass. The flags, according to
a tag, were underwritten by a local real estate agency and the Veterans of Foreign
Wars. I marched into the house, yanked out the phone book, found the real estate
office in the yellow pages, and phoned them up immediately, demanding that
they come and take their fucking flag off my lawn, screaming into the phone,
“The whole point of that goddamn flag is that people don’t stick flags in my yard
without asking me!” I felt like Jimmy Stewart in Mr. Smith Goes to Washington,
but with profanity. A few minutes later, an elderly gentleman in a VFW cap, who
probably lost his best friend liberating France or something, pulled up in a big
car, grabbed the flag, and rolled his eyes as I stared at him through the window.
Then I felt dramatic and dumb. Still, sometimes I think the true American flag
has always been that one with the snake hissing “Don’t Tread on Me.”
The week of the attack on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, I
watched TV news all day and slept with the radio on. I found myself flipping
channels hoping to see the FBI handcuff a terrorist on camera. What did hap­
pen, a lot, was that citizens or politicians or journalists would mention that they
wonder what it will be like for Americans now to live with the constant threat of
random, sudden death. I know a little bit about what that’s like. I did grow up
during the Cold War. Maybe it says something about my level of cheer that I
found this notion comforting, to remember that all those years I was sure the

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1059

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1060 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
world might blow up at any second, I somehow managed to graduate from high
school and do my laundry and see Smokey Robinson live.
Things were bad in New York. I stopped being able to tell whether my eyes
were teary all the time from grief or from the dirty, smoky wind. Just when it
seemed as if the dust had started to settle, then came the anthrax. I was on the
phone with a friend who works in Rockefeller Center, and he had to hang up to
be evacuated because a contaminated envelope had infected a person in the build­
ing; an hour later, another friend in another building was sitting at his desk eating
his lunch and men in sealed plastic disease­control space suits walked through his
office, taking samples. Once delivering the mail became life­threatening, pedes­
trians trudging past the main post office on Eighth Avenue bowed their heads a
little as they read the credo chiseled on the façade, “Neither snow, nor rain, nor
heat, nor gloom of night stays these couriers from the swift completion of their
appointed rounds.”
During another war, across the river, in Newark, a writer turned soldier
named Thomas Paine sat down by a campfire in September 1776 and wrote,
“These are the times that try men’s souls. The summer soldier and the sunshine
patriot will, in this crisis, shrink from the service of their country; but he that
stands it now, deserves the love and thanks of man and woman.” In September
and October, I liked to read that before I pulled the rubber band off the news­
paper to find out what was being done to my country and what my country was
doing back. I like the black and white of Paine’s words. I know I’m no sunshine
patriot. I wasn’t shrinking, though, honestly; the most important service we mere
mortal citizens were called upon to perform was to spend money, so I dutifully
paid for Korean dinners and a new living room lamp. But still I longed for the
morning when I could open up the paper and the only people in it who would irk
me would be dead suicide bombers and retreating totalitarians on the other side
of the world. Because that would be the morning I pulled that flag out of the
recycling bin and taped it up in the window. And while I could shake my fists for
sure at the terrorists on page one, buried domestic items could still make my
stomach hurt — school prayer partisans taking advantage of the grief of children
to circumvent the separation of church and state; the White House press secretary
condemning a late­night talk show host for making a questionable remark about
the U.S. military: “The reminder is to all Americans, that they need to watch what
they say, watch what they do, and that this is not a time for remarks like that.”
Those are the sorts of never­ending qualms that have turned me into the partly
cloudy patriot I long not to be.
When Paine wrote his pamphlet, which came to be called The American Crisis, winter was coming, Washington’s armies were in retreat, the Revolution was
floundering. His words inspired soldiers and civilians alike to buck up and endure
the war so that someday “not a place upon earth might be so happy as America.”
Thing is, it worked. The British got kicked out. The trees got cleared. Time
passed, laws passed and, five student loans later, I made a nice little life for myself.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1060

10

6/18/12 3:13 PM

vOWell • The PARTlY ClOUdY PATRiOT 1061

I can feel it with every passing year, how I’m that much farther away from the
sacrifices of the cast­off Indians and Okie farmers I descend from. As recently as
fifty years ago my grandmother was picking cotton with bleeding fingers. I think
about her all the time while I’m getting overpaid to sit at a computer, eat Chinese
takeout, and think things up in my pajamas. The half century separating my fin­
gers, which are moisturized with cucumber lotion and type eighty words per
minute, and her bloody digits is an ordinary Land of Opportunity parable, and
don’t think I don’t appreciate it. I’m keenly aware of all the ways my life is easier
and lighter, how lucky I am to have the time and energy to contemplate the truly
important things — Bill Murray in Groundhog Day, the baked Alaska at Sardi’s,
the Dean Martin Christmas record, my growing collection of souvenir snow
globes. After all, what is happiness without cheap thrills? Reminds me of that
passage in Philip Roth’s novel American Pastoral when the middle­aged, prosper­
ous grandson of immigrants marvels that his own daughter loathes the country
enough to try to blow it up:
Hate America? Why, he lived in America the way he lived inside his own skin. All the
pleasures of his younger years were American pleasures, all that success and happi­
ness had been American, and he need no longer keep his mouth shut about it just to
defuse her ignorant hatred. The loneliness he would feel if he had to live in another
country. Yes, everything that gave meaning to his accomplishments had been Ameri­
can. Everything he loved was here.

A few weeks after the United States started bombing Afghanistan and the
Taliban were in retreat, I turned on the TV news and watched grinning Afghans
in the streets of Kabul, allowed to play music for the first time in years. I pull a
brain muscle when I try to fathom the rationale for outlawing all music all the
time — not certain genres of music, not music with offensive lyrics played by the
corrupters of youth, but any form of organized sound. Under Taliban rule, my
whole life as an educated (well, at a state school), working woman with CD stor­
age problems would have been null and void. I don’t know what’s more ridicu­
lous, that people like that would deny a person like me the ability to earn a living
using skills and knowledge I learned in school, or that they would deny me my
unalienable right to chop garlic in time with the B­52’s “Rock Lobster” as I cook
dinner.
A few years back, a war correspondent friend of mine gave a speech about
Bosnia to an international relations department at a famous midwestern univer­
sity. I went with him. After he finished, a group of hangers­on, all men except for
me, stuck around to debate the finer points of the former Yugoslavia. The conver­
sation was very detailed, including references to specific mayors of specific Croa­
tian villages. It was like record collector geek talk, only about Bosnia. They were
the record collectors of Bosnia. So they went on denouncing the various idiotic
nationalist causes of various splinter groups, blaming nationalism itself for the
genocidal war. And of course a racist nationalism is to blame. But the more they

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1061

15

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1062 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
ranted, the more uncomfortable I became. They, many of them immigrants
themselves, considered patriotic allegiance to be a sin, a divisive, villainous drive
leading to exclusion, hate, and murder. I, theretofore silent, spoke up. This is what
I said. I said that I had recently flown over Memphis, Tennessee. I said that the
idea of Memphis, Tennessee, not to mention looking down at it, made me go all
soft. Because I looked down at Memphis, Tennessee, and thought of all my heroes
who had walked its streets. I thought of Sun Records, of the producer Sam Phillips.
Sam Phillips, who once described the sort of person he recorded as “a person who
had dreamed, and dreamed, and dreamed.” A person like Elvis Presley, his funny
bass player Bill Black, his guitarist Scotty Moore (we have the same birthday he
and I). Jerry Lee Lewis. Carl Perkins. Hello, I’m Johnny Cash. I told the Bosnian
record collectors that when I thought of the records of these Memphis men, when
I looked out the window at the Mississippi mud and felt their names moistening
my tongue what I felt, what I was proud to feel, was patriotic. I noticed one man
staring at me. He said he was born in some something­istan I hadn’t heard of.
Now that my globe is permanently turned to that part of the world, I realize he
was talking about Tajikistan, the country bordering Afghanistan. The man from
Tajikistan looked me in the eye and delivered the following warning.
“Those,” he said, of my accolades for Elvis and friends, “are the seeds of war.”
I laughed and told him not to step on my blue suede shoes, but I got the feel­
ing he wasn’t joking.
Before September 11, the national events that have made the deepest impres­
sions on me are, in chronological order: the 1976 Bicentennial, the Iran hostage
crisis, Iran­Contra, the Los Angeles riots, the impeachment trial of President
Clinton, and the 2000 presidential election. From those events, I learned the fol­
lowing: that the Declaration of Independence is full of truth and beauty; that
some people in other parts of the world hate us because we’re Americans; what a
shredder is; that the rage for justice is so fierce people will set fire to their own
neighborhoods when they don’t get it; that Republicans hate Bill Clinton; and
that the ideal of one man, one vote doesn’t always come true. (In the U.S. Com­
mission on Civil Rights’s report Voting Irregularities in Florida During the 2000
Presidential Election, the testimony of Dr. Frederick Shotz of Broward County
especially sticks out. A handicapped voter in a wheelchair, Dr. Shotz “had to use
his upper body to lift himself up to get up the steps in order for him to access his
polling place. Once he was inside the polling place, he was not given a wheelchair
accessible polling booth. Once again, he had to use his arms to lift himself up to
see the ballot and, while balancing on his arms, simultaneously attempt to cast his
ballot.”)
Looking over my list, I can’t help but notice that only one of my formative
experiences, the Bicentennial, came with balloons and cake. Being a little kid that
year, visiting the Freedom Train with its dramatically lit facsimile of the Declara­
tion, learning that I lived in the greatest, most fair and wise and lovely place on
earth, made a big impression on me. I think it’s one of the reasons I’m so fond of

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1062

6/18/12 3:13 PM

vOWell • The PARTlY ClOUdY PATRiOT 1063

President Lincoln. Because he stared down the crap. More than anyone in the his­
tory of the country, he faced up to our most troubling contradiction — that a
nation born in freedom would permit the enslavement of human beings — and
never once stopped believing in the Declaration of Independence’s ideals, never
stopped trying to make them come true.
On a Sunday in November, I walked up to the New York Public Library to see
the Emancipation Proclamation. On loan from the National Archives, the docu­
ment was in town for three days. They put it in a glass case in a small, dark room.
Being alone with old pieces of paper and one guard in an alcove at the library was
nice and quiet. I stared at Abraham Lincoln’s signature for a long time. I stood
there, thinking what one is supposed to think: This is the paper he held in his
hands and there is the ink that came from his pen, and when the ink dried the
slaves were freed. Except look at the date, January 1, 1863. The words wouldn’t
come true for a couple of years, which, I’m guessing, is a long time when another
person owns your body. But I love how Lincoln dated the document, noting that
it was signed “in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and sixty­three,
and of the Independence of the United States of America the eighty­seventh.”
Four score and seven years before, is the wonderfully arrogant implication, some­
thing as miraculous as the virgin birth happened on this earth, and the calendar
should reflect that.
The Emancipation Proclamation is a perfect American artifact to me — a
good deed that made a lot of other Americans mad enough to kill. I think that’s
why the Civil War is my favorite American metaphor. I’m so much more comfort­
able when we’re bickering with each other than when we have to link arms and
fight a common enemy. But right after September 11, the TV was full of unity.
Congressmen, political enemies from both houses of Congress, from both sides
of the aisle, stood together on the Capitol steps and sang “God Bless America.” At
the memorial service at the National Cathedral, President and Mrs. Carter chat­
ted like old friends with President and Mrs. Ford. Rudolph Giuliani, the mayor
of New York, kissed his former opponent Senator Hillary Clinton on the cheek
as the New York congressional delegation toured the World Trade Center disas­
ter area.
In September, people across the country and all over the world — including,
bless them, the Canadians, and they are born sick of us — were singing the Amer­
ican national anthem. And when I heard their voices I couldn’t help but remem­
ber the last time I had sung that song. I was one of hundreds of people standing
in the mud on the Washington Mall on January 20 at the inauguration of George
W. Bush. Everyone standing there in the cold rain had very strong feelings. It was
either/or. Either you beamed through the ceremony with smiles of joy, or you
wept through it all with tears of rage. I admit, I was one of the people there who
needed a hankie when it was over. At the end of the ceremony, it was time to sing
the national anthem. Some of the dissenters refused to join in. Such was their
anger at the country at that moment they couldn’t find it in their hearts to sing.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1063

20

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1064 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
But I was standing there next to my friend Jack, and Jack and I put our hands over
our hearts and sang that song loud. Because we love our country too. Because we
wouldn’t have been standing there, wouldn’t have driven down to Washington
just to burst into tears if we didn’t care so very, very much about how this country
is run.
When the anthem ended — land of the free, home of the brave — Jack and I
walked to the other end of the Mall to the Lincoln Memorial to read Lincoln’s
Second Inaugural Address, the speech Lincoln gave at the end of the Civil War
about how “we must bind up the nation’s wounds.” It seems so quaint to me now,
after September, after CNN started doing hourly live remotes from St. Vincent’s,
my neighborhood hospital, that I would conceive of a wound as being peeved
about who got to be president.
My ideal picture of citizenship will always be an argument, not a sing­along.
I did not get it out of a civics textbook either. I got it from my parents. My mom
and dad disagree with me about almost everything. I do not share their religion
or their political affiliation. I get on their nerves sometimes. But, and this is the
most important thing they taught me, so what? We love each other. My parents
and I have been through so much and known each other for so long, share so
many in­jokes and memories, our differences of opinion on everything from gun
control to Robin Williams movies hardly matter at all. Plus, our disagreements
make us appreciate the things we have in common all the more. When I call
Republican Senator Orrin Hatch’s office to say that I admire something he said
about stem cell research, I am my parents’ daughter. Because they have always
enjoyed playing up things we do have in common, like Dolly Parton or ibuprofen.
Maybe sometimes, in quiet moments of reflection, my mom would prefer that I
not burn eternally in the flames of hell when I die, but otherwise she wants me to
follow my own heart.
I will say that, in September, atheism was a lonely creed. Not because atheists
have no god to turn to, but because everyone else forgot about us. At a televised
interfaith memorial service at Yankee Stadium on September 23, Muslim, Chris­
tian, Jewish, Sikh, and Hindu clerics spoke to their fellow worshipers. Placido
Domingo sang “Ave Maria” for the mayor. I waited in vain for someone like me to
stand up and say that the only thing those of us who don’t believe in god have to
believe in is other people and that New York City is the best place there ever was
for a godless person to practice her moral code. I think it has something to do
with the crowded sidewalks and subways. Walking to and from the hardware
store requires the push and pull of selfishness and selflessness, taking turns
between getting out of someone’s way and them getting out of yours, waiting for
a dog to move, helping a stroller up steps, protecting the eyes from runaway
umbrellas. Walking in New York is a battle of the wills, a balance of aggression
and kindness. I’m not saying it’s always easy. The occasional “Watch where you’re
going, bitch” can, I admit, put a crimp in one’s day. But I believe all that choreog­
raphy has made me a better person. The other day, in the subway at 5:30, I was

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1064

25

6/18/12 3:13 PM

vOWell • The PARTlY ClOUdY PATRiOT 1065

crammed into my sweaty, crabby fellow citizens, and I kept whispering under my
breath “we the people, we the people,” over and over again, reminding myself
we’re all in this together and they had as much right — exactly as much right — as
I to be in the muggy underground on their way to wherever they were on their
way to.
Once, headed uptown on the 9 train, I noticed a sign posted by the Metropoli­
tan Transit Authority advising subway riders who might become ill in the train.
The sign asked that the suddenly infirm inform another passenger or get out at
the next stop and approach the stationmaster. Do not, repeat, do not pull the emer­
gency brake, the sign said, as this will only delay aid. Which was all very logical,
but for the following proclamation at the bottom of the sign, something along the
lines of “If you are sick, you will not be left alone.” This strikes me as not only kind,
not only comforting, but the very epitome of civilization, good government, i.e.,
the crux of the societal impulse. Banding together, pooling our taxes, not just
making trains, not just making trains that move underground, not just mak­
ing trains that move underground with surprising efficiency at a fair price —
but posting on said trains a notification of such surprising compassion and
thoughtfulness, I found myself scanning the faces of my fellow passengers, hop­
ing for fainting, obvious fevers, at the very least a sneeze so that I might offer a
tissue.

Exploring the Text
1. In paragraph 2, Sarah Vowell purposely confuses Mel Gibson, the actor, with his
character, Benjamin Martin. How does this strategy support her contention that
“American history is a quagmire”?
2. Vowell writes, “I’ve always been more of a Jeffersonhead” (para. 3). What is the
effect of such diction?
3. What is the primary implication of paragraph 4?
4. What is the definition of “patriotic”? What is the definition of “jingoistic”
(para. 5)? What are Vowell’s definitions of the terms? How does knowing the dif­
ference affect your understanding of her essay?
5. How does the addition of the word “Chinese” contribute to the tone and meaning
of paragraph 6?
6. In discussing the American flag, Vowell writes, “The meaning had changed; or
let’s say it changed back” (para. 7). What does she mean?
7. In paragraph 11, Vowell writes, “I like the black and white of Paine’s words.” And
she concludes the paragraph with the phrase, “the partly cloudy patriot I long not
to be.” What has caused her to be a “partly cloudy patriot”? How effectively does
this phrase serve as the title of the essay?
8. Choose either paragraphs 1 and 2 or 13 and 14, and rewrite them in what you
imagine would be Vowell’s sincere voice, meaning without irony or sarcasm.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1065

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1066 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
Compare the two. Why has Vowell chosen to write with an ironic persona in the
voice of a “cranky stylist,” as Newsweek has said?
9. What is the effect of the narrative portion of the essay that runs from paragraph
15 through 17?
10. In paragraph 18, Vowell lists “the national events that have made the deepest
impressions” on her and explains what she learned from them. What historical
events have made the deepest impressions on you? What have you learned from
them?
11. How does the section on Abraham Lincoln (paras. 19–21) contribute to the essay
as a whole?
12. Moving toward her conclusion, Vowell begins a discussion of her parents and her
personal beliefs (para. 24). What is the rhetorical effect of this shift? How does it
prepare the reader for the conclusion of the essay?
13. Read the headnote above the opening paragraph, and find several examples in
the essay that support Vowell’s characterization by the New York Times. How do
those examples contribute to the essay as a whole?

The Veil
Marjane Satrapi
like the heroine of Persepolis, marjane Satrapi was born in iran in 1969 into a
modern, progressive family. her great-grandfather was the last emperor of iran
before he was overthrown in 1925. Satrapi attended the lycée français (frenchlanguage high school) in Tehran before being sent to Austria at age fourteen during the iran-iraq war. After returning, she earned a degree in art before moving to
france, where her popular book, Persepolis, was published in french in 2000.
Persepolis is a graphic memoir that blends the personal and the political. it’s the
story of a child growing up in iran during a tumultuous time in the nation’s history
that included a war with iraq, the overthrow of the shah, and the islamic revolution.
“The veil,” included here, is the first chapter of the book.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1066

6/18/12 3:13 PM

SATRAPi • The veil 1067

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1067

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1068 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1068

6/18/12 3:13 PM

SATRAPi • The veil 1069

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1069

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1070 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1070

6/18/12 3:13 PM

SATRAPi • The veil 1071

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1071

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1072 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1072

6/18/12 3:13 PM

SATRAPi • The veil 1073

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1073

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1074 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
Exploring the Text
1. Why has Marjane Satrapi left the protagonist out of page 1067, panel 2? What
rhetorical purpose does the omission serve?
2. How would you characterize the way the children are presented in the last panel
on page 1067 and the first two on page 1068?
3. What is Satrapi’s attitude toward the responses of the people depicted on
page 1068, panel 4? Explain your response.
4. What cultural values are being criticized on page 1070, panels 6 and 7? Explain.
5. Read carefully the exchange depicted on page 1071, panel 5. What is Satrapi sug­
gesting in this exchange?
6. What can you infer about Satrapi’s attitude toward religion? Refer to specific con­
tent to explain your answer.
7. How does the process of reading differ when visuals are included, as they are in
graphic novels and memoirs? Do you read the text first? Do you look at the pic­
tures first? Which is primary? Which serves the other? Explain your response.
8. Are the illustrations humorous? Objective? Argumentative? Select one that illus­
trates each of these descriptions, and explain how it does so.
9. Does “The Veil” appeal more to ethos or to logos? Explain.
10. About the writing of Persepolis, Satrapi says, “I had the advantage of being cute,
because I am just a small girl, it’s not me who makes any decisions, it’s not me
who does anything. So the world around me changed, I am a witness of this big
change around me.” Why does Satrapi see such an approach as “an advantage”?
How would the piece differ if it were presented in the third person? Or by an adult?
11. Is “The Veil” an appropriate title for this chapter? Explain why or why not.

On the Rainy River
Tim O’Brien
Tim O’Brien (b. 1946) grew up in a small town in minnesota. in 1968, he received
a BA from macalester College and, soon thereafter, a draft notice. he served as a
soldier in the vietnam War and wrote about his experiences in his memoir, If I Die
in a Combat Zone (1973). O’Brien won the National Book Award in 1979 for a
novel about the war, Going after Cacciato. “On the Rainy River,” the story that
follows, is from The Things They Carried (1990), a work of fiction that O’Brien
based on his war experiences and in which he placed himself as the protagonist.

T

his is one story I’ve never told before. Not to anyone. Not to my parents,
not to my brother or sister, not even to my wife. To go into it, I’ve always
thought, would only cause embarrassment for all of us, a sudden need to be else­

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1074

6/18/12 3:13 PM

O’BRieN • ON The RAiNY RiveR 1075

where, which is the natural response to a confession. Even now, I’ll admit, the
story makes me squirm. For more than twenty years I’ve had to live with it, feeling
the shame, trying to push it away, and so by this act of remembrance, by putting
the facts down on paper, I’m hoping to relieve at least some of the pressure on my
dreams. Still, it’s a hard story to tell. All of us, I suppose, like to believe that in a
moral emergency we will behave like the heroes of our youth, bravely and forth­
rightly, without thought of personal loss or discredit. Certainly that was my con­
viction back in the summer of 1968. Tim O’Brien: a secret hero. The Lone Ranger.
If the stakes ever became high enough — if the evil were evil enough, if the good
were good enough — I would simply tap a secret reservoir of courage that had
been accumulating inside me over the years. Courage, I seemed to think, comes
to us in finite quantities, like an inheritance, and by being frugal and stashing it
away and letting it earn interest, we steadily increase our moral capital in prepara­
tion for that day when the account must be drawn down. It was a comforting
theory. It dispensed with all those bothersome little acts of daily courage; it
offered hope and grace to the repetitive coward; it justified the past while amor­
tizing the future.
In June of 1968, a month after graduating from Macalester College, I was
drafted to fight a war I hated. I was twenty­one years old. Young, yes, and politi­
cally naive, but even so the American war in Vietnam seemed to me wrong. Cer­
tain blood was being shed for uncertain reasons. I saw no unity of purpose,
no consensus on matters of philosophy or history or law. The very facts were
shrouded in uncertainty: Was it a civil war? A war of national liberation or simple
aggression? Who started it, and when, and why? What really happened to the
USS Maddox on that dark night in the Gulf of Tonkin? Was Ho Chi Minh a
Communist stooge, or a nationalist savior, or both, or neither? What about the
Geneva Accords? What about SEATO and the Cold War? What about dominoes?
America was divided on these and a thousand other issues, and the debate had
spilled out across the floor of the United States Senate and into the streets, and
smart men in pinstripes could not agree on even the most fundamental matters
of public policy. The only certainty that summer was moral confusion. It was
my view then, and still is, that you don’t make war without knowing why. Knowl­
edge, of course, is always imperfect, but it seemed to me that when a nation goes
to war it must have reasonable confidence in the justice and imperative of its
cause. You can’t fix your mistakes. Once people are dead, you can’t make them
undead.
In any case those were my convictions, and back in college I had taken a
modest stand against the war. Nothing radical, no hothead stuff, just ringing a
few doorbells for Gene McCarthy, composing a few tedious, uninspired editorials
for the campus newspaper. Oddly, though, it was almost entirely an intellectual
activity. I brought some energy to it, of course, but it was the energy that accom­
panies almost any abstract endeavor; I felt no personal danger; I felt no sense of
an impending crisis in my life. Stupidly, with a kind of smug removal that I can’t

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1075

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1076 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
begin to fathom, I assumed that the problems of killing and dying did not fall
within my special province.
The draft notice arrived on June 17, 1968. It was a humid afternoon, I remem­
ber, cloudy and very quiet, and I’d just come in from a round of golf. My mother
and father were having lunch out in the kitchen. I remember opening up the let­
ter, scanning the first few lines, feeling the blood go thick behind my eyes. I
remember a sound in my head. It wasn’t thinking, just a silent howl. A million
things all at once — I was too good for this war. Too smart, too compassionate, too
everything. It couldn’t happen. I was above it. I had the world . . . [licked] — Phi
Beta Kappa and summa cum laude and president of the student body and a full­
ride scholarship for grad studies at Harvard. A mistake maybe — a foul­up in the
paperwork. I was no soldier. I hated Boy Scouts. I hated camping out. I hated dirt
and tents and mosquitoes. The sight of blood made me queasy, and I couldn’t
tolerate authority, and I didn’t know a rifle from a slingshot. I was a liberal, for
Christ sake: If they needed fresh bodies, why not draft some back­to­the­stone­
age hawk? Or some dumb jingo in his hard hat and Bomb Hanoi button, or one
of LBJ’s pretty daughters, or [General William] Westmoreland’s whole handsome
family — nephews and nieces and baby grandson. There should be a law, I thought.
If you support a war, if you think it’s worth the price, that’s fine, but you have to
put your own precious fluids on the line. You have to head for the front and hook
up with an infantry unit and help spill the blood. And you have to bring along
your wife, or your kids, or your lover. A law, I thought.
I remember the rage in my stomach. Later it burned down to a smoldering
self­pity, then to numbness. At dinner that night my father asked what my plans
were. “Nothing,” I said. “Wait.”

5

Y
I spent the summer of 1968 working in an Armour meatpacking plant in my
hometown of Worthington, Minnesota. The plant specialized in pork products,
and for eight hours a day I stood on a quarter­mile assembly line — more prop­
erly, a disassembly line — removing blood clots from the necks of dead pigs. My
job title, I believe, was Declotter. After slaughter, the hogs were decapitated, split
down the length of the belly, pried open, eviscerated, and strung up by the hind
hocks on a high conveyer belt. Then gravity took over. By the time a carcass
reached my spot on the line, the fluids had mostly drained out, everything except
for thick clots of blood in the neck and upper chest cavity. To remove the stuff, I
used a kind of water gun. The machine was heavy, maybe eighty pounds, and was
suspended from the ceiling by a heavy rubber cord. There was some bounce to it,
an elastic up­and­down give, and the trick was to maneuver the gun with your
whole body, not lifting with the arms, just letting the rubber cord do the work for
you. At one end was a trigger; at the muzzle end was a small nozzle and a steel
roller brush. As a carcass passed by, you’d lean forward and swing the gun up
against the clots and squeeze the trigger, all in one motion, and the brush would

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1076

6/18/12 3:13 PM

O’BRieN • ON The RAiNY RiveR 1077

whirl and water would come shooting out and you’d hear a quick splattering
sound as the clots dissolved into a fine red mist. It was not pleasant work. Goggles
were a necessity, and a rubber apron, but even so it was like standing for eight
hours a day under a lukewarm blood­shower. At night I’d go home smelling of
pig. It wouldn’t go away. Even after a hot bath, scrubbing hard, the stink was
always there — like old bacon, or sausage, a dense greasy pig­stink that soaked
deep into my skin and hair. Among other things, I remember, it was tough getting
dates that summer. I felt isolated; I spent a lot of time alone. And there was also
that draft notice tucked away in my wallet.
In the evenings I’d sometimes borrow my father’s car and drive aimlessly around
town, feeling sorry for myself, thinking about the war and the pig factory and
how my life seemed to be collapsing toward slaughter. I felt paralyzed. All around
me the options seemed to be narrowing, as if I were hurtling down a huge black
funnel, the whole world squeezing in tight. There was no happy way out. The
government had ended most graduate school deferments; the waiting lists for the
National Guard and Reserves were impossibly long; my health was solid; I didn’t
qualify for CO [conscientious objector] status — no religious grounds, no history
as a pacifist. Moreover, I could not claim to be opposed to war as a matter of general
principle. There were occasions, I believed, when a nation was justified in using
military force to achieve its ends, to stop a Hitler or some comparable evil, and I told
myself that in such circumstances I would’ve willingly marched off to the battle.
The problem, though, was that a draft board did not let you choose your war.
Beyond all this, or at the very center, was the raw fact of terror. I did not want
to die. Not ever. But certainly not then, not there, not in a wrong war. Driving up
Main Street, past the courthouse and the Ben Franklin store, I sometimes felt the
fear spreading inside me like weeds. I imagined myself dead. I imagined myself
doing things I could not do — charging an enemy position, taking aim at another
human being.
At some point in mid­July I began thinking seriously about Canada. The
border lay a few hundred miles north, an eight­hour drive. Both my conscience
and my instincts were telling me to make a break for it, just take off and run like
hell and never stop. In the beginning the idea seemed purely abstract, the word
Canada printing itself out in my head; but after a time I could see particular
shapes and images, the sorry details of my own future — a hotel room in Winni­
peg, a battered old suitcase, my father’s eyes as I tried to explain myself over the
telephone. I could almost hear his voice, and my mother’s. Run, I’d think. Then
I’d think, Impossible. Then a second later I’d think, Run.
It was a kind of schizophrenia. A moral split. I couldn’t make up my mind. I
feared the war, yes, but I also feared exile. I was afraid of walking away from my
own life, my friends and my family, my whole history, everything that mattered to
me. I feared losing the respect of my parents. I feared the law. I feared ridicule and
censure. My hometown was a conservative little spot on the prairie, a place where
tradition counted, and it was easy to imagine people sitting around a table down

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1077

10

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1078 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
at the old Gobbler Café on Main Street, coffee cups poised, the conversation
slowly zeroing in on the young O’Brien kid, how the damned sissy had taken off
for Canada. At night, when I couldn’t sleep, I’d sometimes carry on fierce argu­
ments with those people. I’d be screaming at them, telling them how much I
detested their blind, thoughtless, automatic acquiescence to it all, their simple­
minded patriotism, their prideful ignorance, their love­it­or­leave­it platitudes,
how they were sending me off to fight a war they didn’t understand and didn’t
want to understand. I held them responsible. By God, yes, I did. All of them — I
held them personally and individually responsible — the polyestered Kiwanis
boys, the merchants and farmers, the pious churchgoers, the chatty housewives,
the PTA and the Lions club and the Veterans of Foreign Wars and the fine
upstanding gentry out at the country club. They didn’t know Bao Dai from the
man in the moon. They didn’t know history. They didn’t know the first thing
about Diem’s tyranny, or the nature of Vietnamese nationalism, or the long colo­
nialism of the French — this was all too damned complicated, it required some
reading — but no matter, it was a war to stop the Communists, plain and simple,
which was how they liked things, and you were a . . . [traitor] if you had second
thoughts about killing or dying for plain and simple reasons.
I was bitter, sure. But it was so much more than that. The emotions went
from outrage to terror to bewilderment to guilt to sorrow and then back again to
outrage. I felt a sickness inside me. Real disease.
Most of this I’ve told before, or at least hinted at, but what I have never told
is the full truth. How I cracked. How at work one morning, standing on the pig
line, I felt something break open in my chest. I don’t know what it was. I’ll never
know. But it was real, I know that much, it was a physical rupture — a cracking­
leaking­popping feeling. I remember dropping my water gun. Quickly, almost
without thought, I took off my apron and walked out of the plant and drove
home. It was midmorning, I remember, and the house was empty. Down in my
chest there was still that leaking sensation, something very warm and precious
spilling out, and I was covered with blood and hog­stink, and for a long while I
just concentrated on holding myself together. I remember taking a hot shower. I
remember packing a suitcase and carrying it out to the kitchen, standing very still
for a few minutes, looking carefully at the familiar objects all around me. The old
chrome toaster, the telephone, the pink and white Formica on the kitchen coun­
ters. The room was full of bright sunshine. Everything sparkled. My house, I
thought. My life. I’m not sure how long I stood there, but later I scribbled out a
short note to my parents.
What it said, exactly, I don’t recall now. Something vague. Taking off, will call,
love Tim.

Y
I drove north.
It’s a blur now, as it was then, and all I remember is a sense of high velocity
and the feel of the steering wheel in my hands. I was riding on adrenaline. A giddy

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1078

15

6/18/12 3:13 PM

O’BRieN • ON The RAiNY RiveR 1079

feeling, in a way, except there was the dreamy edge of impossibility to it — like
running a dead­end maze — no way out — it couldn’t come to a happy conclu­
sion and yet I was doing it anyway because it was all I could think of to do. It was
pure light, fast and mindless. I had no plan. Just hit the border at high speed and
crash through and keep on running. Near dusk I passed through Bemidji, then
turned northeast toward International Falls. I spent the night in the car behind a
closed­down gas station a half mile from the border. In the morning, after gassing
up, I headed straight west along the Rainy River, which separates Minnesota from
Canada, and which for me separated one life from another. The land was mostly
wilderness. Here and there I passed a motel or bait shop, but otherwise the coun­
try unfolded in great sweeps of pine and birch and sumac. Though it was still
August, the air already had the smell of October, football season, piles of yellow­
red leaves, everything crisp and clean. I remember a huge blue sky. Off to my right
was the Rainy River, wide as a lake in places, and beyond the Rainy River was
Canada.
For a while I just drove, not aiming at anything, then in the late morning I
began looking for a place to lie low for a day or two. I was exhausted, and scared
sick, and around noon I pulled into an old fishing resort called the Tip Top Lodge.
Actually it was not a lodge at all, just eight or nine tiny yellow cabins clustered on
a peninsula that jutted northward into the Rainy River. The place was in sorry
shape. There was a dangerous wooden dock, an old minnow tank, a flimsy tar
paper boathouse along the shore. The main building, which stood in a cluster of
pines on high ground, seemed to lean heavily to one side, like a cripple, the roof
sagging toward Canada. Briefly, I thought about turning around, just giving up,
but then I got out of the car and walked up to the front porch.
The man who opened the door that day is the hero of my life. How do I say this
without sounding sappy? Blurt it out — the man saved me. He offered exactly what
I needed, without questions, without any words at all. He took me in. He was there
at the critical time — a silent, watchful presence. Six days later, when it ended, I
was unable to find a proper way to thank him, and I never have, and so, if nothing
else, this story represents a small gesture of gratitude twenty years overdue.
Even after two decades I can close my eyes and return to that porch at the Tip
Top Lodge. I can see the old guy staring at me. Elroy Berdahl: eighty­one years
old, skinny and shrunken and mostly bald. He wore a flannel shirt and brown
work pants. In one hand, I remember, he carried a green apple, a small paring
knife in the other. His eyes had the bluish gray color of a razor blade, the same
polished shine, and as he peered up at me I felt a strange sharpness, almost pain­
ful, a cutting sensation, as if his gaze were somehow slicing me open. In part, no
doubt, it was my own sense of guilt, but even so I’m absolutely certain that the old
man took one look and went right to the heart of things — a kid in trouble. When
I asked for a room, Elroy made a little clicking sound with his tongue. He nodded,
led me out to one of the cabins, and dropped a key in my hand. I remember smil­
ing at him. I also remember wishing I hadn’t. The old man shook his head as if to
tell me it wasn’t worth the bother.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1079

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1080 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
“Dinner at five­thirty,” he said. “You eat fish?”
“Anything,” I said.
Elroy grunted and said, “I’ll bet.”

20

Y
We spent six days together at the Tip Top Lodge. Just the two of us. Tourist season
was over, and there were no boats on the river, and the wilderness seemed to
withdraw into a great permanent stillness. Over those six days Elroy Berdahl and
I took most of our meals together. In the mornings we sometimes went out on
long hikes into the woods, and at night we played Scrabble or listened to records
or sat reading in front of his big stone fireplace. At times I felt the awkwardness of
an intruder, but Elroy accepted me into his quiet routine without fuss or cere­
mony. He took my presence for granted, the same way he might’ve sheltered a
stray cat — no wasted sighs or pity — and there was never any talk about it. Just
the opposite. What I remember more than anything is the man’s willful, almost
ferocious silence. In all that time together, all those hours, he never asked the
obvious questions: Why was I there? Why alone? Why so preoccupied? If Elroy
was curious about any of this, he was careful never to put it into words.
My hunch, though, is that he already knew. At least the basics. After all, it was
1968, and guys were burning draft cards, and Canada was just a boat ride away.
Elroy Berdahl was no hick. His bedroom, I remember, was cluttered with books
and newspapers. He killed me at the Scrabble board, barely concentrating, and on
those occasions when speech was necessary he had a way of compressing large
thoughts into small, cryptic packets of language. One evening, just at sunset, he
pointed up at an owl circling over the violet­lighted forest to the west.
“Hey, O’Brien,” he said. “There’s Jesus.”
The man was sharp — he didn’t miss much. Those razor eyes. Now and then
he’d catch me staring out at the river, at the far shore, and I could almost hear the
tumblers clicking in his head. Maybe I’m wrong, but I doubt it.
One thing for certain, he knew I was in desperate trouble. And he knew I
couldn’t talk about it. The wrong word — or even the right word — and I would’ve
disappeared. I was wired and jittery. My skin felt too tight. After supper one eve­
ning I vomited and went back to my cabin and lay down for a few moments and
then vomited again; another time, in the middle of the afternoon, I began sweat­
ing and couldn’t shut it off. I went through whole days feeling dizzy with sorrow.
I couldn’t sleep; I couldn’t lie still. At night I’d toss around in bed, half awake, half
dreaming, imagining how I’d sneak down to the beach and quietly push one of
the old man’s boats out into the river and start paddling my way toward Canada.
There were times when I thought I’d gone off the psychic edge. I couldn’t tell up
from down, I was just falling, and late in the night I’d lie there watching weird
pictures spin through my head. Getting chased by the Border Patrol — helicop­
ters and searchlights and barking dogs — I’d be crashing through the woods, I’d
be down on my hands and knees — people shouting out my name — the law clos­

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1080

25

6/18/12 3:13 PM

O’BRieN • ON The RAiNY RiveR 1081

ing in on all sides — my hometown draft board and the FBI and the Royal Cana­
dian Mounted Police. It all seemed crazy and impossible. Twenty­one years old,
an ordinary kid with all the ordinary dreams and ambitions, and all I wanted was
to live the life I was born to — a mainstream life — I loved baseball and hamburg­
ers and cherry Cokes — and now I was off on the margins of exile, leaving my
country forever, and it seemed so impossible and terrible and sad.
I’m not sure how I made it through those six days. Most of it I can’t remem­
ber. On two or three afternoons, to pass some time, I helped Elroy get the place
ready for winter, sweeping down the cabins and hauling in the boats, little chores
that kept my body moving. The days were cool and bright. The nights were very
dark. One morning the old man showed me how to split and stack firewood, and
for several hours we just worked in silence out behind his house. At one point, I
remember, Elroy put down his maul and looked at me for a long time, his lips
drawn as if framing a difficult question, but then he shook his head and went
back to work. The man’s self­control was amazing. He never pried. He never put
me in a position that required lies or denials. To an extent, I suppose, his reticence
was typical of that part of Minnesota, where privacy still held value, and even if
I’d been walking around with some horrible deformity — four arms and three
heads — I’m sure the old man would’ve talked about everything except those
extra arms and heads. Simple politeness was part of it. But even more than that, I
think, the man understood that words were insufficient. The problem had gone
beyond discussion. During that long summer I’d been over and over the various
arguments, all the pros and cons, and it was no longer a question that could be
decided by an act of pure reason. Intellect had come up against emotion. My
conscience told me to run, but some irrational and powerful force was resisting,
like a weight pushing me toward the war. What it came down to, stupidly, was a
sense of shame. Hot, stupid shame. I did not want people to think badly of me.
Not my parents, not my brother and sister, not even the folks down at the Gobbler
Café. I was ashamed to be there at the Tip Top Lodge. I was ashamed of my con­
science, ashamed to be doing the right thing.
Some of this Elroy must’ve understood. Not the details, of course, but the
plain fact of crisis.
Although the old man never confronted me about it, there was one occasion
when he came close to forcing the whole thing out into the open. It was early
evening, and we’d just finished supper, and over coffee and dessert I asked him
about my bill, how much I owed so far. For a long while the old man squinted
down at the tablecloth.
“Well, the basic rate,” he said, “is fifty bucks a night. Not counting meals. This
makes four nights, right?”
I nodded. I had three hundred and twelve dollars in my wallet.
Elroy kept his eyes on the tablecloth. “Now that’s an on­season price. To be
fair, I suppose we should knock it down a peg or two.” He leaned back in his chair.
“What’s a reasonable number, you figure?”

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1081

30

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1082 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
“I don’t know,” I said. “Forty?”
“Forty’s good. Forty a night. Then we tack on food — say another hundred?
Two hundred sixty total?”
“I guess.”
He raised his eyebrows. “Too much?”
“No, that’s fair. It’s fine. Tomorrow, though . . . I think I’d better take off
tomorrow.”
Elroy shrugged and began clearing the table. For a time he fussed with the
dishes, whistling to himself as if the subject had been settled. After a second he
slapped his hands together.
“You know what we forgot?” he said. “We forgot wages. Those odd jobs you
done. What we have to do, we have to figure out what your time’s worth. Your last
job — how much did you pull in an hour?”
“Not enough,” I said.
“A bad one?”
“Yes. Pretty bad.”
Slowly then, without intending any long sermon, I told him about my days at
the pig plant. It began as a straight recitation of the facts, but before I could stop
myself I was talking about the blood clots and the water gun and how the smell
had soaked into my skin and how I couldn’t wash it away. I went on for a long
time. I told him about wild hogs squealing in my dreams, the sounds of butchery,
slaughterhouse sounds, and how I’d sometimes wake up with that greasy pig­
stink in my throat.
When I was finished, Elroy nodded at me.
“Well, to be honest,” he said, “when you first showed up here, I wondered
about all that. The aroma, I mean. Smelled like you was awful damned fond of
pork chops.” The old man almost smiled. He made a snuffling sound, then sat
down with a pencil and a piece of paper. “So what’d this crud job pay? Ten bucks
an hour? Fifteen?”
“Less.”
Elroy shook his head. “Let’s make it fifteen. You put in twenty­five hours here,
easy. That’s three hundred seventy­five bucks total wages. We subtract the two
hundred sixty for food and lodging, I still owe you a hundred and fifteen.”
He took four fifties out of his shirt pocket and laid them on the table.
“Call it even,” he said.
“No.”
“Pick it up. Get yourself a haircut.”
The money lay on the table for the rest of the evening. It was still there when I
went back to my cabin. In the morning, though, I found an envelope tacked to my
door. Inside were the four fifties and a two­word note that said emergency fund.
The man knew.

35

40

45

50

Y

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1082

6/18/12 3:13 PM

O’BRieN • ON The RAiNY RiveR 1083

Looking back after twenty years, I sometimes wonder if the events of that sum­
mer didn’t happen in some other dimension, a place where your life exists before
you’ve lived it, and where it goes afterward. None of it ever seemed real. During
my time at the Tip Top Lodge I had the feeling that I’d slipped out of my own
skin, hovering a few feet away while some poor yo­yo with my name and face
tried to make his way toward a future he didn’t understand and didn’t want. Even
now I can see myself as I was then. It’s like watching an old home movie: I’m
young and tan and fit. I’ve got hair — lots of it. I don’t smoke or drink. I’m wear­
ing faded blue jeans and a white polo shirt. I can see myself sitting on Elroy
Berdahl’s dock near dusk one evening, the sky a bright shimmering pink, and I’m
finishing up a letter to my parents that tells what I’m about to do and why I’m
doing it and how sorry I am that I’d never found the courage to talk to them
about it. I ask them not to be angry. I try to explain some of my feelings, but there
aren’t enough words, and so I just say that it’s a thing that has to be done. At the
end of the letter I talk about the vacations we used to take up in this north coun­
try, at a place called Whitefish Lake, and how the scenery here reminds me of
those good times. I tell them I’m fine. I tell them I’ll write again from Winnipeg
or Montreal or wherever I end up.

Y
On my last full day, the sixth day, the old man took me out fishing on the Rainy
River. The afternoon was sunny and cold. A stiff breeze came in from the north,
and I remember how the little fourteen­foot boat made sharp rocking motions
as we pushed off from the dock. The current was fast. All around us, I remember,
there was a vastness to the world, an unpeopled rawness, just the trees and the
sky and the water reaching out toward nowhere. The air had the brittle scent of
October.
For ten or fifteen minutes Elroy held a course upstream, the river choppy and
silver­gray, then he turned straight north and put the engine on full throttle. I felt
the bow lift beneath me. I remember the wind in my ears, the sound of the old
outboard Evinrude. For a time I didn’t pay attention to anything, just feeling the
cold spray against my face, but then it occurred to me that at some point we
must’ve passed into Canadian waters, across that dotted line between two differ­
ent worlds, and I remember a sudden tightness in my chest as I looked up and
watched the far shore come at me. This wasn’t a daydream. It was tangible and
real. As we came in toward land, Elroy cut the engine, letting the boat fishtail
lightly about twenty yards off shore. The old man didn’t look at me or speak.
Bending down, he opened up his tackle box and busied himself with a bobber
and a piece of wire leader, humming to himself, his eyes down.
It struck me then that he must’ve planned it. I’ll never be certain, of course,
but I think he meant to bring me up against the realities, to guide me across the
river and to take me to the edge and to stand a kind of vigil as I chose a life for
myself.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1083

55

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1084 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
I remember staring at the old man, then at my hands, then at Canada. The
shoreline was dense with brush and timber. I could see tiny red berries on the
bushes. I could see a squirrel up in one of the birch trees, a big crow looking at
me from a boulder along the river. That close — twenty yards — and I could see
the delicate latticework of the leaves, the texture of the soil, the browned needles
beneath the pines, the configurations of geology and human history. Twenty
yards. I could’ve done it. I could’ve jumped and started swimming for my life.
Inside me, in my chest, I felt a terrible squeezing pressure. Even now, as I write
this, I can still feel that tightness. And I want you to feel it — the wind coming off
the river, the waves, the silence, the wooded frontier. You’re at the bow of a boat
on the Rainy River. You’re twenty­one years old, you’re scared, and there’s a hard
squeezing pressure in your chest.
What would you do?
Would you jump? Would you feel pity for yourself ? Would you think about
your family and your childhood and your dreams and all you’re leaving behind?
Would it hurt? Would it feel like dying? Would you cry, as I did?
I tried to swallow it back. I tried to smile, except I was crying.
Now, perhaps, you can understand why I’ve never told this story before. It’s
not just the embarrassment of tears. That’s part of it, no doubt, but what embar­
rasses me much more, and always will, is the paralysis that took my heart. A moral
freeze: I couldn’t decide, I couldn’t act, I couldn’t comport myself with even a
pretense of modest human dignity.
All I could do was cry. Quietly, not bawling, just the chest­chokes.
At the rear of the boat Elroy Berdahl pretended not to notice. He held a fish­
ing rod in his hands, his head bowed to hide his eyes. He kept humming a soft,
monotonous little tune. Everywhere, it seemed, in the trees and water and sky, a
great worldwide sadness came pressing down on me, a crushing sorrow, sorrow
like I had never known it before. And what was so sad, I realized, was that Canada
had become a pitiful fantasy. Silly and hopeless. It was no longer a possibility. Right
then, with the shore so close, I understood that I would not do what I should do.
I would not swim away from my hometown and my country and my life. I would
not be brave. That old image of myself as a hero, as a man of conscience and cour­
age, all that was just a threadbare pipe dream. Bobbing there on the Rainy River,
looking back at the Minnesota shore, I felt a sudden swell of helplessness come
over me, a drowning sensation, as if I had toppled overboard and was being swept
away by the silver waves. Chunks of my own history flashed by. I saw a seven­year­
old boy in a white cowboy hat and a Lone Ranger mask and a pair of holstered
six­shooters; I saw a twelve­year­old Little League shortstop pivoting to turn a
double play; I saw a sixteen­year­old kid decked out for his first prom, looking
spiffy in a white tux and a black bow tie, his hair cut short and flat, his shoes freshly
polished. My whole life seemed to spill out into the river, swirling away from me,
everything I had ever been or ever wanted to be. I couldn’t get my breath; I
couldn’t stay afloat; I couldn’t tell which way to swim. A hallucination, I suppose,

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1084

60

6/18/12 3:13 PM

O’BRieN • ON The RAiNY RiveR 1085

but it was as real as anything I would ever feel. I saw my parents calling to me
from the far shoreline. I saw my brother and sister, all the townsfolk, the mayor
and the entire Chamber of Commerce and all my old teachers and girlfriends
and high school buddies. Like some weird sporting event: everybody screaming
from the sidelines, rooting me on — a loud stadium roar. Hotdogs and popcorn —
stadium smells, stadium heat. A squad of cheerleaders did cartwheels along the
banks of the Rainy River; they had megaphones and pompoms and smooth brown
thighs. The crowd swayed left and right. A marching band played fight songs. All
my aunts and uncles were there, and Abraham Lincoln, and Saint George, and a
nine­year­old girl named Linda who had died of a brain tumor back in fifth grade,
and several members of the United States Senate, and a blind poet scribbling
notes, and LBJ, and Huck Finn, and Abbie Hoffman, and all the dead soldiers back
from the grave, and the many thousands who were later to die — villagers with
terrible burns, little kids without arms or legs — yes, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff
were there, and a couple of popes, and a first lieutenant named Jimmy Cross, and
the last surviving veteran of the American Civil War, and Jane Fonda dressed up
as Barbarella, and an old man sprawled beside a pigpen, and my grandfather, and
Gary Cooper, and a kind­faced woman carrying an umbrella and a copy of Plato’s
Republic, and a million ferocious citizens waving flags of all shapes and colors —
people in hard hats, people in headbands — they were all whooping and chanting
and urging me toward one shore or the other. I saw faces from my distant past
and distant future. My wife was there. My unborn daughter waved at me, and my
two sons hopped up and down, and a drill sergeant named Blyton sneered and
shot up a finger and shook his head. There was a choir in bright purple robes.
There was a cabbie from the Bronx. There was a slim young man I would one day
kill with a hand grenade along a red clay trail outside the village of My Khe.
The little aluminum boat rocked softly beneath me. There was the wind and
the sky.
I tried to will myself overboard.
I gripped the edge of the boat and leaned forward and thought, Now.
I did try. It just wasn’t possible.
All those eyes on me — the town, the whole universe — and I couldn’t risk
the embarrassment. It was as if there were an audience to my life, that swirl of
faces along the river, and in my head I could hear people screaming at me. Traitor!
they yelled. Turncoat! . . . I felt myself blush. I couldn’t tolerate it. I couldn’t
endure the mockery, or the disgrace, or the patriotic ridicule. Even in my imagi­
nation, the shore just twenty yards away, I couldn’t make myself be brave. It had
nothing to do with morality. Embarrassment, that’s all it was.
And right then I submitted.
I would go to the war — I would kill and maybe die — because I was embar­
rassed not to.
That was the sad thing. And so I sat in the bow of the boat and cried.
It was loud now. Loud, hard crying.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1085

65

70

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1086 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
Elroy Berdahl remained quiet. He kept fishing. He worked his line with the
tips of his fingers, patiently, squinting out at his red and white bobber on the
Rainy River. His eyes were flat and impassive. He didn’t speak. He was simply
there, like the river and the late­summer sun. And yet by his presence, his mute
watchfulness, he made it real. He was the true audience. He was a witness, like
God, or like the gods, who look on in absolute silence as we live our lives, as we
make our choices or fail to make them.
“Ain’t biting,” he said.
Then after a time the old man pulled in his line and turned the boat back
toward Minnesota.

75

Y
I don’t remember saying goodbye. That last night we had dinner together, and I
went to bed early, and in the morning Elroy fixed breakfast for me. When I told
him I’d be leaving, the old man nodded as if he already knew. He looked down at
the table and smiled.
At some point later in the morning it’s possible that we shook hands — I just
don’t remember — but I do know that by the time I’d finished packing the old
man had disappeared. Around noon, when I took my suitcase out to the car, I
noticed that his old black pickup truck was no longer parked in front of the
house. I went inside and waited for a while, but I felt a bone certainty that he
wouldn’t be back. In a way, I thought, it was appropriate. I washed up the break­
fast dishes, left his two hundred dollars on the kitchen counter, got into the car,
and drove south toward home.
The day was cloudy. I passed through towns with familiar names, through
the pine forests and down to the prairie, and then to Vietnam, where I was a sol­
dier, and then home again. I survived, but it’s not a happy ending. I was a coward.
I went to the war.

Exploring the Text
1. What is the rhetorical effect of the first seven sentences? Based on the opening,
what were your expectations of the story to follow?
2. This is a fictional story in which Tim O’Brien has used himself — or a character by
the same name — as the protagonist. Describe how you determine which details
are factual and which are imaginative. What is the effect of mixing fact and fiction?
3. Reread the questions in paragraph 2. Are they rhetorical? What purpose do they
serve? Could we ask similar questions about events today? Explain your response.
4. What is the narrator’s conflict (para. 9)? How does this conflict relate to the theme
of this chapter?
5. Why does O’Brien address the reader directly in paragraphs 58–60? How would
you answer his questions?

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1086

6/18/12 3:13 PM

PiCASSO • GUeRNiCA 1087

6. Identify the rhetorical strategies O’Brien uses in paragraph 64. What are the effects
of these strategies in this long paragraph?
7. What is the effect of collapsing time in the final paragraph? What is the rhetorical
effect of the irony in this paragraph?
8. If you have read The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn by Mark Twain, compare
Huck’s conflict about doing what he has been taught is “the right thing” — turning
Jim in — with O’Brien’s statement at the end of paragraph 27. How are the situa­
tions of the two protagonists similar?

Guernica
Pablo Picasso
Widely regarded as the twentieth century’s most respected and influential painter,
Pablo Picasso (1881–1973) painted Guernica, an eleven-foot-tall, twenty-six-footwide mural, in 1937. it was his response to the bombing of the Basque capital in
the Spanish civil war. The bombing had been carried out by Nazis at the behest
of francisco franco, who went on to rule Spain as dictator from 1939 to 1975.
Thousands of people in Guernica were killed or wounded, and the town was
destroyed. The painting is housed in the museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina
Sofía in madrid.

(See insert for color version.)

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1087

6/18/12 3:13 PM

1088 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
Exploring the Text
1. Look carefully at the elements of Guernica, specifically the burning woman, the
horse, the warrior with the broken sword, the crying woman with the child, and
the bull. How does each element contribute to the painting’s theme — the apoca­
lyptic horrors of war?
2. Discuss the style of Guernica. If you have studied art history, you may know
that Picasso was a prime practitioner of Cubist fragmentation. How does such a
method serve the meaning of this painting?
3. In the painting, Pablo Picasso uses only black, white, and gray. What is the effect of
the absence of color?
4. Picasso once said, “Painting is not made to decorate apartments. It is an instru­
ment for offensive and defensive war against the enemy.” How does Guernica
exemplify this statement? What, if anything, has replaced fine art as a political
statement in the post­Picasso world?
5. How does the painting appeal to ethos, logos, and pathos?
6. A tapestry of Guernica hangs at the United Nations building in New York City.
What is its rhetorical effect as a mural in this setting?

Depictions of Guernica
in february 2003, Colin Powell, then U.S. secretary of state, delivered a speech
at the United Nations making the case for the invasion of iraq. during Powell’s talk,
a tapestry depicting Pablo Picasso’s Guernica was covered so that the audience
would not see it. U.N. officials claim they covered the image to provide a neutral
backdrop for television camera crews. Two national magazines that address political and cultural issues, the New Yorker and Harper’s, responded to that event with
their covers, shown on the following pages.

Exploring the Text
1. Why would authorities at the United Nations decide to cover Guernica during a
political speech? What rhetorical purpose would covering it serve?
2. Which of the classic appeals do both the New Yorker and Harper’s use in their covers?
3. What assumptions about their audiences — their readers’ familiarity with history
and art, their awareness of current events — do both publications evidently hold?
4. From these two covers, what inferences can you make about the political attitudes
of each magazine? Explain.
5. Considering these covers as examples of visual rhetoric, what claim do they make?
6. Compare and contrast the two covers. How does each cover depict the draping?
What images from the original does each cover show? Is one more powerful than
the other? Explain.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1088

6/18/12 3:13 PM

PiCASSO • GUeRNiCA 1089

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1089

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1090 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1090

6/18/12 3:14 PM

Conversation
Colonialism
The following eight texts comment directly or indirectly on colonialism:

Sources
1. Christopher Columbus, Letter to King Ferdinand of Spain
2. King Ferdinand, The Requerimiento
3. Red Jacket, Defense of Native American Religion
4. George Orwell, Shooting an Elephant
5. Frantz Fanon, from Concerning Violence
6. Eavan Boland, In Which the Ancient History I Learn Is Not My Own (poem)
7. Chinua Achebe, from The Empire Fights Back
8. National Park Service, Christiansted: Official Map and Guide
After you have read, studied, and synthesized these pieces, enter the Conversation
by responding to one of the suggested prompts on pages 1118–19.

1. Letter to King Ferdinand of Spain
Christopher Columbus
The following is Christopher Columbus’s 1493 letter addressed to the Spanish
finance minister, but ultimately intended for King Ferdinand of Spain, in which
Columbus describes the results of his first voyage to the New World.

Sir:
As I know you will be rejoiced at the glorious success that our Lord has given
me in my voyage, I write this to tell you how in thirty-three days I sailed to the
Indies with the fleet that the illustrious King and Queen, our Sovereigns, gave me,
where I discovered a great many islands, inhabited by numberless people; and of
all I have taken possession for their Highnesses by proclamation and display of
the Royal Standard without opposition.
To the first island I discovered I gave the name of San Salvador, in commemoration of His Divine Majesty, who has wonderfully granted all this. The
Indians call it Guanaham. The second I named the Island of Santa Maria de Concepción; the third, Fernandina; the fourth, Isabella; the fifth, Juana; and thus to
each one I gave a new name.
When I came to Juana, I followed the coast of that isle toward the west, and
found it so extensive that I thought it might be the mainland, the province of

1091

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1091

6/27/12 9:14 AM

1092 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
Cathay;1 and as I found no towns nor villages on the seacoast, except a few small
settlements, where it was impossible to speak to the people, because they fled at
once, I continued the said route, thinking I could not fail to see some great cities
or towns; and finding at the end of many leagues that nothing new appeared, and
that the coast led northward, contrary to my wish, because the winter had already
set in, I decided to make for the south, and as the wind also was against my pro­
ceeding, I determined not to wait there longer, and turned back to a certain har­
bor whence I sent two men to find out whether there was any king or large city.
They explored for three days, and found countless small communities and people,
without number, but with no kind of government, so they returned. I heard from
other Indians I had already taken that this land was an island, and thus followed
the eastern coast for 107 leagues, until I came to the end of it. From that point I
saw another isle to the eastward, at eighteen leagues’ distance, to which I gave the
name of Hispaniola. I went thither and followed its northern coast to the east, as
I had done in Juana, 178 leagues eastward, as in Juana. This island, like all the
others, is most extensive. It has many ports along the seacoast excelling any in
Christendom — and many fine, large, flowing rivers. The land there is elevated,
with many mountains and peaks incomparably higher than in the centre isle. They
are most beautiful, of a thousand varied forms, accessible, and full of trees of end­
less varieties, so high that they seem to touch the sky, and I have been told that
they never lose their foliage. I saw them as green and lovely as trees are in Spain
in the month of May. Some of them were covered with blossoms, some with fruit,
and some in other conditions, according to their kind. The nightingale and other
small birds of a thousand kinds were singing in the month of November when I
was there. There were palm trees of six or eight varieties, the graceful peculiarities
of each one of them being worthy of admiration as are the other trees, fruits, and
grasses. There are wonderful pine woods, and very extensive ranges of meadow
land. There is honey, and there are many kinds of birds, and a great variety of
fruits. Inland there are numerous mines of metals and innumerable people.
Hispaniola is a marvel. Its hills and mountains, fine plains and open country,
are rich and fertile for planting and for pasturage, and for building towns and
villages. The seaports there are incredibly fine, as also the magnificent rivers, most
of which bear gold. The trees, fruits, and grasses differ widely from those in Juana.
There are many spices and vast mines of gold and other metals in this island.
The people of this island and of all the other islands which I have found, and
of which I have information, all go naked, men and women, as their mothers bore
them, although some of the women cover a single place with the leaf of a plant or
with a net of cotton which they make for the purpose. They have no iron, nor
steel, nor weapons, nor are they fit for them, because although they are well­made
men of commanding stature, they appear extraordinarily timid. The only arms

5

1 China. — Eds.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1092

6/18/12 3:14 PM

CONveRSATiON 1093

they have are sticks of cane, cut when in seed, with a sharpened stick at the end,
and they are afraid to use these. Often I have sent two or three men ashore to
some town to converse with them, and the natives came out in great numbers,
and as soon as they saw our men arrive, fled without a moment’s delay although
I protected them from all injury. At every point where I landed, and succeeded in
talking to them, I gave them some of everything I had — cloth and many other
things — without receiving anything in return, but they are a hopelessly timid
people. It is true that since they have gained more confidence and are losing this
fear, they are so unsuspicious and so generous with what they possess, that no one
who had not seen it would believe it. They never refuse anything that is asked for.
They even offer it themselves, and show so much love that they would give their
very hearts. Whether it be anything of great or small value, with any trifle of
whatever kind, they are satisfied. I forbade worthless things being given to them,
such as bits of broken bowls, pieces of glass, and old straps, although they were as
much pleased to get them as if they were the finest jewels in the world. One sailor
was found to have got for a leathern strap, gold of the weight of two and a half
castellanos, and others for even more worthless things much more; while for a
new blancas they would give all they had, were it two or three castellanos of pure
gold or an arroba or two of spun cotton. Even bits of the broken hoops of wine
casks they accepted, and gave in return what they had, like fools, and it seemed
wrong to me. I forbade it, and gave a thousand good and pretty things that I had
to win their love, and to induce them to become Christians, and to love and serve
their Highnesses and the whole Castilian nation, and help to get for us things they
have in abundance, which are necessary to us.
They have no religion, nor idolatry, except that they all believe power and
goodness to be in heaven. They firmly believed that I, with my ships and men,
came from heaven, and with this idea I have been received everywhere, since they
lost fear of me. They are, however, far from being ignorant. They are most inge­
nious men, and navigate these seas in a wonderful way, and describe everything
well, but they never before saw people wearing clothes, nor vessels like ours.
As soon as I reached the Indies, in the first isle I discovered, I took by force
some of the natives, that from them we might gain some information of what
there was in these parts; and so it was that we immediately understood each other,
either by words or signs. They are still with me and still believe that I come from
heaven. They were the first to declare this wherever I went, and the others ran
from house to house, and to the towns around, crying out, “Come! come! and see
the men from heaven!” Then all, both men and women, as soon as they were re­
assured about us, came, both small and great, all bringing something to eat and
to drink, which they presented with marvellous kindness.
In these isles there are a great many canoes, something like rowing boats, of
all sizes, and most of them are larger than an eighteen­oared galley. They are not
so broad, as they are made of a single plank, but a galley could not keep up with
them in rowing, because they go with incredible speed, and with these they row

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1093

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1094 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
about among all these islands, which are innumerable, and carry on their com­
merce. I have seen some of these canoes with seventy and eighty men in them,
and each had an oar.
In all the islands I observed little difference in the appearance of the people,
or in their habits and language, except that they understand each other, which is
remarkable. Therefore I hope that their Highnesses will decide upon the conver­
sion of these people to our holy faith, to which they seem much inclined.
I have already stated how I sailed 107 leagues along the seacoast of Juana, in
a straight line from west to east. I can therefore assert that this island is larger than
England and Scotland together, since beyond these 107 leagues there remained at
the west point two provinces where I did not go, one of which they call Avan, the
home of men with tails. These provinces are computed to be fifty or sixty leagues
in length, as far as can be gathered from the Indians with me who are acquainted
with all these islands.
The other, Hispaniola, is larger in circumference than all Spain from Catalo­
nia to Fuenterrabia in Biscay, since upon one of its four sides I sailed 188 leagues
from west to east. This is worth having, and must on no account be given up. I
have taken possession of all these islands, for their Highnesses, and all may be
more extensive than I know, or can say, and I hold them for their Highnesses, who
can command them as absolutely as the kingdoms of Castile. In Hispaniola, in
the most convenient place, most accessible for the gold mines and all commerce
with the mainland on this side or with that of the Great Khan, on the other, with
which there would be great trade and profit, I have taken possession of a large
town, which I have named the City of Navidad. I began fortifications there which
should be completed by this time, and I have left in it men enough to hold it, with
arms, artillery, and provisions for more than a year; and a boat with a master sea­
man skilled in the arts necessary to make others; I am so friendly with the king of
that country that he was proud to call me his brother and hold me as such. Even
should he change his mind and wish to quarrel with my men, neither he nor his
subjects know what arms are, nor wear clothes, as I have said. They are the most
timid people in the world, so that only the men remaining there could destroy the
whole region, and run no risk if they know how to behave themselves properly.
In all these islands the men seem to be satisfied with one wife, except they
allow as many as twenty to their chief or king.
The women appear to me to work harder than the men, and so far I can hear
they have nothing of their own, for I think I perceived that what one had others
shared, especially food.
In the islands so far, I have found no monsters, as some expected, but, on the
contrary, they are people of very handsome appearance. They are not black as in
Guinea, though their hair is straight and coarse, as it does not grow where the
sun’s rays are too ardent. And in truth the sun has extreme power here, since it is
within twenty­six degrees of the equinoctial line. In these islands there are moun­
tains where the cold this winter was very severe, but the people endure it from

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1094

10

6/18/12 3:14 PM

CONveRSATiON 1095

habit, and with the aid of the meat they eat with very hot spices. As for monsters,
I have found no trace of them except at the point in the second isle as one enters
the Indies, which is inhabited by a people considered in all the isles as most fero­
cious, who eat human flesh. They possess many canoes, with which they overrun
all the isles of India, stealing and seizing all they can. They are not worse looking
than the others, except that they wear their hair long like women, and use bows
and arrows of the same cane, with sharp stick at the end for want of iron, of
which they have none. They are ferocious compared to these other races, who are
extremely cowardly; but I only hear this from the others. They are said to make
treaties of marriage with the women in the first isle to be met with coming from
Spain to the Indies, where there are no men. These women have no feminine
occupation, but use bows and arrows of cane like those before mentioned, and
cover and arm themselves with plates of copper, of which they have a great quan­
tity. Another island, I am told, is larger than Hispaniola, where the natives have no
hair, and where there is countless gold; and from them all I bring Indians to testify
to this.
To speak, in conclusion, only of what has been done during this hurried voy­
age, their Highnesses will see that I can give them as much gold as they desire, if
they will give me a little assistance, spices, cotton, as much as their Highnesses
may command to be shipped, and mastic, as much as their Highnesses choose to
send for, which until now has only been found in Greece, in the isle of Chios, and
the Signoria can get its own price for it; as much aloe as they command to be
shipped, and as many slaves as they choose to send for, all heathens. I think I have
found rhubarb and cinnamon. Many other things of value will be discovered by
the men I left behind me, as I stayed nowhere when the wind allowed me to pur­
sue my voyage, except in the City of Navidad, which I left fortified and safe.
Indeed, I might have accomplished much more, had the crews served me as they
ought to have done.
The eternal and almighty God, our Lord, it is Who gives to all who walk in
His way, victory over things apparently impossible, and in this case signally so,
because although these lands had been imagined and talked of before they were
seen, most men listened incredulously to what was thought to be but an idle tale.
But our Redeemer has given victory to our most illustrious King and Queen, and
to their Kingdoms rendered famous by this glorious event, at which all Christen­
dom should rejoice, celebrating it with great festivities and solemn thanksgivings
to the Holy Trinity, with fervent prayers for the high distinction that will accrue
to them from turning so many peoples to our holy faith; and also from the tem­
poral benefits that not only Spain but all Christian nations will obtain.
Thus I record. What has happened in a brief note written on board the Caravel, off the Canary Isles, on the 15th of February, 1493.

15

Yours to command,
The Admiral

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1095

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1096 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
Questions
1. Why do you suppose Columbus is surprised by the lack of diversity among the
natives? How do his first­hand impressions differ from what he has heard? Offer
specific examples to support your answer.
2. Look closely at Columbus’s diction — for example, at “taken possession” (para. 1)
and “command them” (para. 11). What do these phrases suggest about the attitude
of both Columbus and King Ferdinand toward the native people?
3. Columbus states that he has established a fort where he has left some men for a year.
He writes, “I am so friendly with the king of that country that he was proud to call
me his brother and hold me as such. Even should he change his mind and wish to
quarrel with my men, neither he nor his subjects know what arms are” (para. 11),
and that the few men he left behind could destroy the whole region. Given this
language, what is the nature of the “friendship” that has been established?
4. In paragraph 15, Columbus enumerates the things that he will give to King Ferdi­
nand, and he promises that he will find “many other things of value.” What are the
eight things that he mentions? What do they have in common? Are you surprised
at anything about the list? Explain your response.
5. What assumptions concerning authority, ownership, and faith underlie the state­
ments Columbus makes in paragraph 16? What are the “temporal benefits”
Columbus refers to? Are they secondary to religious ones, as he suggests? Explain
your response.

2. The Requerimiento
King Ferdinand
The following letter — a requerimiento, or demand — was sent with Spanish
conquistadors on their voyages to the New World. it explained to the natives
that Pope Alexander vi had given King ferdinand the right to take possession
of any lands that the conquistadors discovered.

On the part of the King, Don Fernando, and of Doña Juana, his daughter, Queen
of Castile and León, subduers of the barbarous nations, we their servants notify
and make known to you, as best we can, that the Lord our God, living and eternal,
created the heaven and the earth, and one man and one woman, of whom you
and we, and all the men of the world, were and are all descendants, and all those
who come after us.
Of all these nations God our Lord gave charge to one man, called St. Peter,
that he should be lord and superior of all the men in the world, that all should
obey him, and that he should be the head of the whole human race, wherever
men should live, and under whatever law, sect, or belief they should be; and he
gave him the world for his kingdom and jurisdiction.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1096

6/18/12 3:14 PM

CONveRSATiON 1097

One of these pontiffs, who succeeded St. Peter as lord of the world in the
dignity and seat which I have before mentioned, made donation of these isles and
Terra­firma to the aforesaid King and Queen and to their successors, our lords,
with all that there are in these territories,
Wherefore, as best we can, we ask and require you that you consider what we
have said to you, and that you take the time that shall be necessary to understand
and deliberate upon it, and that you acknowledge the Church as the ruler and
superior of the whole world,
But if you do not do this, and maliciously make delay in it, I certify to you
that, with the help of God, we shall powerfully enter into your country, and shall
make war against you in all ways and manners that we can, and shall subject you
to the yoke and obedience of the Church and of their highnesses; we shall take
you, and your wives, and your children, and shall make slaves of them, and as
such shall sell and dispose of them as their highnesses may command; and we
shall take away your goods, and shall do you all the mischief and damage that we
can, as to vassals who do not obey, and refuse to receive their lord, and resist and
contradict him: and we protest that the deaths and losses which shall accrue from
this are your fault, and not that of their highnesses, or ours, nor of these cavaliers
who come with us.

5

Questions
1. In paragraphs 1 and 2, what assumptions about the world underlie the contents of
the letter? What does the speaker evidently assume about the audience?
2. Read carefully the long sentence that comprises paragraph 2 and submit it to the
Toulmin model of argument analysis as described in Chapter 3. What does that
analysis reveal about the Requerimiento’s argument?
3. Make a list of the unwarranted assumptions and unsupported claims made in para­
graph 3. Why do you think King Ferdinand does not make a more cogent argument?
4. Considering the threat that begins paragraph 5, what is ironic about the text that
precedes it?
5. Which of the statements in the letter do you find most surprising or shocking?
Explain why.
6. In this letter, the king makes what might be called an “offer they can’t refuse.” Imagine
that you are the intended audience. What would you say in response to this letter?

3. Defense of Native American Religion
Red Jacket
Chief Sagoyewatha of the Senecas, who were members of the iroquois federation, was known as Red Jacket from his habit of wearing red coats given to
him by the British, on whose side the Senecas fought in the American Revolution.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1097

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1098 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
After the war, Red Jacket led a delegation that met with George Washington,
acting as a mediator between the U.S. government and the Senecas. The text
below is his 1805 response to a Boston missionary society that wanted to
proselytize among the iroquois.

Friend and brother; it was the will of the Great Spirit that we should meet together
this day. He orders all things, and he has given us a fine day for our council. He
has taken his garment from before the sun, and caused it to shine with brightness
upon us; our eyes are opened, that we see clearly; our ears are unstopped, that we
have been able to hear distinctly the words that you have spoken; for all these
favors we thank the Great Spirit, and him only.
Brother, this council fire was kindled by you; it was at your request that we
came together at this time; we have listened with attention to what you have said.
You requested us to speak our minds freely; this gives us great joy, for we now
consider that we stand upright before you, and can speak what we think; all have
heard your voice, and all speak to you as one man; our minds are agreed.
Brother, you say you want an answer to your talk before you leave this place.
It is right you should have one, as you are a great distance from home, and we do
not wish to detain you; but we will first look back a little, and tell you what our
fathers have told us, and what we have heard from the white people.
Brother, listen to what we say. There was a time when our forefathers owned
this great island. Their seats extended from the rising to the setting sun. The Great
Spirit had made it for the use of Indians. He had created the buffalo, the deer, and
other animals for food. He made the bear and the beaver, and their skins served
us for clothing. He had scattered them over the country, and taught us how to
take them. He had caused the earth to produce corn for bread. All this he had
done for his red children because he loved them. If we had any disputes about
hunting grounds, they were generally settled without the shedding of much
blood. But an evil day came upon us; your forefathers crossed the great waters,
and landed on this island. Their numbers were small; they found friends, and not
enemies; they told us they had fled from their own country for fear of wicked
men, and come here to enjoy their religion. They asked for a small seat; we took
pity on them, granted their request, and they sat down amongst us; we gave them
corn and meat; they gave us poison in return. The white people had now found
our country; tidings were carried back, and more came amongst us; yet we did
not fear them, we took them to be friends; they called us brothers; we believed
them, and gave them a larger seat. At length, their numbers had greatly increased;
they wanted more land; they wanted our country. Our eyes were opened, and our
minds became uneasy. Wars took place; Indians were hired to fight against Indi­
ans, and many of our people were destroyed. They also brought strong liquor
among us; it was strong and powerful, and has slain thousands.
Brother, our seats were once large, and yours were very small; you have now
become a great people, and we have scarecely a place left to spread our blankets;

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1098

5

6/18/12 3:14 PM

CONveRSATiON 1099

you have got our country, but are not satisfied; you want to force your religion
upon us.
Brother, continue to listen. You say you are sent to instruct us how to worship
the Great Spirit agreeably to his mind, and if we do not take hold of the religion
which you white people teach, we shall be unhappy hereafter. You say that you are
right, and we are lost; how do we know this to be true? We understand that your
religion is written in a book; if it was intended for us as well as you, why has not
the Great Spirit given it to us, and not only to us, but why did he not give to our
forefathers the knowledge of that book, with the means of understanding it
rightly? We only know what you tell us about it. How shall we know when to
believe, being so often deceived by the white people?
Brother, you say there is but one way to worship and serve the Great Spirit; if
there is but one religion, why do you white people differ so much about it? Why
not all agree, as you can all read the book?
Brother, we do not understand these things. We are told that your religion
was given to your forefathers, and has been handed down from father to son. We
also have a religion which was given to our forefathers, and has been handed
down to us their children. We worship that way. It teacheth us to be thankful for
all the favors we receive; to love each other, and to be united. We never quarrel
about religion.
Brother, the Great Spirit has made us all; but he has made a great difference
between his white and red children; he has given us a different complexion, and
different customs; to you he has given the arts; to these he has not opened our
eyes; we know these things to be true. Since he has made so great a difference
between us in other things, why may we not conclude that he has given us a dif­
ferent religion according to our understanding. The Great Spirit does right; he
knows what is best for his children; we are satisfied.
Brother, we do not wish to destroy your religion, or take it from you; we only
want to enjoy our own.
Brother, you say you have not come to get our land or our money, but to
enlighten our minds. I will now tell you that I have been at your meetings, and
saw you collecting money from the meeting. I cannot tell what this money was
intended for, but suppose it was for your minister; and if we should conform to
your way of thinking, perhaps you may want some from us.
Brother, we are told that you have been preaching to the white people in this
place. These people are our neighbors; we are acquainted with them; we will wait
a little while and see what effect your preaching has upon them. If we find it does
them good, makes them honest and less disposed to cheat Indians, we will then
consider again what you have said.
Brother, you have now heard our answer to your talk, and this is all we have
to say at present. As we are going to part, we will come and take you by the hand,
and hope the Great Spirit will protect you on your journey, and return you safe to
your friends.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1099

10

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1100 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
Questions
1. Notice how Red Jacket begins each paragraph. How does this approach appeal to
both ethos and pathos?
2. What is the significance of ending the first paragraph with the phrase “and him
only”?
3. How would you characterize Red Jacket’s tone in paragraphs 2 and 3?
4. What is Red Jacket’s rhetorical purpose in paragraphs 4 and 5? Elsewhere in the
text, Red Jacket repeats the phrases “we are told” and “you say” several times. How
does this repetition serve his purpose?
5. Red Jacket says, “Brother, we do not understand these things” (para. 8). Is he being
disingenuous? Explain your response.
6. How effectively does Red Jacket use rhetorical questions? Imagine and describe the
audience’s probable response to each of them.
7. In paragraph 12, Red Jacket makes a promise. Is it a sincere one? Is it similar to a
rhetorical question, in that Red Jacket already knows the result of what he sug­
gests? Explain your response.

4. Shooting an Elephant
George Orwell
in the following autobiographical essay written in 1936, George Orwell talks
about his experience as a British officer in British-occupied Burma in the
1920s.

In Moulmein, in Lower Burma, I was hated by large numbers of people — the
only time in my life that I have been important enough for this to happen to me.
I was sub­divisional police officer of the town, and in an aimless, petty kind of
way anti­European feeling was very bitter. No one had the guts to raise a riot, but
if a European woman went through the bazaars alone somebody would probably
spit betel juice over her dress. As a police officer I was an obvious target and was
baited whenever it seemed safe to do so. When a nimble Burman tripped me up
on the football field and the referee (another Burman) looked the other way, the
crowd yelled with hideous laughter. This happened more than once. In the end
the sneering yellow faces of young men that met me everywhere, the insults
hooted after me when I was at a safe distance, got badly on my nerves. The young
Buddhist priests were the worst of all. There were several thousands of them in
the town and none of them seemed to have anything to do except stand on street
corners and jeer at Europeans.
All this was perplexing and upsetting. For at that time I had already made up
my mind that imperialism was an evil thing and the sooner I chucked up my job
and got out of it the better. Theoretically — and secretly, of course — I was all for

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1100

6/18/12 3:14 PM

CONveRSATiON 1101

the Burmese and all against their oppressors, the British. As for the job I was
doing, I hated it more bitterly than I can perhaps make clear. In a job like that you
see the dirty work of Empire at close quarters. The wretched prisoners huddling
in the stinking cages of the lock­ups, the grey, cowed faces of the long­term con­
victs, the scarred buttocks of the men who had been flogged with bamboos — all
these oppressed me with an intolerable sense of guilt. But I could get nothing into
perspective. I was young and ill­educated and I had had to think out my problems
in the utter silence that is imposed on every Englishman in the East. I did not
even know that the British Empire is dying, still less did I know that it is a great
deal better than the younger empires that are going to supplant it. All I knew was
that I was stuck between my hatred of the empire I served and my rage against the
evil­spirited little beasts who tried to make my job impossible. With one part of
my mind I thought of the British Raj as an unbreakable tyranny, as something
clamped down, in saecula saeculorum1 upon the will of prostrate peoples; with
another part I thought that the greatest joy in the world would be to drive a bayo­
net into a Buddhist priest’s guts. Feelings like these are the normal by­products of
imperialism; ask any Anglo­Indian official, if you can catch him off duty.
One day something happened which in a roundabout way was enlightening.
It was a tiny incident in itself, but it gave me a better glimpse than I had had
before of the real nature of imperialism — the real motives for which despotic
governments act. Early one morning the sub­inspector at a police station the
other end of the town rang me up on the phone and said that an elephant was
ravaging the bazaar. Would I please come and do something about it? I did not
know what I could do, but I wanted to see what was happening and I got on to a
pony and started out. I took my rifle, an old .44 Winchester and much too small
to kill an elephant, but I thought the noise might be useful in terrorem.2 Various
Burmans stopped me on the way and told me about the elephant’s doings. It was
not, of course, a wild elephant, but a tame one which had gone “must.” It had
been chained up, as tame elephants always are when their attack of “must” is due,
but on the previous night it had broken its chain and escaped. Its mahout, the
only person who could manage it when it was in that state, had set out in pursuit,
but had taken the wrong direction and was now twelve hours’ journey away, and
in the morning the elephant had suddenly reappeared in the town. The Burmese
population had no weapons and were quite helpless against it. It had already
destroyed somebody’s bamboo hut, killed a cow and raided some fruit­stalls and
devoured the stock; also it had met the municipal rubbish van and, when the
driver jumped out and took to his heels, had turned the van over and inflicted
violences upon it.
The Burmese sub­inspector and some Indian constables were waiting for me
in the quarter where the elephant had been seen. It was a very poor quarter, a
1Latin, “for ever and ever.” — Eds.
2A legal term meaning “to scare a person into complying with terms.” — Eds.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1101

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1102 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
labyrinth of squalid bamboo huts, thatched with palm­leaf, winding all over a
steep hillside. I remember that it was a cloudy, stuffy morning at the beginning of
the rains. We began questioning the people as to where the elephant had gone
and, as usual, failed to get any definite information. That is invariably the case in
the East; a story always sounds clear enough at a distance, but the nearer you get
to the scene of events the vaguer it becomes. Some of the people said that the
elephant had gone in one direction, some said that he had gone in another, some
professed not even to have heard of any elephant. I had almost made up my mind
that the whole story was a pack of lies, when we heard yells a little distance away.
There was a loud, scandalized cry of “Go away, child! Go away this instant!” and
an old woman with a switch in her hand came round the corner of a hut, violently
shooing away a crowd of naked children. Some more women followed, clicking
their tongues and exclaiming; evidently there was something that the children
ought not to have seen. I rounded the hut and saw a man’s dead body sprawling
in the mud. He was an Indian, a black Dravidian coolie,3 almost naked, and he
could not have been dead many minutes. The people said that the elephant had
come suddenly upon him round the corner of the hut, caught him with its trunk,
put its foot on his back and ground him into the earth. This was the rainy season
and the ground was soft, and his face had scored a trench a foot deep and a couple
of yards long. He was lying on his belly with arms crucified and head sharply
twisted to one side. His face was coated with mud, the eyes wide open, the teeth
bared and grinning with an expression of unendurable agony. (Never tell me, by
the way, that the dead look peaceful. Most of the corpses I have seen looked devil­
ish.) The friction of the great beast’s foot had stripped the skin from his back as
neatly as one skins a rabbit. As soon as I saw the dead man I sent an orderly to a
friend’s house nearby to borrow an elephant rifle. I had already sent back the
pony, not wanting it to go mad with fright and throw me if it smelt the elephant.
The orderly came back in a few minutes with a rifle and five cartridges, and
meanwhile some Burmans had arrived and told us that the elephant was in the
paddy fields below, only a few hundred yards away. As I started forward practi­
cally the whole population of the quarter flocked out of the houses and followed
me. They had seen the rifle and were all shouting excitedly that I was going to
shoot the elephant. They had not shown much interest in the elephant when he
was merely ravaging their homes, but it was different now that he was going to be
shot. It was a bit of fun to them, as it would be to an English crowd; besides they
wanted the meat. It made me vaguely uneasy. I had no intention of shooting the
elephant — I had merely sent for the rifle to defend myself if necessary — and it is
always unnerving to have a crowd following you. I marched down the hill, look­
ing and feeling a fool, with the rifle over my shoulder and an ever­growing army
of people jostling at my heels. At the bottom, when you got away from the huts,

5

3An unskilled Indian laborer. — Eds.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1102

6/18/12 3:14 PM

CONveRSATiON 1103

there was a metalled road and beyond that a miry waste of paddy fields a thou­
sand yards across, not yet ploughed but soggy from the first rains and dotted with
coarse grass. The elephant was standing eight yards from the road, his left side
towards us. He took not the slightest notice of the crowd’s approach. He was tear­
ing up bunches of grass, beating them against his knees to clean them and stuff­
ing them into his mouth.
I had halted on the road. As soon as I saw the elephant I knew with perfect
certainty that I ought not to shoot him. It is a serious matter to shoot a working
elephant — it is comparable to destroying a huge and costly piece of machinery —
and obviously one ought not to do it if it can possibly be avoided. And at that
distance, peacefully eating, the elephant looked no more dangerous than a cow. I
thought then and I think now that his attack of “must” was already passing off; in
which case he would merely wander harmlessly about until the mahout came
back and caught him. Moreover, I did not in the least want to shoot him. I decided
that I would watch him for a little while to make sure that he did not turn savage
again, and then go home.
But at that moment I glanced round at the crowd that had followed me. It
was an immense crowd, two thousand at the least and growing every minute. It
blocked the road for a long distance on either side. I looked at the sea of yellow
faces above the garish clothes — faces all happy and excited over this bit of fun, all
certain that the elephant was going to be shot. They were watching me as they
would watch a conjurer about to perform a trick. They did not like me, but with
the magical rifle in my hands I was momentarily worth watching. And suddenly
I realized that I should have to shoot the elephant after all. The people expected it
of me and I had got to do it; I could feel their two thousand wills pressing me
forward, irresistibly. And it was at this moment, as I stood there with the rifle in
my hands, that I first grasped the hollowness, the futility of the white man’s
dominion in the East. Here was I, the white man with his gun, standing in front
of the unarmed native crowd — seemingly the leading actor of the piece; but in
reality I was only an absurd puppet pushed to and fro by the will of those yellow
faces behind. I perceived in this moment that when the white man turns tyrant it
is his own freedom that he destroys. He becomes a sort of hollow, posing dummy,
the conventionalized figure of a sahib.4 For it is the condition of his rule that he
shall spend his life in trying to impress the “natives,” and so in every crisis he has
got to do what the “natives” expect of him. He wears a mask, and his face grows
to fit it. I had got to shoot the elephant. I had committed myself to doing it when
I sent for the rifle. A sahib has got to act like a sahib; he has got to appear resolute,
to know his own mind and do definite things. To come all that way, rifle in hand,
with two thousand people marching at my heels, and then to trail feebly away,
having done nothing — no, that was impossible. The crowd would laugh at me.

4In colonial India, the title used to address a European. — Eds.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1103

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1104 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
And my whole life, every white man’s life in the East, was one long struggle not to
be laughed at.
But I did not want to shoot the elephant. I watched him beating his bunch of
grass against his knees, with that preoccupied grandmotherly air that elephants
have. It seemed to me that it would be murder to shoot him. At that age I was not
squeamish about killing animals, but I had never shot an elephant and never
wanted to. (Somehow it always seems worse to kill a large animal.) Besides, there
was the beast’s owner to be considered. Alive, the elephant was worth at least a
hundred pounds; dead, he would only be worth the value of his tusks, five pounds,
possibly. But I had got to act quickly. I turned to some experienced­looking Bur­
mans who had been there when we arrived, and asked them how the elephant had
been behaving. They all said the same thing: he took no notice of you if you left
him alone, but he might charge if you went too close to him.
It was perfectly clear to me what I ought to do. I ought to walk up to within,
say, twenty­five yards of the elephant and test his behavior. If he charged, I could
shoot; if he took no notice of me, it would be safe to leave him until the mahout
came back. But also I knew that I was going to do no such thing. I was a poor shot
with a rifle and the ground was soft mud into which one would sink at every step.
If the elephant charged and I missed him, I should have about as much chance as
a toad under a steam­roller. But even then I was not thinking particularly of my
own skin, only of the watchful yellow faces behind. For at that moment, with the
crowd watching me, I was not afraid in the ordinary sense, as I would have been
if I had been alone. A white man mustn’t be frightened in front of “natives”; and
so, in general, he isn’t frightened. The sole thought in my mind was that if any­
thing went wrong those two thousand Burmans would see me pursued, caught,
trampled on and reduced to a grinning corpse like that Indian up the hill. And if
that happened it was quite probable that some of them would laugh. That would
never do. There was only one alternative. I shoved the cartridges into the maga­
zine and lay down on the road to get a better aim.
The crowd grew very still, and a deep, low, happy sigh, as of people who see
the theatre curtain go up at last, breathed from innumerable throats. They were
going to have their bit of fun after all. The rifle was a beautiful German thing with
cross­hair sights. I did not then know that in shooting an elephant one would
shoot to cut an imaginary bar running from ear­hole to ear­hole. I ought, there­
fore, as the elephant was sideways on, to have aimed straight at his ear­hole; actu­
ally I aimed several inches in front of this, thinking the brain would be further
forward.
When I pulled the trigger I did not hear the bang or feel the kick — one never
does when a shot goes home — but I heard the devilish roar of glee that went up
from the crowd. In that instant, in too short a time, one would have thought, even
for the bullet to get there, a mysterious, terrible change had come over the ele­
phant. He neither stirred nor fell, but every line of his body had altered. He looked
suddenly stricken, shrunken, immensely old, as though the frightful impact of

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1104

10

6/18/12 3:14 PM

CONveRSATiON 1105

the bullet had paralysed him without knocking him down. At last, after what
seemed a long time — it might have been five seconds, I dare say — he sagged
flabbily to his knees. His mouth slobbered. An enormous senility seemed to have
settled upon him. One could have imagined him thousands of years old. I fired
again into the same spot. At the second shot he did not collapse but climbed with
desperate slowness to his feet and stood weakly upright, with legs sagging and
head drooping. I fired a third time. That was the shot that did for him. You could
see the agony of it jolt his whole body and knock the last remnant of strength
from his legs. But in falling he seemed for a moment to rise, for as his hind legs
collapsed beneath him he seemed to tower upward like a huge rock toppling, his
trunk reaching skywards like a tree. He trumpeted, for the first and only time.
And then down he came, his belly towards me, with a crash that seemed to shake
the ground even where I lay.
I got up. The Burmans were already racing past me across the mud. It was
obvious that the elephant would never rise again, but he was not dead. He was
breathing very rhythmically with long rattling gasps, his great mound of a side
painfully rising and falling. His mouth was wide open — I could see far down into
caverns of pale pink throat. I waited a long time for him to die, but his breathing
did not weaken. Finally I fired my two remaining shots into the spot where I
thought his heart must be. The thick blood welled out of him like red velvet, but
still he did not die. His body did not even jerk when the shots hit him, the tor­
tured breathing continued without a pause. He was dying, very slowly and in
great agony, but in some world remote from me where not even a bullet could
damage him further. I felt that I had got to put an end to that dreadful noise. It
seemed dreadful to see the great beast lying there, powerless to move and yet
powerless to die, and not even to be able to finish him. I sent back for my small
rifle and poured shot after shot into his heart and down his throat. They seemed
to make no impression. The tortured gasps continued as steadily as the ticking of
a clock.
In the end I could not stand it any longer and went away. I heard later that it
took him half an hour to die. Burmans were bringing dahs and baskets even
before I left, and I was told they had stripped his body almost to the bones by the
afternoon.
Afterwards, of course, there were endless discussions about the shooting of
the elephant. The owner was furious, but he was only an Indian and could do
nothing. Besides, legally I had done the right thing, for a mad elephant has to be
killed, like a mad dog, if its owner fails to control it. Among the Europeans opin­
ion was divided. The older men said I was right, the younger men said it was a
damn shame to shoot an elephant for killing a coolie, because an elephant was
worth more than any damn Coringhee coolie. And afterwards I was very glad that
the coolie had been killed; it put me legally in the right and it gave me a sufficient
pretext for shooting the elephant. I often wondered whether any of the others
grasped that I had done it solely to avoid looking a fool.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1105

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1106 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
Questions
1. What is George Orwell’s attitude toward imperialism, toward the native peoples,
and toward his own position in Burma? Give evidence supporting your claim.
2. In paragraph 3, the narrator says that the incident of shooting the elephant “in a
roundabout way was enlightening. It was a tiny incident in itself, but it gave me a
better glimpse than I had had before of the real nature of imperialism — the real
motives for which despotic governments act.” What does he see as “the real nature
of imperialism,” and how does this incident reveal that nature?
3. In paragraph 6, the narrator says, “As soon as I saw the elephant I knew with per­
fect certainty that I ought not to shoot him.” Why, then, does he decide to shoot it?
Cite specific factors that influence his decision.
4. Explain the opinions of the Europeans about the killing of the elephant, as pre­
sented in the final paragraph. At the conclusion of the essay, how do you feel
toward Orwell?
5. Describe Orwell’s position concerning human motives. Support or challenge his
position using evidence drawn from your readings, observations, and experiences.

5. from Concerning Violence
Frantz Fanon
in the following excerpt from the first chapter of his book The Wretched of the
Earth (1963), Algerian psychiatrist and philosopher frantz fanon discusses
colonialism.

The colonial world is a world cut in two. The dividing line, the frontiers are shown
by barracks and police stations. In the colonies it is the policeman and the soldier
who are the official, instituted go­betweens, the spokesmen of the settler and his
rule of oppression. In capitalist societies the educational system, whether lay or
clerical, the structure of moral reflexes handed down from father to son, the
exemplary honesty of workers who are given a medal after fifty years of good and
loyal service, and the affection which springs from harmonious relations and
good behavior — all these aesthetic expressions of respect for the established
order serve to create around the exploited person an atmosphere of submission
and of inhibition which lightens the task of policing considerably. In the capitalist
countries a multitude of moral teachers, counselors and “bewilderers” separate
the exploited from those in power. In the colonial countries, on the contrary, the
policeman and the soldier, by their immediate presence and their frequent and
direct action, maintain contact with the native and advise him by means of rifle
butts and napalm not to budge. It is obvious here that the agents of government
speak the language of pure force. The intermediary does not lighten the oppres­
sion, nor seek to hide the domination; he shows them up and puts them into

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1106

6/18/12 3:14 PM

CONveRSATiON 1107

practice with the clear conscience of an upholder of the peace; yet he is the bringer
of violence into the home and into the mind of the native.
The zone where the natives live is not complementary to the zone inhabited
by the settlers. The two zones are opposed, but not in the service of a higher unity.
Obedient to the rules of pure Aristotelian logic, they both follow the principle of
reciprocal exclusivity. No conciliation is possible, for of the two terms, one is
superfluous. The settlers’ town is a strongly built town, all made of stone and
steel. It is a brightly lit town; the streets are covered with asphalt, and the garbage
cans swallow all the leavings, unseen, unknown and hardly thought about. The
settler’s feet are never visible, except perhaps in the sea; but there you’re never
close enough to see them. His feet are protected by strong shoes although the
streets of his town are clean and even, with no holes or stones. The settler’s town
is a well­fed town, an easygoing town; its belly is always full of good things. The
settlers’ town is a town of white people, of foreigners.
The town belonging to the colonized people, or at least the native town, the
Negro village, the medina, the reservation, is a place of ill fame, peopled by men of
evil repute. They are born there, it matters little where or how; they die there, it
matters not where, nor how. It is a world without spaciousness; men live there on
top of each other, and their huts are built one on top of the other. The native town
is a hungry town, starved of bread, of meat, of shoes, of coal, of light. The native
town is a crouching village, a town on its knees, a town wallowing in the mire. It
is a town of niggers and dirty Arabs. The look that the native turns on the settler’s
town is a look of lust, a look of envy; it expresses his dreams of possession — all
manner of possession: to sit at the settler’s table, to sleep in the settler’s bed, with
his wife if possible. The colonized man is an envious man. And this the settler
knows very well; when their glances meet he ascertains bitterly, always on the
defensive, “They want to take our place.” It is true, for there is no native who does
not dream at least once a day of setting himself up in the settler’s place.
This world divided into compartments, this world cut in two is inhabited by
two different species. The originality of the colonial context is that economic
reality, inequality, and the immense difference of ways of life never come to mask
the human realities. When you examine at close quarters the colonial context, it
is evident that what parcels out the world is to begin with the fact of belonging to
or not belonging to a given race, a given species. In the colonies the economic
substructure is also a superstructure. The cause is the consequence; you are rich
because you are white, you are white because you are rich. This is why Marxist
analysis should always be slightly stretched every time we have to do with the
colonial problem.
Everything up to and including the very nature of precapitalist society, so
well explained by Marx, must here be thought out again. The serf is in essence
different from the knight, but a reference to divine right is necessary to legitimize
this statutory difference. In the colonies, the foreigner coming from another
country imposed his rule by means of guns and machines. In defiance of his

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1107

5

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1108 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
successful transplantation, in spite of his appropriation, the settler still remains a
foreigner. It is neither the act of owning factories, nor estates, nor a bank balance
which distinguishes the governing classes. The governing race is first and fore­
most those who come from elsewhere, those who are unlike the original inhabi­
tants, “the others.”

Questions
1. In paragraph 1, Frantz Fanon makes distinctions between colonial and capitalist
countries. According to his analysis, how are they different? How are they alike?
2. Who do you suppose the “bewilderers” (para. 1) are? What is their role, according
to Fanon?
3. What does Fanon mean by “reciprocal exclusivity” (para. 2)? How does that prin­
ciple affect both the natives and the settlers?
4. What are the implications suggested by the observations Fanon makes in para­
graph 4?
5. Fanon writes, “The cause is the consequence; you are rich because you are white,
you are white because you are rich” (para. 4). Such a statement seems at first to be
a logical fallacy. How does this circular reasoning illustrate Fanon’s ideas? Do you
agree with them? Explain your response.
6. In the final paragraph, Fanon draws an analogy to medieval times and then ques­
tions its applicability. What, according to Fanon, makes the analogy inapplicable
today?

6. In Which the Ancient History I Learn
Is Not My Own
Eavan Boland
in the following 1993 poem, irish poet eavan Boland examines national history and identity.

The linen map
hung from the wall.
The linen was shiny
and cracked in places.
The cracks were darkened by grime.
It was fastened to the classroom wall with
a wooden batten on
a triangle of knotted cotton.
The colours
were faded out

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1108

5

10

6/18/12 3:14 PM

CONveRSATiON 1109

so the red of Empire —
the stain of absolute possession —
the mark once made from Kashmir
to the oast­barns1 of the Kent
coast south of us was
underwater coral.
Ireland was far away
and farther away
every year.
I was nearly an English child.
I could list the English kings.
I could name the famous battles.
I was learning to recognize
God’s grace in history.
And the waters
of the Irish Sea,
their shallow weave
and cross­grained blue green
had drained away
to the pale gaze
of a doll’s china eyes —
a stare without recognition or memory.
We have no oracles,
no rocks or olive trees,
no sacred path to the temple
and no priestesses.
The teacher’s voice had a London accent.
This was London. 1952.
It was Ancient History Class.
She put the tip
of the wooden
pointer on the map.
She tapped over ridges and dried­
out rivers and cities buried in
the sea and seascapes which
had once been land.
And stopped.
Remember this, children.

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

1A kiln for drying hops or malt. — Eds.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1109

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1110 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
The Roman Empire was
the greatest Empire
ever known —
until our time of course —
while the Delphic Oracle
was reckoned to be
the exact centre
of the earth.
Suddenly
I wanted
to stand in front of it.
I wanted to trace over
and over the weave of my own country.
To read out names
I was close to forgetting.
Wicklow. Kilruddery. Dublin.
To ask
where exactly
was my old house?
Its brass One and Seven.
Its flight of granite steps.
Its lilac tree whose scent
stayed under your fingernails
for days.
For days —
she was saying — even months,
the ancients traveled
to the Oracle.
They brought sheep and killed them.
They brought questions about tillage and war.
They rarely left with more
than an ambiguous answer.

50

55

60

65

70

75

80

Questions
1. The Romans conquered Britain but did not conquer Ireland. How does knowing
this affect your reading of “In Which the Ancient History I Learn Is Not My Own”?
2. In lines 17–19, the speaker says, “Ireland was far away / and farther away / every
year.” What does the speaker mean?
3. What does the speaker mean by “God’s grace in history” (l. 24)?

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1110

6/18/12 3:14 PM

CONveRSATiON 1111

4. What is ironic in line 39, “It was Ancient History Class”?
5. What is significant about the qualifier “until our time of course” in line 52?
6. What are the implications of the final stanza?
7. What point does Eavan Boland’s poem make about imperialism?

7. from The Empire Fights Back
Chinua Achebe
in the following excerpt from the second chapter of his book Home and Exile
(2000), Nigerian writer Chinua Achebe looks at British impressions of Africa
as delivered in literature.

I will begin . . . with a question: what did I do with my experience of classroom
rebellion over Mister Johnson?1 Anyone familiar with the gossip in African litera­
ture may have heard that it was that book that made me decide to write. I am not
even sure that I have not said it somewhere myself, in one of those occasional
seizures of expansive ambition we have to sum up the whole world in a single,
neat metaphor. Of course we need such moments now and again to stir things up
in our lives. But other times we must be content to stay modest and level­headed,
more factual. What Mister Johnson did do for me was not to change my course in
life and turn me from something else into a writer; I was born that way. But it did
open my eyes to the fact that my home was under attack and that my home was
not merely a house or a town but, more importantly, an awakening story in whose
ambience my own existence had first begun to assemble its fragments into a
coherence and meaning; the story I had begun to learn consciously the moment
I descended from the lorry that brought me to my father’s house in Ogidi, the
story that, seventeen years later at the university, I still had only a sketchy, tanta­
lizing knowledge of, and over which even today, decades later, I still do not have
sufficient mastery, but about which I can say one thing: that it is not the same
story Joyce Cary intended me to have.
For me there are three reasons for becoming a writer. The first is that you
have an overpowering urge to tell a story. The second, that you have intimations
of a unique story waiting to come out. And the third, which you learn in the pro­
cess of becoming, is that you consider the whole project worth the considerable
trouble — I have sometimes called it terms of imprisonment — you will have to
endure to bring it to fruition. For me, those three factors were present, and would
have been present had Joyce Cary never been born, or set foot in Nigeria. History,
however, had contrived a crossing of our paths, and such crossings may sometimes

1A 1939 novel by the writer Joyce Cary, who had served as an administrator and soldier in
Nigeria, Achebe’s country. — Eds.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1111

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1112 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
leave their footmarks, faint or loud, on memory. And if they do, they should be
acknowledged.
Another question. Was there any way Joyce Cary could have written a Nige­
rian novel that we Nigerian students could have accepted as our story? My answer,
in retrospect, must be: not likely. And my reason would not be the obvious fact
that Cary was a European, but rather because he was the product of a tradition of
presenting Africa that he had absorbed at school and Sunday school, in maga­
zines and in British society in general, at the end of the nineteenth century. In
theory, a good writer might outgrow these influences, but Cary did not.
In their Introduction to The Africa That Never Was, Hammond and Jablow
tell us that the large number of writers they studied “were not, and could not be,
selected for literary merit” and that there were many more “bad” writers than
“good” ones in their sample. (Which, I dare say, is hardly surprising.) They then
identify [Joseph] Conrad, Cary, [Graham] Greene and Huxley (not Aldous but
Elspeth) among the better writers (which is still OK by me — it only tells us how
bad the bad ones must be). But when they proceed to praise these four for their
handling of Africa in their books, I don’t quite know what to make of it:
The better writers, such as Conrad, Cary, Greene and Huxley . . . use the conventions
of the tradition with skill and subtlety. Each of them has an unmistakably individual
style in which he or she selectively exploits the conventions, without allowing the
writing to become overwhelmed by them. They all have more to say about Africa
than the merely conventional clichés, along with the talent to say it well.2

I suppose we can all differ as to the exact point where good writing becomes
overwhelmed by racial cliché. But overwhelmed or merely undermined, litera­
ture is always badly served when an author’s artistic insight yields place to stereo­
type and malice. And it becomes doubly offensive when such a work is arrogantly
proffered to you as your story. Some people may wonder if, perhaps, we were not
too touchy, if we were not oversensitive. We really were not. And I have a some­
what unusual reason for saying so.
Although my classmates and I would not have known it at the time, the Lon­
don publishing house of Methuen had brought out the year before, in 1951, a
little book titled simply West Africa. Its author, F. J. Pedler, was a highly respected
public servant in Britain, with considerable experience of West Africa. Although
the book was not entirely free of the stereotypes of contemporary British colonial
writing, it was in some ways remarkably advanced for its time, and even for today.
One small example will suffice. “It is misleading,” Mr. Pedler wrote, “when Euro­
peans talk of Africans buying a wife.”3 Although he did not mention Joyce Cary
by name it is inconceivable that he would not have been aware of him or of his

5

2Dorothy Hammond and Alta Jablow, The Africa That Never Was (Prospect Heights, Ill.: Wave­

land Press, 1992), p. 9.
3F. J. Pedler, West Africa (London: Methuen & Co., 1951), p. 32.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1112

6/18/12 3:14 PM

CONveRSATiON 1113

much celebrated novel Mister Johnson, in which that very stereotype was exploited
for all it was worth in the episode in which Johnson, after much haggling, buys
himself a local girl, Bamu, as wife.
But what I find truly remarkable about Pedler’s book is the prominence he
gave to, and the faith he had in, African literature that was not even in existence
yet: “A country’s novels reveal its social condition. West Africa has no full­length
novels, but a few short stories may serve the purpose. We quote from two recent
publications which show how educated West Africans themselves describe some
of the features of social life in their own country.” Pedler then proceeded to sum­
marize for his reader two short stories published in a magazine in 1945 in the
British colony of the Gold Coast. He devoted almost three pages of his short book
to this matter and then concluded as follows: “Here is a dramatic treatment of a
contemporary social phenomenon which leaves one with the hope that more
West Africans may enter the field of authorship and give us authentic stories of
the lives of their own people.”4
These brief quotations speak volumes to us on the issue of peoples and their
stories. We should note Pedler’s phrases: West Africans themselves; their own
country; authentic stories; of their own people. Without calling any names this
extraordinary Englishman seemed to be engaged in a running argument against
an age­old practice: the colonization of one people’s story by another. In sidestep­
ping Joyce Cary and all the other high­profile practitioners of this brand of writ­
ing and going, in search of authenticity, to two unpretentious short stories written
by two completely unknown West African authors whose names did not ring any
bell at all, Pedler was putting himself decisively and prophetically on the side of
the right of a people to take back their own narrative. And because he was British,
and because we, the students at Ibadan, did not even know of him, nor he pre­
sumably of us, our little rebellion in class one year after his book can, in retro­
spect, assume the status of a genuine, disinterested service to literature, and
transcend the troubling impression it might otherwise easily create, of a white/
black, British/Nigerian divide.
Incidentally Pedler’s prayer for West African novels was instantly answered.
There was already in the works, as we now know, a startling literary concoction
from the pen of a Nigerian coppersmith, Amos Tutuola, which Faber would pub­
lish in 1952. It may not have been the social realism which F. J. Pedler had pre­
sumably hoped for but an odyssey in peculiar English, which roamed about from
realism to magic and back again, as in old Africa. But no matter, The Palm-Wine
Drinkard opened the floodgates to modern West African writing. Hot on its heels
came another Nigerian, Cyprian Ekwensi, with People of the City; Camara Laye of
Guinea with L’Enfant Noir; my Things Fall Apart; Mongo Beti of Cameroon and
his countryman, Ferdinand Oyono, with Poor Christ of Bomba and Houseboy,
respectively; Cheikh Hamidou Kane of Senegal with Ambiguous Adventure.
4Both quotes from Pedler, West Africa, pp. 49, 50.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1113

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1114 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
Looking back now on that incredible 1950s decade and all the intersecting
events I have been describing, each of which seemed at first sight to be about its
own separate little errand but then chanced upon these others on a large, open
space such as is used to hold a big market once in eight days and abandoned
again to a profound and watchful emptiness till another market­day — looking
back on all this, it does become easy to indulge a temptation to see History as
mindful, purposeful; and to see the design behind this particular summons and
rendezvous as the signal at long last to end Europe’s imposition of a deroga­
tory narrative upon Africa, a narrative designed to call African humanity into
question.
As we have seen, Captain John Lok’s voyage to West Africa in 1561 provided
an early model of what would become a powerful and enduring tradition. One of
his men had described the Negroes as “a people of beastly living, without a God,
laws, religion.”5 Three hundred and fifty years later we find that this model, like
the Energizer Bunny, is still running strong, beating away on its tin drum. “Unhu­
man” was how Joyce Cary, in the early part of our own century, saw his African
dancers. One generation before him, Joseph Conrad had created a memorable
actor/narrator who could be greatly troubled by the mere thought of his Africans
being human, like himself: “Well, you know, that was the worst of it — this suspi­
cion of their not being inhuman.”6

10

Questions
1. What did Chinua Achebe learn from Mister Johnson?
2. According to Achebe, what are the three reasons for becoming a writer? Which one
do you think is most important? Why?
3. In paragraph 3, Achebe analyzes the sources of Joyce Cary’s impressions of Africa.
What are they? Achebe says in paragraph 3 that “a good writer might outgrow
[the] influences” of prejudice. Do you agree? Explain your response.
4. How does Achebe’s attitude toward The Africa That Never Was differ from his atti­
tude toward the contemporaneous West Africa?
5. Among the books he lists in paragraph 9, Achebe includes one of his own, Things
Fall Apart. Achebe took the title from a line in a poem by the Irish poet W. B. Yeats.
Explain the significance of this.
6. Read paragraph 10 carefully, noting that it is one sentence. What statement does
Achebe make there about the “derogatory narrative”? Paraphrase his thesis.

5Hammond and Jablow, p. 20.
6Joseph Conrad, Heart of Darkness (New York: W. W. Norton, 1988), p. 37.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1114

6/18/12 3:14 PM

CONveRSATiON 1115

8. Christiansted: Official Map and Guide
National Park Service
The following U.S. National Park Service travel brochure for tourists in St.
Croix, virgin islands, discusses the history of the island’s capital, Christiansted.

Denmark was a latecomer in the race for colonies in the New World. Columbus’
voyages to the Caribbean gave Spain a monopoly in the region for well over a
century. But after the English planted a colony in the Lesser Antilles in 1624, the
French, the Dutch, and eventually Danes joined the scramble for empire. Seeking
islands on which to cultivate sugar as well as an outlet for trade, the Danish West
India & Guinea Company (a group of nobles and merchants chartered by the
Crown) took possession of St. Thomas in 1672 and its neighbor St. John in 1717.
Because neither island was well suited to agriculture, the company in 1733 pur­
chased St. Croix — a larger, flatter, and more fertile island, 40 miles south — from
France. Colonization of St. Croix began the next year, after troops put down a
slave revolt on St. John.
For their first settlement, the Danes chose a good harbor on the northeast
coast, the site of an earlier French village named Bassin. Their leader Frederick
Moth was a man of some vision. Among his accomplishments were a plan for a
new town, which he named Christiansted in honor of the reigning monarch,
King Christian VI, and a survey of the island into plantations of 150 acres, which
were offered at bargain prices to new settlers. The best land came under cultiva­
tion and dozens of sugar factories began operating. Population approached
10,000, of which nearly 9,000 were slaves imported from West Africa to work in
the fields.
Even with this growth St. Croix’s economy did not flourish. The planters
chaffed under the restrictive trading practices of the DWI&G Company. This
monopoly so burdened planters with regulations that they persuaded the king to
take over the islands in 1755. Crown administration coincided with the begin­
ning of a long period of growth for the cane sugar industry. St. Croix became the
capital of the “Danish Islands of America,” as they were then called, and royal
governors took up residence in Christiansted. For the next century and a half, the
town’s fortunes were tied to St. Croix’s sugar industry. Between 1760 and 1820 the
economy boomed. Population rose dramatically, in part because free­trade poli­
cies and neutrality attracted settlers from other islands — hence the prevalence of
English culture on this Danish island with a French name — and exports of sugar
and rum soared. Capital was available, sugar prices were high, labor cheap. Plant­
ers, merchants, and traders — most of them — reaped great profits, which were
reflected in the fine architecture of town and country. This golden age was, within
a few decades, eclipsed by the rise of the beet sugar industry in Europe and North
America. A drop in the price of cane sugar, an increase in planters’ debts, drought,
hurricanes, and the rising cost of labor after slavery was abolished in 1848 all

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1115

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1116 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS

(See insert for color version.)

contributed to economic decline. As the 19th century wore on, St. Croix became
little more than a marginal sugar producer, her era of fabulous wealth now a
thing of the past. When the United States purchased the Danish West Indies in
1917, it was for the islands’ strategic harbors, not their agriculture. The lovely
town of Christiansted is a link to the old way of life here, with all its elegance,
complexity, and contradiction.

Questions
1. The second paragraph concludes, “Population approached 10,000, of which nearly
9,000 were slaves imported from West Africa to work in the fields.” Consider the
diction in that sentence. What is the effect of the word imported? What is the effect
of calling those 9,000 people slaves rather than “people who had been enslaved”?
2. Paragraph 3 describes St. Croix as a “Danish island with a French name.” Find
out more about St. Croix, noting its distance from France and Denmark. What was
it about this island that attracted the interest of the French and the Danes?
3. Look carefully at the portrait of Christiansted by the Danish artist Theodore C.
Sabroe. What is the effect of the painting’s pastoral and idyllic images?

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1116

6/18/12 3:14 PM

CONveRSATiON 1117

4. Are there unintended ironies in the brochure? Identify any that you can find. What
does the text reveal about the attitude and purpose of the government department
that generated the brochure?

Making Connections
1. In “Shooting an Elephant,” George Orwell observes, “In a job like that you see
the dirty work of Empire at close quarters. The wretched prisoners huddling
in the stinking cages of the lock­ups, the grey, cowed faces of the long­term
convicts, the scarred buttocks of the men who had been flogged with bam­
boos — all these oppressed me with an intolerable sense of guilt” (para. 2). In
“The Wretched of the Earth,” Frantz Fanon writes, “When you examine at
close quarters the colonial context, it is evident that what parcels out the world
is to begin with the fact of belonging to or not belonging to a given race, a
given species” (para. 4). A reader cannot help noticing these writers’ common
subject and even common language. Compare the ways that Orwell and Fanon
respond to the wretched of the earth seen at close quarters.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1117

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1118 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
2. You have read Red Jacket’s defense of Native American religion in his response
to a Boston missionary society. Imagine what Red Jacket’s response might
have been to King Ferdinand’s letter if it had been addressed to him. Write a
paragraph of Red Jacket’s likely response.
3. A writer’s diction can reveal a great deal about his or her perspective and atti­
tude toward the subject. Consider the way that four writers in the Conversa­
tion — Christopher Columbus, King Ferdinand, Eavan Boland, and the author
of the Christiansted tourist brochure — use the word possession. For each of
the four selections, explain what the word means in context and how it reveals
the author’s attitudes. Then, recognizing the vast differences in periods repre­
sented, discuss the similarities among the four.
4. Imagine that George Orwell, Chinua Achebe, Eavan Boland, or Frantz Fanon
were to visit the Virgin Islands and come upon the Christiansted tourist bro­
chure. How might each writer react? How might each one respond? In the
voice of one of them, write a brief letter to the U.S. Department of the Interior,
explaining the writer’s view regarding the brochure.
5. Achebe’s essay concludes with the words of Marlow, the narrator of Joseph
Conrad’s famous novel, Heart of Darkness: “Well, you know, that was the worst
of it — this suspicion of their not being inhuman.” Which selections in the
Conversation address this “suspicion”? Explain how they do so.

Entering the Conversation
As you respond to the following prompts, support your argument with references to the
sources in this Conversation on colonialism. For help using sources, see Chapter 4.

1. Assume you want to teach an audience of middle school students about colo­
nialism. In words and sentences middle school students can understand, explain
what colonialism is, and discuss its effects in the modern world. Consider the
effects on the governing nations and on the people living in the colonies. Use
your knowledge of history and current events, and refer to at least two texts in
this Conversation on colonialism.
2. What factual information could someone glean about colonialism from the
texts in this chapter? Refer to all of the sources as you enumerate the facts.
3. Write an essay in which you discuss the individual’s struggle against the power
of the colonizer.
4. Dwight David Eisenhower, president of the United States from 1953 to 1961,
once said, “We are so proud of our guarantees of freedom in thought and

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1118

6/18/12 3:14 PM

STUdeNT WRiTiNG 1119

speech and worship, that, unconsciously, we are guilty of one of the greatest
errors that ignorance can make — we assume our standard of values is shared
by all other humans in the world.” Write an essay that evaluates the truth of
this statement. For evidence to support your position, refer specifically to the
selections in the Conversation.
5. George Orwell says of the imperialist, “He wears a mask, and his face grows to
fit it” (para. 7). Write an essay exploring the implications of this statement.
6. Having read the modern selections by George Orwell, Frantz Fanon, Eavan
Boland, the U.S. Department of the Interior, and Chinua Achebe, consider the
perspectives presented in the older selections from Christopher Columbus,
King Ferdinand, and Red Jacket. Examine the extent to which issues and atti­
tudes from these older pieces are still relevant in the modern pieces and in the
world today.

Student Writing
Synthesis: Responding to a Quotation
The following prompt invites the student to enter this chapter’s Conversation.
In “Shooting an Elephant” (p. 1100), George Orwell observes that “when the white
man turns tyrant it is his own freedom that he destroys,” and that this man “wears a
mask, and his face grows to fit it.” Consider the implications of Orwell’s observations
about human nature in political situations. Then write an essay in which you defend,
challenge, or qualify the paradoxes that Orwell presents. To support your argument,
refer to the selections in this chapter as well as to your knowledge of history and cur­
rent events.

Consider this essay by Sarah Berlinger, an eleventh­grade student, and ana­
lyze the rhetorical strategies that she employs.

The Paradox of Power
Sarah Berlinger
The archetypal tyrant rules his empire from behind the closed walls of a
sumptuous palace, meting out unilateral pronouncements with a heavy, jewel-encrusted
hand. Yet beneath the gaudy façade, the expectations of his people and the reputation
he must uphold shackle him to conformity. In his 1936 essay “Shooting an Elephant,”
George Orwell articulates this paradox: “When the white man turns tyrant it is his
own freedom that he destroys. . . . He wears a mask, and his face grows to fit it.” As
a policeman in Burma, Orwell was the closest link that the townspeople had to an
authority figure. As a result, they brought him under their will and expected him to

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1119

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1120 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
ward off any dangers. An elephant once threatened the safety of the village. The
townspeople wanted Orwell to kill the elephant — against his own wishes. In reality, the
powerful and absolute possess the least amount of control, as they have no choice but to
do everything possible to hold on to their dominion; ultimately, the authority lies in the
calloused hands of the common man.
Imperialism counterintuitively empowers the oppressed; in the end, the people
emerge victorious, while the imperialists remain trapped by their follies. The definition
of tyranny can extend to any situation in which one government controls a separate
people. In this sense, imperialism and tyranny are synonymous — yet by overpowering
another group, tyrants unwittingly surrender their freedom, bound to their role as
oppressor, much as their new subjects are bound to them. The most familiar example
of the imperialistic paradox within our own history can be found in the American
Revolution. The Stamp Act was the tipping point in the colonists’ tolerance of British
rule. After this, organized resistance movements sprang up and gained both support and
momentum. The subjugated retain the power of rebellion, masters of their own future,
whereas those in charge have no choice but to fruitlessly follow the mission to which
they have condemned themselves — or risk losing face. King George III had no option
but to retaliate against his subjects, which served only to further fuel their fury. His
reputation and the expectations of his subjects forced the king to reject the Olive Branch
Petition, the colonists’ last attempt for a peaceful resolution. Too deeply involved, the
king had to barrel blindly along his one-way path, dooming himself and his country to
failure. Imperialism binds oppressors to precedent and conformity much more tightly
than rulers can bind their subjects to them.
Similarly, when a government professes its complete superiority, the regime
goads the rest of the world to prove it wrong; often, the world does just that. King
Ferdinand of Spain sent a letter with the conquistadors on their voyages to the New
World. The king demanded that the natives “acknowledge the Church as the ruler and
superior of the whole world.” He warned that if they
do not do this and maliciously make delay in it, I certify to you that, with the help
of God, we shall powerfully enter into your country, and shall make war against
you in all ways and manners that we can, and shall subject you to the yoke and
obedience of the Church and of their highnesses; we shall take you, and your
wives, and your children, and shall make slaves of them.
The list of enumerable threats incited the natives to resist. Upon their arrival,
however, the Spanish were forced to carry out what they had promised. Yet, as history
can attest, the Spanish no longer control the Carribean, nor any other former colonies in
Central and South America. Political might engenders greed and corruption, yet it also
encourages the common man to rebel — when he does so, he dooms the tyrant’s rule: the
determination of many usually overpowers the greed of a few.
In contrast to an imperialistic society, only in a governmental system where a
Big Brother authority is absent does Orwell’s power paradox fade into the background:

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1120

5

6/18/12 3:14 PM

STUdeNT WRiTiNG 1121

a government President Abraham Lincoln proclaimed in the Gettysburg Address as a
“government of the people, by the people” that “shall not perish from this earth.” Henry
David Thoreau, an American author and philosopher, states in “On the Duty of Civil
Disobedience” that a government “is only the mode which the people have chosen to
execute their will.” People, however, can corrupt and be corrupted. The government itself
“is equally liable to be abused and perverted before the people can act through it.” Act
they will, though, for as Thoreau observed during the Mexican-American War, “the
people would not have consented to this measure.” For this reason, in order to hinder
a power-hungry tyrant from taking over, it is advantageous to weaken a government’s
authority from the beginning by placing the might in the hands of the many, instead
of entrusting it to the whims of a few. In this way, one person cannot subsume all the
power, tethering himself to his own precarious might. As Thoreau proclaims, “That
government is best which governs least. . . . For government is an expedient by which
men would fain succeed in letting one another alone; and . . . when it is most expedient,
the governed are most let alone by it.” This form of authority ensures that Orwell’s
political paradoxes — the inseparable relationship between power and weakness —
cannot develop to stifle the advancement of individual societies.
However, despite all these preventative measures that attempt to thwart a
political power imbalance, when one country declares war on another, Orwell’s paradox
eventually surfaces. Countries enter war for a variety of reasons. Often, however, they do
so out of self-interest: territorial expansion, monetary gain, or trade development and
protection. In short, greed — however nobly disguised — usually prompts war. In much
the same way that imperialism represses the independence of colonists, an entire
country loses its freedom when it enters into combat. This is because in a war, countries
become tyrants, concentrating power in the hands of the few — the government — and
restricting it from the many — the world. Even though a country may dominate the
globe, its strength impedes the freedom of its citizens. John Adams’s Alien and Sedition
Acts, the 1917 Espionage Act, and the 1944 Supreme Court decision Korematsu v. United
States all proclaimed that in times of war the government could limit the average
citizen’s civil liberties, overriding existing democratic principles. Moreover, even though
the country has dominance, and a person within it retains the ability to choose, the
impetus of going to war binds many emotionally and physically. Tim O’Brien wrote about
such a situation in The Things They Carried, a fictionalized account of his own
experiences in Vietnam. In one scene, O’Brien receives a draft notice during the Vietnam
War era; morally lost and confused, he runs away toward the Canadian border. O’Brien
laments: “All those eyes on me — the town, the whole universe — and I couldn’t risk the
embarrassment. . . . I couldn’t endure the mockery, or the disgrace, or the patriotic
ridicule.” Because of this he “submitted. . . . [He] would go to the war — [he] would kill
and maybe die — because [he] was embarrassed not to.” Even though he was less than
twenty yards from freedom and the border, O’Brien could not leave because the force of
war held him in place. War suppresses the freedom of the nation and its citizens, rather
than expanding it.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1121

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1122 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
Furthermore, governments and their people each wear Orwell’s “mask” during
times of war. Armed conflict, both a by-product and a cause of Orwell’s paradox, causes a
state to “[seek] to destroy its own culture.” This idea is mirrored in “The Destruction of
Culture,” in War Is a Force That Gives Us Meaning, written by Chris Hedges, a contemporary
American writer and war correspondent specializing in the socio-political environments
of the United States and the Middle East. Hedges explains that “only when this destruction
has been completed” can the government “begin to exterminate the culture of its
opponents.” The regime destroys “authentic culture — that which allows us to question
and examine ourselves and our society” — and replaces it “with a warped version of
reality” where “[t]he enemy is dehumanized” and “[a]ll is dedicated to promoting and
glorifying the myth, the nation, the cause.” These myths cause us to “doubt our own
perceptions.” The “mask” then arises: people are transformed into what the government
wants them to resemble and to think. Hedges points out the horrific results of this
practice: “[w]hen the visible and tangible symbols of one’s past are destroyed or denied,
the past can be recreated to fit the myth.” In wartime, all forms of government
brainwash their respective citizens into believing the “mask” and “myth” that will
further promote the war — and the unilateral desires of the country. Hedges describes
how on a trip to a war museum in Vienna, he couldn’t find a single room dedicated to
World War II. Asking around, he discovered that in Austria World War II might as well
have not existed — the “mask” of society had wiped the war from the collective
consciousness of the country’s citizenry. History itself has disparate interpretations
based on which side of the war a country has pledged its allegiance. One Serbian
textbook describes Gavrilo Princip, a Bosnian Serb who assassinated Archduke Franz
Ferdinand, as a “hero and a poet.” A Croatian textbook, however, castigates him as an
“assassin trained and instructed by the Serbs to commit this act of terrorism,” whose
actions sparked the onset of World War I. Similarly, Jamaica Kincaid reflects Hedges’s and
Orwell’s ideas in “On Seeing England for the First Time,” an essay in which she examines
her life growing up in colonized British Antigua. Kincaid comments that colonization, in
some cases, is a result of war. As such, she had “long ago been conquered” — forced to
believe in England’s superiority, and her inferiority, because she “was not from it.” Her
whole country wore a “mask,” throwing away their culture, cloaking themselves in all
things “Made in England.” These “masks” divide the world across wartime alliance lines,
cementing the hatreds of opposing sides during times of peace and colonization. The
antagonistic views that arise irrevocably alter the entire globe’s history, with no two
groups agreeing on the same series of events. History, one of the only definite aspects
of time on this planet, is rendered indefinable and inconstant because of this process,
rewritten to fit the needs of each society. Whole communities wear a “mask,” wishing to
conform to the “myths” of their country preceding, during, and following times of war.
Orwell’s lens redefines power as a distortion of truth.
Excessive power consumption makes a person — or a government — considerably
weakened and restricted; might and politics are extremely corrosive to the freedom and

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1122

6/18/12 3:14 PM

STUdeNT WRiTiNG 1123

advancement of society. In times of war, all governments descend into tyranny and wear
respective Orwellian “masks.” These render a united community shattered. This social
phenomenon holds true in contemporary times. A vast number of Americans view the
U.S. occupation of Iraq in a positive light, thinking themselves liberators of the Iraqi
people and crusaders of democracy. However, the majority of Iraqis think of Americans
not as liberators, but as oppressors. Similarly, Libyan dictator Muammar el Qaddafi
imposed a brutal regime on his people for forty-two years. Eventually, his subjects
revolted against him. They gained both national and international support: world
leaders across the globe called for Qaddafi’s resignation. Nevertheless, the Libyan leader
stubbornly and fruitlessly clung to his power, in the same restrictive way that his power
clung to him, binding him to his demise. Our world is drunk on and dripping in power.
Even in the alleged democratic nations, democracy has transformed into something
ostensible: existing governmental regimes endanger and circumvent core principles of
egalitarianism; economic collapse threatens the global markets; citizen unrest is both
pervasive and destabilizing. The current fragile state of the world is a result of an
unequal distribution of power and is a plea for greater transparency, truth, change, and
equality in government and politics. Ironically, only the common man, whose vision
remains unobstructed by tyrannical tendencies, can break this cycle of degeneracy and
distorted reality that increasingly characterizes the world today.

Questions
1. What is Sarah’s central position in this essay? Paraphrase her thesis in a sentence
or two.
2. How does she establish ethos?
3. Discuss two appeals to pathos and two to logos in the essay. How do these appeals
contribute to the effectiveness of the essay?
4. Identify and explain the effects of five rhetorical strategies in this student essay,
including allusion, organization, vivid imagery, and figurative language.
5. Discuss Sarah’s use of sources. Does she use them effectively? Would using fewer
have weakened or strengthened her argument? Explain your response.
6. Sarah supplements her essay with historical information drawn from outside the
sources. How effectively does this information support her position and contrib­
ute to the essay as a whole?
7. If you were Sarah’s editor, what might you suggest for revision? Would you have
any suggestions regarding organization? Would you ask her to develop any points
further? Would you suggest cutting anything from the essay so as to shorten it?
Explain your suggestions with specific reference to the text of the essay.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1123

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1124 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS

Grammar as Rhetoric and Style
Subordination in the Complex Sentence
One way that writers build longer sentences that are logical and clear is through
subordination. Subordination is the use of a subordinating conjunction to make
the meaning of one clause dependent on another clause. Although there are dif­
ferent types of subordination, involving both clauses and phrases, we are focusing
here on the complex sentence — that is, a sentence formed by an independent
clause and a dependent clause that begins with a subordinating conjunction.
Just because a clause is subordinate does not mean that what it says is unim­
portant. The ideas in both clauses contribute to the meaning of the sentence. It is
the job of subordination to tell us how those ideas are related. This ability to con­
nect ideas is the reason subordination is so effective; by using because, you tell
your reader that one thing causes another; by using when, you indicate that two
things are related chronologically. Thus, you can show the logical relationships in
a rather lengthy sentence so that the length in no way impedes clarity.
Note the relationship between the dependent and independent clauses in the
following sentence:
When a nimble Burman tripped me up on the football field and the referee
(another Burman) looked the other way, the crowd yelled with hideous
laughter.
— George Orwell

In this example, Orwell uses the subordinate clause to establish the chronology of
events that lead to the main action of the sentence — that is, his being laughed at
by the crowd.
Subordinating conjunctions (shown in blue below) can be classified by the
relationships they indicate:
Contrast or Concession: although, even though, though, while, whereas
Although the book was not entirely free of the stereotypes of contemporary
British colonial writing, it was in some ways remarkably advanced for its
time . . .
— Chinua Achebe

Cause and Effect or Reason: because, since, so that
Because neither island was well suited to agriculture, the company in 1733
purchased St. Croix — a larger, flatter, and more fertile island, 40 miles
south — from France.
— National Park Service

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1124

6/18/12 3:14 PM

GRAmmAR AS RheTORiC ANd STYle 1125

Condition: if, once, unless, should
If God helps and I get to be released, I hope you accept my invitation to be
my guest in the holy city of peace, Jerusalem.
— Laura Blumenfeld

Time: when, whenever, after, before, as, once, since, while, until
When the United States purchased the Danish West Indies in 1917, it was
for the islands’ strategic harbors, not their agriculture.
— National Park Service

Until there is a common vocabulary and a shared historical memory there
is no peace in any society, only an absence of war.
— Chris Hedges

Punctuation
Correct punctuation adds clarity to longer sentences. The rule of thumb is: use a
comma to set off a subordinate clause that opens a sentence unless that sentence
is very short. Notice that each of the opening clauses in the preceding examples
from Achebe, Blumenfeld, and the National Park Service is set off with a comma.
Note that the comma comes not after the subordinating conjunction but after
the entire clause. If you read the examples aloud, you’ll probably find yourself
naturally pausing at the end of the subordinate clause. Of course, these rules are
not rigid; they are matters of style. Notice that Chris Hedges in the last example
above has decided not to interrupt the rhythm of the sentence with the pause of
a comma.
When the subordinate clause follows the independent clause, it gets a little
trickier. Most of the time there is no comma at all because the dependent clause
is necessary to the meaning of the sentence; this is called a restrictive clause. The
sentence you just read is an example: the clause “because the dependent clause is
necessary . . .” is essential to the meaning of the sentence. In some cases, however,
the dependent clause adds information but is not necessary to the meaning of the
sentence. For example:
It is left only to those on the margins to keep the flame of introspection alive, although
the destruction of culture is often so great that full recovery is impossible.
— Chris Hedges

Here the subordinate clause is not essential to the meaning of the sentence, so it is
set off with a comma; this is called a nonrestrictive clause. This all may sound a bit
familiar to you. You may remember that in the discussion of appositives in Chap­
ter 5 (p. 269) we also talked about using commas with essential and non­essential

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1125

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1126 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
elements. Here the rule is the same: essential information must be included and
thus should not be set off with a comma; non­essential information that can be
excluded should be set off with a comma.
Keep in mind that a dependent clause cannot stand alone. When you’re using
a dependent clause, be careful not to end up with a sentence fragment — that is, a
dependent clause followed by a period. To correct a sentence fragment, simply
attach it to the independent clause.

Rhetorical and Stylistic Strategy
One strategy is to use subordination to blend short sentences into more graceful,
longer sentences. Consider the following two sentences:
It was still August. The air already had the smell of October, football season, piles of
yellow­red leaves, everything crisp and clean.

Both are complete sentences. As readers, we understand them easily. The relation­
ship between the two is temporal. But consider the difference with the addition
of a subordinating conjunction:
Though it was still August, the air already had the smell of October, football season,
piles of yellow­red leaves, everything crisp and clean.
— Tim O’Brien

Here the conjunction though indicates a contrast between the summer months
and the smell of the air. Combining the two short sentences does not make the
resulting sentence more difficult to understand; on the contrary, the longer sen­
tence is easier to understand because it leaves nothing to chance.
A writer has to determine which clause should be dependent and which
should be independent in a complex sentence. Although one clause is just as
important as the other, the independent clause usually carries the most force, so
you should put the idea you want to emphasize in an independent clause. Some­
times, the choice is obvious because the relationship is chronological or cause
and effect, but other times either clause could be independent. Consider the fol­
lowing example:
Although my classmates and I would not have known it at the time, the London
publishing house of Methuen had brought out the year before, in 1951, a little book
titled simply West Africa.
— Chinua Achebe

What would the difference in effect have been if Achebe had written the following?
Although the London publishing house of Methuen had brought out the year before,
in 1951, a little book titled simply West Africa, my classmates and I would not have
known it at the time.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1126

6/18/12 3:14 PM

GRAmmAR AS RheTORiC ANd STYle 1127

Both examples indicate that the relationship between the two clauses is one of
contrast. But the second example puts the emphasis on Achebe and his classmates
when, in fact, the publication of West Africa is the main event in the sentence and
deserves more emphasis; the publication of the book affected Achebe and his
friends, not vice versa.
Where to place the subordinate clause is another choice a writer must make.
For instance, examine once again the dependent clause in the following example:
Though it was still August, the air already had the smell of October, football season,
piles of yellow­red leaves, everything crisp and clean.
— Tim O’Brien

The dependent clause (“Though it was still August”) could have been put at the
end of the sentence or even in the middle. Why do you think O’Brien placed it at
the beginning? Perhaps placing the dependent clause in the middle of all those
descriptive phrases would have muddled the sentence, making it difficult to deci­
pher. As for putting it at the end, consider this example:
The air already had the smell of October, football season, piles of yellow­red leaves,
everything crisp and clean, though it was still August.

The effect is different. In the original sentence, O’Brien signals at the outset that
something is unusual: “Though it was still August.” However, if this clause appears
at the end of the sentence, it gets buried. By the time we’ve read about the smell
of things associated with autumn, the fact that “it was still August” seems beside
the point.

• ExERCiSE 1 •
Combine each of the following pairs of sentences into one sentence, using
subordination. You might shift the order of the sentences, and in some cases
you may have to change the wording slightly. Be sure to punctuate correctly.
1. The investigators have gathered and analyzed all the evidence. We
may expect a full report.
2. Tom had listened to the music of Bruce Springsteen for years. He
had no idea a live performance could be so exciting.
3. The team has suffered its share of injuries this year. It could have
improved its performance by giving Flynn more time on the field.
4. We will not be able to resolve this situation amicably. We must be
willing to leave our prejudices at the door.
5. The crime rate has escalated near the mall. Many people have
stopped shopping at the mall.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1127

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1128 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
6. Rose Henderson has the qualifications to become a first­rate senator.
Most of us knew she did not have a good chance to be elected. We
worked hard on her campaign.
7. Lan Cao is a law professor at the College of William and Mary. She is
also the author of the novel Monkey Bridge.
8. I’m not feeling well today. I plan to leave the office early.
9. Apple offered a free iPod with every MacBook. Sales of the MacBook
improved dramatically.
10. The affluent population of Dallas, Texas, is increasing steadily. Hous­
ing prices are rising beyond what someone with a middle­class salary
can afford.
11. We all realize the necessity for increased security. We need to protect
our civil liberties.
12. Thousands of vacationers travel to our national parks in search of
solitude and fresh air. Other people prefer the excitement of casinos
and amusement parks.

• ExERCiSE 2 •
Identify each subordinate clause in the following sentences, and explain its
effect. All are direct quotations from the readings in this chapter.
1. When I saw England for the first time, I was a child in school sitting
at a desk.
— Jamaica Kincaid
2. If now as I speak of all this I give the impression of someone on the
outside looking in, nose pressed up against a glass window, that is
wrong.
— Jamaica Kincaid
3. Although the old man never confronted me about it, there was one
occasion when he came close to forcing the whole thing out into the
open.
— Tim O’Brien
4. Once people are dead, you can’t make them undead.
— Tim O’Brien
5. If he charged, I could shoot; if he took no notice of me, it would be
safe to leave him until the mahout came back. — George Orwell
6. I perceived in this moment that when the white man turns tyrant it
is his own freedom that he destroys.
— George Orwell
7. As the 19th century wore on, St. Croix became little more than a
marginal sugar producer . . .
— National Park Service
8. It is true, for there is no native who does not dream at least once a
day of setting himself up in the settler’s place.
— Frantz Fanon

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1128

6/18/12 3:14 PM

GRAmmAR AS RheTORiC ANd STYle 1129

9. If I have unjustly wrestled a plank from a drowning man, I must
restore it to him though I drown myself. — Henry David Thoreau
10. A minority is powerless while it conforms to the majority.
— Henry David Thoreau
11. There will never be a really free and enlightened State, until the State
comes to recognize the individual as a higher and independent
power, from which all its own power and authority are derived, and
treats him accordingly.
— Henry David Thoreau

• ExERCiSE 3 •
Analyze the use of subordinate clauses in the following passages. Pay particular attention to how the writer varies sentence patterns.
1. I suppose we can all differ as to the exact point where good writing
becomes overwhelmed by racial cliché. But overwhelmed or under­
mined, literature is always badly served when an author’s artistic insight
yields place to stereotype and malice. And it becomes doubly offensive
when such a work is arrogantly proffered to you as your story. Some
people may wonder if, perhaps, we were not too touchy, if we were not
oversensitive. We really were not. And I have a somewhat unusual rea­
son for saying so.
— Chinua Achebe
2. All this was perplexing and upsetting. For at that time I had already made
up my mind that imperialism was an evil thing and the sooner I chucked
up my job and got out of it the better. Theoretically — and secretly, of
course — I was all for the Burmese and all against their oppressors, the
British. . . . Feelings like these are the normal by­products of imperial­
ism; ask any Anglo­Indian official, if you can catch him off duty. . . .
Afterwards, of course, there were endless discussions about the
shooting of the elephant. The owner was furious, but he was only an
Indian and could do nothing. Besides, legally I had done the right thing,
for a mad elephant has to be killed, like a mad dog, if its owner fails to
control it. Among the Europeans opinion was divided. The older men
said I was right, the younger men said it was a damn shame to shoot an
elephant for killing a coolie, because an elephant was worth more than
any damn Coringhee coolie. And afterwards I was very glad that the
coolie had been killed; it put me legally in the right and it gave me a suf­
ficient pretext for shooting the elephant. I often wondered whether any
of the others grasped that I had done it solely to avoid looking a fool.
— George Orwell
3. In wartime the state seeks to destroy its own culture. It is only when this
destruction has been completed that the state can begin to exterminate

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1129

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1130 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
the culture of its opponents. In times of conflict authentic culture is
subversive. As the cause championed by the state comes to define
national identity, as the myth of war entices a nation to glory and sac­
rifice, those who question the value of the cause and the veracity of the
myths are branded internal enemies.
— Chris Hedges
4. A minority is powerless while it conforms to the majority; it is not even
a minority then; but it is irresistible when it clogs by its whole weight.
If the alternative is to keep all just men in prison, or give up war and
slavery, the State will not hesitate which to choose. If a thousand men
were not to pay their tax­bills this year, that would not be a violent and
bloody measure, as it would be to pay them, and enable the State to
commit violence and shed innocent blood. This is, in fact, the defini­
tion of a peaceable revolution, if any such is possible. If the tax­gatherer,
or any other public officer, asks me, as one has done, “But what shall I
do?” my answer is, “If you really wish to do anything, resign your office.”
When the subject has refused allegiance and the officer has resigned
his office, then the revolution is accomplished.
— Henry David Thoreau

• ExERCiSE 4 •
In a national magazine that features writing on cultural and political subjects, find a passage that is effective in its use of subordination. Discuss how
each subordinate clause works to support the speaker’s rhetorical purpose.

Suggestions for Writing
Politics
Now that you have examined a number of texts that focus on politics, explore one
dimension of this topic by synthesizing your own ideas and the readings. You
might want to do more research or use readings from other classes as you discuss
and prepare for the following projects.
1. Read the following section from a translation of an ancient text, the Tao Te
Ching by Lao­tzu, a Chinese philosopher who lived in the sixth century b.c.
Then write an essay in which you support or refute Lao­tzu’s claims about
political leadership. Use your knowledge of history and current events, and
refer to the texts in this chapter to support your argument.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1130

6/18/12 3:14 PM

Suggestions for Writing 1131

When the Master governs, the people
are hardly aware that he exists.
Next best is a leader who is loved.
Next, one who is feared.
The worst is one who is despised.
If you don’t trust the people,
you make them untrustworthy.
The Master doesn’t talk, he acts.
When his work is done,
the people say, “Amazing:
we did it, all by ourselves!”

2. Henry David Thoreau’s objections to slavery and to what he saw as unjustified war prompted the writing of the essay “On the Duty of Civil Disobedience” (p. 1016), which strongly influenced both Gandhi and Martin Luther
King Jr. as they opposed injustice. In “On the Rainy River” (p. 1074), Tim
O’Brien considers civil disobedience as a response to what he also considers
an unjust war. Reflect on the state of our society today, and write an essay in
which you apply Thoreau’s ideas to our time. Is civil disobedience an appropriate response to perceived injustice today? Why or why not?
3. Assuming the voice of one of the contemporary writers in this chapter, or in
your own informed voice, write a letter to one of the earlier writers (for
example, Red Jacket, Henry David Thoreau, Abraham Lincoln, Virginia
Woolf) about political issues. In your letter, refer to current political problems that would interest the earlier writer. Your letter may take the form of a
request for information or guidance, a complaint or polemic defending or
challenging the writer’s views, or a complimentary letter telling the writer
how prescient he or she was.
4. In paragraph 3 of “Shooting an Elephant” (p. 1101), George Orwell says that
the incident of shooting the elephant “in a roundabout way was enlightening. It was a tiny incident in itself, but it gave me a better glimpse than I had
had before of the real nature of imperialism — ​the real motives for which
despotic governments act.” He implies that governments act from the same
petty impulses that drive human beings in response to pressures. Write an
essay in which you support, refute, or qualify Orwell’s position concerning
despotic governments. Use evidence from your knowledge of history and
from other readings in this chapter to support your position.
5. Consider the importance of appealing to ethos in political writing. To take
four examples, Virginia Woolf, Chris Hedges, Laura Blumenfeld, and Tim
O’Brien all write from personal experience. How important is that experience

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1131

6/20/12 10:09 AM

1132 ChAPTeR 13 • POliTiCS
to the relationships established among the speaker, the text, and the reader, as
illustrated by Aristotle’s rhetorical triangle? Would ethos be equally served
if these four writers had not personally experienced what they report but
instead had based their writings on research or on the accounts of others?
Referring to at least two of the texts, write an argument about the importance
of personal experience as support for an argument.
6. Write a thoughtful essay on the relationship between the citizen and the state
in our time. Refer to at least three of the texts in this chapter to support your
position.
7. About the legacy of George Orwell, political commentator Christopher
Hitchens writes:
His importance to the century just past, and therefore his status as a figure in his­
tory as well as literature, derives from the extraordinary salience of the subjects he
“took on,” and stayed with, and never abandoned. As a consequence, we com­
monly use the term “Orwellian” in one of two ways. To describe a state of affairs
as “Orwellian” is to imply crushing tyranny and fear and conformism. To describe
a piece of writing as “Orwellian” is to recognize that human resistance to these
terrors is unquenchable.

Write an essay in which you apply Hitchens’s second definition of Orwellian
to “Shooting an Elephant” and to at least two other texts in this chapter.
8. From one of the texts in the chapter (a piece by Kincaid, Thoreau, Blumen­
feld, Vowell, O’Brien, or Orwell, for instance), select a narrative section. Then
create a graphic novelization of the events in the passage you select, writing
captions and dialogue to accompany the illustrations.
9. Compare Kincaid’s characterization of Christopher Columbus in “On See­
ing England for the First Time” (para. 10) with the Christopher Columbus
revealed in his letter to the Spanish monarchy.
10. This chapter, which includes an image of Guernica along with the magazine
covers from Harper’s and the New Yorker, “The Veil” from Persepolis, and the
Christiansted travel brochure, is particularly rich in visual material. Write an
essay that explains how the visual texts have helped you to gain an under­
standing of political issues raised in this chapter. Refer to at least three of the
visual selections as well as to other texts in the chapter.
11. Go online and watch the TED Talk by Nigerian writer Chimamanda Adiche
called “The Danger of a Single Story.” Then write an essay about the danger
of the “single story” as Adiche characterizes it. In your essay, refer to several
of the pieces in this chapter for support and illustration.
12. Each of the following statements addresses the nature of politics. Select one
that interests you, and write an essay defending or challenging its assertion.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1132

6/18/12 3:14 PM

SUGGeSTiONS fOR WRiTiNG 1133

To support your argument, refer to your knowledge of history and to the
selections in this chapter.
No cause is left but the most ancient of all, the one, in fact, that from the begin­
ning of our history has determined the very existence of politics, the cause of
freedom versus tyranny.
— Hannah Arendt
We are not afraid to entrust the American people with unpleasant facts, foreign
ideas, alien philosophies, and competitive values. For a nation that is afraid to let
its people judge the truth and falsehood in an open market is a nation that is
afraid of its people.
— John F. Kennedy
In our age there is no such thing as “keeping out of politics.” All issues are political
issues, and politics itself is a mass of lies, evasions, folly, hatred and schizophrenia.
— George Orwell
Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere. — Martin Luther King Jr.
Nobody made a greater mistake than he who did nothing because he could do
only a little.
— Edmund Burke
Do not put such unlimited power into the hands of husbands. Remember all men
would be tyrants if they could.
— Abigail Adams
What we think, or what we know, or what we believe is, in the end, of little conse­
quence. The only consequence is what we do.
— John Ruskin
If we are to survive, we are to have ideas, vision, and courage. These things are
rarely produced by communities. Everything that matters in our intellectual and
moral life begins with an individual confronting his own mind and conscience in
a room by himself.
— Arthur Schlesinger Jr.

13_SHE_67650_Ch13_1005_1134.indd 1133

6/18/12 3:14 PM

this page left intentionally blank

00_SHE_67650_FM_i_xxxvi.indd 36

6/18/12 3:09 PM

MLA Guidelines for
a List of Works Cited
Print Resources
1. A Book with One Author
A book with one author serves as a general model for most MLA citations. Include
author, title, city of publication, publisher, date of publication, and medium.
Beavan, Colin. No Impact Man. New York: Farrar, 2009. Print.

2. A Book with Multiple Authors
Kasarda, John D., and Greg Lindsay. Aerotropolis: The Way We’ll Live Next. New York:
Farrar, 2011. Print.

3. Two or More Works by the Same Author
Multiple entries should be arranged alphabetically by title. The author’s name
appears at the beginning of the first entry but is replaced by three hyphens and a
period in all subsequent entries.
Gladwell, Malcolm. Outliers: The Story of Success. New York: Little, Brown, 2008. Print.
---. What the Dog Saw, and Other Adventures. New York: Little, Brown, 2009. Print.

4. Author and Editor Both Named
Vidal, Gore. The Selected Essays of Gore Vidal. Ed. Jay Parini. New York: Vintage,
2009. Print.

Alternatively, to cite the editor’s contribution, start with the editor’s name.
Parini, Jay, ed. The Selected Essays of Gore Vidal. By Gore Vidal. New York: Vintage,
2009. Print.

5. Anthology
Oates, Joyce Carol, ed. Telling Stories: An Anthology for Writers. New York: Norton,
1997. Print.

1135

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1135

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1136

MLA GuideLines for A List of Works Cited

6. Translation
Wiesel, Elie. Night. Trans. Marion Wiesel. New York: Hill-Farrar, 2006. Print.

7. Entry in a Reference Work
Because most reference works are alphabetized, you should omit page numbers.
Lounsberry, Barbara. “Joan Didion.” Encyclopedia of the Essay. Ed. Tracy Chandler.
Chicago: Fitzroy Dearborn, 1997. Print.

For a well-known encyclopedia, use only the edition and year of publication.
When an article is not attributed to an author, begin the entry with the article
title.
“Gilgamesh.” The Columbia Encyclopedia. 5th ed. 1993. Print.

8. Sacred Text
Unless a specific published edition is being cited, sacred texts should be omitted
from the Works Cited list.
The New Testament. Trans. Richmond Lattimore. New York: North Point-Farrar, 1997.
Print.

9. Article in a Journal
The title of the journal should be followed by the volume, issue, and year of the
journal’s publication.
de Botton, Alain. “Treasure Hunt.” Lapham’s Quarterly 4.2 (2011): 205–10. Print.

10. Article in a Magazine
In a weekly:
Menand, Louis. “The Unpolitical Animal: How Political Science Understands Voters.”
New Yorker 30 Aug. 2004: 92–96. Print.

In a monthly:
Baker, Kevin. “Barack Hoover Obama: The Best and the Brightest Blow It Again.”
Harper’s July 2009: 29–37. Print.

11. Article in a Newspaper
If you are citing a local paper that does not contain the city name in its title, add
the city name in brackets after the title.
Edge, John T. “Fast Food Even before Fast Food.” New York Times 30 Sept. 2009,
late ed.: D1+. Print.

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1136

6/18/12 3:14 PM

MLA GuideLines for A List of Works Cited

1137

12. Review
In a weekly:
Davis, Jordan. “Happy Thoughts!” Rev. of The Golden Age of Paraphernalia, by Kevin
Davies. Nation 23 Feb. 2009: 31–34. Print.

In a monthly:
Simpson, Mona. “Imperfect Union.” Rev. of Mrs. Woolf and the Servants, by Alison
Light. Atlantic Monthly Jan.–Feb. 2009: 93–101. Print.

Electronic Resources
13. Article from a Database Accessed through a Subscription Service
Apply the normal rules for citing a journal article, but follow this with the name
of the subscription service in italics, the medium used, and the date of access.
Morano, Michele. “Boy Eats World.” Fourth Genre: Explorations in Nonfiction 13.2
(2011): 31–35. Project MUSE. Web. 11 Nov. 2011.

14. Article in an Online Magazine
Follow the author name and article title with the name of the magazine in italics,
the organization hosting the Web page (usually found at the very bottom of the
site), the date published, the medium, and the date accessed. If there is no host or
sponsor of the site, write N.p., for “no publisher.”
Yoffe, Emily. “Full Metal Racket: Metal Detecting Is the World’s Worst Hobby.”
Slate. Washington Post. Newsweek Interactive, 25 Sept. 2009. Web. 30 Sept.
2009.

15. Article in an Online Newspaper
Sisario, Ben. “Record Stores: Out of Sight, Not Obsolete.” New York Times. New York
Times, 29 Sept. 2009. Web. 30 Sept. 2009.

16. Online Review
Stevens, Dana. “Catcher in the MRI.” Rev. of 50/50, dir. Adam Levine. Slate.
Washington Post, 30 Sept. 2011. Web. 8 Oct. 2011.

17. Entry in an Online Reference Work
“John Ruskin.” Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Encyclopædia Britannica, 2009.
Web. 5 Oct. 2009

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1137

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1138

MLA GuideLines for A List of Works Cited

18. Work from a Web Site
“Wallace Stevens (1879–1955).” Poetryfoundation.org. Poetry Foundation, 2009.
Web. 30 Sept. 2009.

19. Entire Web Site
Web site with editor:
Dutton, Dennis, ed. Arts and Letters Daily. Chronicle of Higher Education, 2009.
Web. 2 Oct. 2009.

Web site without editor:
Poets.org. Academy of American Poets, 2009. Web. 2 Oct. 2009.

For a personal Web site, use the following model:
Mendelson, Edward. Home page. Columbia U, 2009. Web. 2 Oct. 2009.

20. Entire Web Log (Blog)
If there is no host or sponsor of the site, write N.p., for “no publisher.”
Holbo, John, ed. The Valve. N.p., 2 Oct. 2009. Web. 2 Oct. 2009.

21. Entry in a Wiki
“Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood.” Wikipedia. Wikimedia Foundation, 1 Oct. 2009. Web.
2 Oct. 2009.

Other
22. Film, Video, or DVD
Follow the title with the director, notable performers, the distribution company,
the date of release, and the medium. For films viewed on the Web, follow this with
the name of the Web site used to view the film, the medium (Web), and the date
viewed. If citing the editor’s contribution, begin the entry with his or her name
before the title.
Viewed in theaters:
The Hurt Locker. Dir. Kathryn Bigelow. Summit, 2009. Film.

Viewed on DVD or videocassette (follow original release date with distributor
and release date of DVD or video):
Dead Poets Society. Dir. Peter Weir. Perf. Robin Williams. 1989. Buena Vista Home
Entertainment, 2006. DVD.

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1138

6/18/12 3:14 PM

MLA GuideLines for A List of Works Cited

1139

Viewed on the Web (use original distributor and release date):
Lynch, David, dir. The Elephant Man. Perf. Anthony Hopkins and John Hurt.
Paramount, 1980. Netflix. Web. 2 Oct. 2009.

23. Broadcast Interview
On the radio:
Gioia, Dana. Interview with Leonard Lopate. The Leonard Lopate Show. NPR. WNYC,
New York, 19 July 2004. Radio.

On the Web:
Gioia, Dana. Interview with Leonard Lopate. The Leonard Lopate Show. NPR.org. NPR,
19 July 2004. Web. 2 Oct. 2009.

24. Lecture or Speech
Viewed in person:
Kass, Leon. “Looking for an Honest Man: Reflections of an Unlicensed Humanist.”
Jefferson Lecture in the Humanities. NEH. Warner Theatre, Washington, D.C.
22 May 2009. Lecture.

Viewed on the Web:
Batuman, Elif. Lowell Humanities Series. Boston College. Boston College Front Row.
Trustees of Boston College, 13 Oct. 2010. Web. 2 Oct. 2011.

25. Podcast
“The Consequences to Come.” Moderator Robert Silvers. Participants Darryl Pinckney,
Ronald Dworkin, Joan Didion, and Mark Danner. New York Review of Books.
NYREV, Inc., 24 Sept. 2008. MP3 File.

26. Work of Art or Photograph
In a museum:
Hopper, Edward. Nighthawks. 1942. Oil on canvas. Art Institute, Chicago.

On the Web:
Thiebaud, Wayne. Three Machines. 1963. De Young Museum, San Francisco. Famsf.org.
Web. 2 Oct. 2009.

In print:
Clark, Edward. Navy CPO Graham Jackson Plays “Goin’ Home.” 1945. Life Gallery of
Photography. The Great LIFE Photographers. Eds. of Life. New York: Bulfinch,
2004. 78–79. Print.

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1139

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1140

MLA GuideLines for A List of Works Cited

27. Map or Chart
In print:
“U.S. Personal Savings Rate, 1929–1999.” Chart. Credit Card Nation: The
Consequences of America’s Addiction to Credit. By Robert D. Manning.
New York: Basic, 2000. 100. Print.

On the Web:
“1914 New Balkan States and Central Europe Map.” Map. National Geographic.
National Geographic Society, 2009. Web. 5 Oct. 2009.

28. Cartoon or Comic Strip
In print:
Vey, P. C. Cartoon. New Yorker 10 Nov. 2008: 54. Print.

On the Web:
Davis, Jim. “Garfield.” Comic strip. Garfield.com. Paws, 24 July 2001. Web.
2 Oct. 2009.

29. Advertisement
In print:
Rosetta Stone. Advertisement. Harper’s Aug. 2008: 21. Print.

On the Web:
Zurich. Advertisement. Wall Street Journal. Dow Jones, Inc., 2 Oct. 2009. Web.
2 Oct. 2009.

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1140

6/18/12 3:14 PM

Glossary

ad hominem Latin for “against the man,” this fallacy refers to the specific diversionary tactic of switching the argument from the issue at hand to the character of the other speaker. If you argue that a park in your community should not
be renovated because the person supporting it was arrested during a domestic
dispute, then you are guilty of ad hominem.
ad populum (bandwagon appeal) This fallacy occurs when evidence boils down
to “everybody’s doing it, so it must be a good thing to do.”
You should vote to elect Rachel Johnson — she has a strong lead in the polls.

Polling higher does not necessarily make Senator Johnson the “best” candidate,
only the most popular.
alliteration Repetition of the same sound beginning several words or syllables
in sequence.
[L]et us go forth to lead the land we love . . .
— John F. Kennedy

allusion Brief reference to a person, event, or place (real or fictitious) or to a
work of art.
Let both sides unite to heed in all corners of the earth the command of Isaiah . . .
— John F. Kennedy

analogy A comparison between two seemingly dissimilar things. Often, an
analogy uses something simple or familiar to explain something unfamiliar or
complex.
As birds have flight, our special gift is reason.
— Bill McKibben
If I have unjustly wrested a plank from a drowning man, I must restore it to him
though I drown myself. . . . But he that would save his life, in such a case, shall lose it.
This people must cease to hold slaves and to make war on Mexico, though it cost them
their existence as a people.
— Henry David Thoreau

1141

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1141

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1142

GLossAry

anaphora Repetition of a word or phrase at the beginning of successive phrases,
clauses, or lines.
. . . not as a call to bear arms, though arms we need — not as a call to battle, though
embattled we are . . .
— John F. Kennedy

anecdote A brief story used to illustrate a point or claim.
annotation The taking of notes directly on a text.
antimetabole Repetition of words in reverse order.
[A]sk not what your country can do for you — ask what you can do for your country.
— John F. Kennedy

antithesis Opposition, or contrast, of ideas or words in a parallel construction.
[W]e shall . . . support any friend, oppose any foe . . .
— John F. Kennedy

appeal to false authority This fallacy occurs when someone who has no expertise to speak on an issue is cited as an authority. A TV star, for instance, is
not a medical expert, though pharmaceutical advertisements often use celebrity endorsements.
According to former congressional leader Ari Miller, the Himalayas have an estimated
Yeti population of between 300 and 500 individuals.

archaic diction

Old-fashioned or outdated choice of words.

. . . beliefs for which our forebears fought . . .
— John F. Kennedy

argument A process of reasoned inquiry. A persuasive discourse resulting in a
coherent and considered movement from a claim to a conclusion.
Aristotelian triangle See rhetorical triangle.
assertion A statement that presents a claim or thesis.
assumption See warrant.
asyndeton Omission of conjunctions between coordinate phrases, clauses, or
words.
[W]e shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend,
oppose any foe to assure the survival and the success of liberty.
— John F. Kennedy

audience The listener, viewer, or reader of a text. Most texts are likely to have
multiple audiences.
Gehrig’s audience was his teammates and fans in the stadium that day, but it was also
the teams he played against, the fans listening on the radio, and posterity — us.

backing In the Toulmin model, backing consists of further assurances or data
without which the assumption lacks authority. For an example, see Toulmin
model.

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1142

6/18/12 3:14 PM

GLossAry

1143

bandwagon appeal See ad populum fallacy.
begging the question A fallacy in which a claim is based on evidence or support
that is in doubt. It “begs” a question whether the support itself is sound.
Giving students easy access to a wealth of facts and resources online allows them to
develop critical thinking skills.

circular reasoning A fallacy in which the argument repeats the claim as a way to
provide evidence.
You can’t give me a C; I’m an A student!

claim Also called an assertion or proposition, a claim states the argument’s
main idea or position. A claim differs from a topic or subject in that a claim has
to be arguable.
claim of fact A claim of fact asserts that something is true or not true.
The number of suicides and homicides committed by teenagers, most often young men,
has exploded in the last three decades . . .
— Anna Quindlen

claim of policy A claim of policy proposes a change.
Yet one solution continues to elude us, and that is ending the ignorance about mental
health, and moving it from the margins of care and into the mainstream where it
belongs.
— Anna Quindlen

claim of value A claim of value argues that something is good or bad, right or
wrong.
There’s a plague on all our houses, and since it doesn’t announce itself with lumps or
spots or protest marches, it has gone unremarked in the quiet suburbs and busy cities
where it has been laying waste.
— Anna Quindlen

classical oration, the Five-part argument structure used by classical rhetoricians. The five parts are:
introduction (exordium) Introduces the reader to the subject under discussion.
narration (narratio) Provides factual information and background material on the subject at hand or establishes why the subject is a problem that
needs addressing.
confirmation (confirmatio) Usually the major part of the text, the confirmation includes the proof needed to make the writer’s case.
refutation (refutatio) Addresses the counterargument. It is a bridge between the writer’s proof and conclusion.
conclusion (peroratio) Brings the essay to a satisfying close.
closed thesis A closed thesis is a statement of the main idea of the argument
that also previews the major points the writer intends to make.

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1143

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1144

GLossAry

The three-dimensional characters, exciting plot, and complex themes of the Harry
Potter series make them not only legendary children’s books but enduring literary
classics.

complex sentence A sentence that includes one independent clause and at least
one dependent clause.
If a free society cannot help the many who are poor, it cannot save the few who are rich.
— John F. Kennedy

compound sentence A sentence that includes at least two independent clauses.
The energy, the faith, the devotion which we bring to this endeavor will light our
country and all who serve it and the glow from that fire can truly light the world.
— John F. Kennedy

concession An acknowledgment that an opposing argument may be true or
reasonable. In a strong argument, a concession is usually accompanied by a
refutation challenging the validity of the opposing argument.
Lou Gehrig concedes what some of his listeners may think — that his bad break is a
cause for discouragement or despair.

confirmation In classical oration, this major part of an argument comes
between the narration and refutation; it provides the development of proof
through evidence that supports the claims made by the speaker.
connotation Meanings or associations that readers have with a word beyond its
dictionary definition, or denotation. Connotations are often positive or negative, and they often greatly affect the author’s tone. Consider the connotations
of the words below, all of which mean “overweight.”
That cat is plump. That cat is fat. That cat is obese.

context
text.

The circumstances, atmosphere, attitudes, and events surrounding a

The context for Lou Gehrig’s speech is the recent announcement of his illness and his
subsequent retirement, but also the poignant contrast between his potent career and his
debilitating disease.

counterargument An opposing argument to the one a writer is putting forward. Rather than ignoring a counterargument, a strong writer will usually
address it through the process of concession and refutation.
Some of Lou Gehrig’s listeners might have argued that his bad break was a cause for
discouragement or despair.

cumulative sentence Sentence that completes the main idea at the beginning of
the sentence and then builds and adds on.
But neither can two great and powerful groups of nations take comfort from our
present course — both sides overburdened by the cost of modern weapons, both rightly
alarmed by the steady spread of the deadly atom, yet both racing to alter that uncertain
balance of terror that stays the hand of mankind’s final war.
— John F. Kennedy

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1144

6/18/12 3:14 PM

GLossAry

1145

deduction Deduction is a logical process wherein you reach a conclusion by
starting with a general principle or universal truth (a major premise) and
applying it to a specific case (a minor premise). The process of deduction is
usually demonstrated in the form of a syllogism:
major premise:

Exercise contributes to better health.

minor premise:

Yoga is a type of exercise.

conclusion:

Yoga contributes to better health.

diction A speaker’s choice of words. Analysis of diction looks at these choices
and what they add to the speaker’s message.
either/or (false dilemma) In this fallacy, the speaker presents two extreme
options as the only possible choices.
Either we agree to higher taxes, or our grandchildren will be mired in debt.

enthymeme Essentially a syllogism with one of the premises implied, and taken
for granted as understood.
You should take her class because I learned so much from her last year.
(Implied premise: If you take her class, you will learn a lot too.)

equivocation A fallacy that uses a term with two or more meanings in an
attempt to misrepresent or deceive.
We will bring our enemies to justice, or we will bring justice to them.

ethos Greek for “character.” Speakers appeal to ethos to demonstrate that they
are credible and trustworthy to speak on a given topic. Ethos is established by
both who you are and what you say.
Lou Gehrig brings the ethos of being a legendary athlete to his speech, yet in it he establishes a different kind of ethos — that of a regular guy and a good sport who shares the
audience’s love of baseball and family. And like them, he has known good luck and bad
breaks.

exordium In classical oration, the introduction to an argument, in which the
speaker announces the subject and purpose, and appeals to ethos in order to
establish credibility.
fallacy See logical fallacy.
false dilemma See either/or.
faulty analogy A fallacy that occurs when an analogy compares two things that
are not comparable. For instance, to argue that because we put animals who
are in irreversible pain out of their misery, so we should do the same for people, asks the reader to ignore significant and profound differences between animals and people.
figurative language (figure of speech) Nonliteral language, sometimes referred
to as tropes or metaphorical language, often evoking strong imagery, figures
of speech often compare one thing to another either explicitly (simile) or

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1145

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1146

GLossAry

implicitly (metaphor). Other forms of figurative language include personification, paradox, overstatement (hyperbole), understatement, metonymy, synecdoche, and irony.
first-hand evidence Evidence based on something the writer knows, whether
it’s from personal experience, observations, or general knowledge of events.
hasty generalization A fallacy in which a faulty conclusion is reached because
of inadequate evidence.
Smoking isn’t bad for you; my great aunt smoked a pack a day and lived to
be 90.

hortative sentence
action.

Sentence that exhorts, urges, entreats, implores, or calls to

Let both sides explore what problems unite us instead of belaboring those problems
which divide us.
— John F. Kennedy

hyperbole Deliberate exaggeration used for emphasis or to produce a comic or
ironic effect; an overstatement to make a point.
My first and last name together generally served the same purpose as a high brick wall.
— Firoozeh Dumas

imagery A description of how something looks, feels, tastes, smells, or sounds.
Imagery may use literal or figurative language to appeal to the senses.
Your eyes glaze as you travel life’s highway past all the crushed animals and the Big
Gulp cups.
— Joy Williams

imperative sentence

Sentence used to command or enjoin.

My fellow citizens of the world: ask not what America will do for you, but what
together we can do for the freedom of man.
— John F. Kennedy

induction From the Latin inducere, “to lead into,” induction is a logical process
wherein you reason from particulars to universals, using specific cases in order
to draw a conclusion, which is also called a generalization.
Regular exercise promotes weight loss.
Exercise lowers stress levels.
Exercise improves mood and outlook.
generalization:

Exercise contributes to better health.

inversion Inverted order of words in a sentence (variation of the subject-verbobject order).
United there is little we cannot do in a host of cooperative ventures. Divided there is
little we can do.
— John F. Kennedy

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1146

6/18/12 3:14 PM

GLossAry

1147

irony A figure of speech that occurs when a speaker or character says one thing
but means something else, or when what is said is the opposite of what is
expected, creating a noticeable incongruity.
Nature has become simply a visual form of entertainment, and it had better look
snappy.
— Joy Williams

juxtaposition Placement of two things closely together to emphasize similarities or differences.
The nations of Asia and Africa are moving at jet-like speed toward gaining political
independence, but we still creep at horse-and-buggy pace toward gaining a cup of coffee
at a lunch counter.
— Martin Luther King

logical fallacies Logical fallacies are potential vulnerabilities or weaknesses in
an argument. They often arise from a failure to make a logical connection
between the claim and the evidence used to support it.
logos Greek for “embodied thought.” Speakers appeal to logos, or reason, by
offering clear, rational ideas and using specific details, examples, facts, statistics, or expert testimony to back them up.
Gehrig starts with the thesis that he is “the luckiest man on the face of the earth” and
supports it with two points: (1) the love and kindness he’s received in his seventeen
years of playing baseball, and (2) a list of great people who have been his friends,
family, and teammates.

metaphor

Figure of speech that compares two things without using like or as.

And if a beachhead of cooperation may push back the jungle of suspicion . . .
— John F. Kennedy

metonymy Figure of speech in which something is represented by another
thing that is related to it or emblematic of it.
The pen is mightier than the sword.

modifier An adjective, adverb, phrase, or clause that modifies a noun, pronoun,
or verb. The purpose of a modifier is usually to describe, focus, or qualify.
Sprawling and dull in class, he comes alive in the halls and in the cafeteria.
— David Denby

mood The feeling or atmosphere created by a text.
narration In classical oration, the factual and background information, establishing why a subject or problem needs addressing; it precedes the confirmation, or laying out of evidence to support claims made in the argument.
nominalization The process of changing a verb into a noun.
Discuss becomes discussion. Depend becomes dependence.

occasion

The time and place a speech is given or a piece is written.

In the case of Gehrig’s speech, the occasion is Lou Gehrig Appreciation Day. More
specifically, his moment came at home plate between games of a doubleheader.

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1147

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1148

GLossAry

open thesis An open thesis is one that does not list all of the points the writer
intends to cover in an essay.
The popularity of the Harry Potter series demonstrates that simplicity trumps complexity when it comes to the taste of readers, both young and old.

oxymoron A paradox made up of two seemingly contradictory words.
But this peaceful revolution . . .
— John F. Kennedy

paradox A statement or situation that is seemingly contradictory on the surface, but delivers an ironic truth.
There is that scattereth, yet increaseth.
— The Bible
To live outside the law you must be honest.
— Bob Dylan

parallelism Similarity of structure in a pair or series of related words, phrases,
or clauses.
Let both sides explore. . . . Let both sides, for the first time, formulate serious and
precise proposals. . . . Let both sides seek to invoke. . . . Let both sides unite to heed . . .
— John F. Kennedy

pathos Greek for “suffering” or “experience.” Speakers appeal to pathos to emotionally motivate their audience. More specific appeals to pathos might play on
the audience’s values, desires, and hopes, on the one hand, or fears and prejudices, on the other.
The most striking appeal to pathos is the poignant contrast between Gehrig’s horrible
diagnosis and his public display of courage.

periodic sentence

Sentence whose main clause is withheld until the end.

To that world assembly of sovereign states, the United Nations, our last best hope in an
age where the instruments of war have far outpaced the instruments of peace, we renew
our pledge of support . . .
— John F. Kennedy

peroration In classical oration, the final part of an argument. It follows the
refutation and typically appeals to pathos as it moves the audience toward the
conclusion.
persona Greek for “mask.” The face or character that a speaker shows to his or
her audience.
Lou Gehrig is a famous baseball hero, but in his speech he presents himself as a
common man who is modest and thankful for the opportunities he’s had.

personification Attribution of a lifelike quality to an inanimate object or an
idea.
. . . with history the final judge of our deeds . . .
— John F. Kennedy

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1148

6/18/12 3:14 PM



Glossary

1149

polemic Greek for “hostile.” An aggressive argument that tries to establish the
superiority of one opinion over all others. Polemics generally do not concede
that opposing opinions have any merit.
polysyndeton The deliberate use of multiple conjunctions between coordinate
phrases, clauses, or words.
I paid for my plane ticket, and the taxes, and the fees, and the charge for the checked
bag, and five dollars for a bottle of water.

post hoc ergo propter hoc This fallacy is Latin for “after which therefore because
of which,” meaning that it is incorrect to always claim that something is a cause
just because it happened earlier. One may loosely summarize this fallacy by
saying that correlation does not imply causation.
We elected Johnson as president and look where it got us: hurricanes, floods, stock
market crashes.

propaganda The spread of ideas and information to further a cause. In its negative sense, propaganda is the use of rumors, lies, disinformation, and scare
tactics in order to damage or promote a cause. For more information, see How
to Detect Propaganda on p. 756.
purpose

The goal the speaker wants to achieve.

One of Gehrig’s chief purposes in delivering his Farewell Address is to thank his fans
and his teammates, but he also wants to demonstrate that he remains positive: he
emphasizes his past luck and present optimism and downplays his illness.

qualified argument An argument that is not absolute. It acknowledges the merits of an opposing view, but develops a stronger case for its own position.
qualifier In the Toulmin model, the qualifier uses words like usually, probably,
maybe, in most cases, and most likely to temper the claim a bit, making it less
absolute. For an example, see Toulmin model.
qualitative evidence Evidence supported by reason, tradition, or precedent.
quantitative evidence Quantitative evidence includes things that can be measured, cited, counted, or otherwise represented in numbers — ​for instance, statistics, surveys, polls, census information.
rebuttal In the Toulmin model, a rebuttal gives voice to possible objections. For
an example, see Toulmin model.
refutation A denial of the validity of an opposing argument. In order to sound
reasonable, a refutation often follows a concession that acknowledges that an
opposing argument may be true or reasonable. One of the stages in classical
oration, usually following the confirmation, or proof, and preceding the conclusion, or peroration.
Lou Gehrig refutes that his bad break is a cause for discouragement by saying that he
has “an awful lot to live for!”

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1149

6/20/12 10:20 AM

1150

GLossAry

reservation In the Toulmin model, a reservation explains the terms and conditions necessitated by the qualifier. For an example, see Toulmin model.
rhetoric Aristotle defined rhetoric as “the faculty of observing in any given case
the available means of persuasion.” In other words, it is the art of finding ways
of persuading an audience.
rhetorical appeals Rhetorical techniques used to persuade an audience by
emphasizing what they find most important or compelling. The three major
appeals are to ethos (character), logos (reason), and pathos (emotion).
rhetorical question Figure of speech in the form of a question posed for rhetorical effect rather than for the purpose of getting an answer.
Will you join in that historic effort?
— John F. Kennedy

rhetorical triangle (Aristotelian triangle) A diagram that illustrates the interrelationship among the speaker, audience, and subject in determining a text.
See p. 4.
Rogerian arguments Developed by psychiatrist Carl Rogers, Rogerian arguments are based on the assumption that fully understanding an opposing position is essential to responding to it persuasively and refuting it in a way that is
accommodating rather than alienating.
satire The use of irony or sarcasm to critique society or an individual.
scheme Artful syntax; a deviation from the normal order of words. Common
schemes include parallelism, juxtaposition, antithesis, and antimetabole.
second-hand evidence Evidence that is accessed through research, reading, and
investigation. It includes factual and historical information, expert opinion,
and quantitative data.
simile A figure of speech used to explain or clarify an idea by comparing it
explicitly to something else, using the words like, as, or as though.
Zoos are pretty, contained, and accessible. . . . Sort of like a biological Crabtree &
Evelyn basket selected with you in mind.
— Joy Williams

SOAPS A mnemonic device that stands for Subject, Occasion, Audience, Purpose, and Speaker. It is a handy way to remember the various elements that
make up the rhetorical situation.
speaker The person or group who creates a text. This might be a politician who
delivers a speech, a commentator who writes an article, an artist who draws a
political cartoon, or even a company that commissions an advertisement.
In his Farewell Address, the speaker is not just Lou Gehrig, but baseball hero and ALS
victim Lou Gehrig, a common man who is modest and thankful for the opportunities
he’s had.

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1150

6/18/12 3:14 PM

GLossAry

1151

stance A speaker’s attitude toward the audience (differing from tone, the speaker’s attitude toward the subject).
straw man A fallacy that occurs when a speaker chooses a deliberately poor or
oversimplified example in order to ridicule and refute an idea.
Politician X proposes that we put astronauts on Mars in the next four years. Politician
Y ridicules this proposal by saying that his opponent is looking for “little green men in
outer space.”

subject

The topic of a text. What the text is about.

Lou Gehrig’s subject in his speech is his illness, but it is also an expression of his
gratitude for all of the lucky breaks that preceded his diagnosis.

syllogism A logical structure that uses the major premise and minor premise to
reach a necessary conclusion.
major premise:

Exercise contributes to better health.

minor premise:

Yoga is a type of exercise.

conclusion:

synecdoche

Yoga contributes to better health.

Figure of speech that uses a part to represent the whole.

In your hands, my fellow citizens, more than mine, will rest the final success or failure
of our course.
— John F. Kennedy

syntax The arrangement of words into phrases, clauses, and sentences. This
includes word order (subject-verb-object, for instance, or an inverted structure); the length and structure of sentences (simple, compound, complex, or
compound-complex); and such schemes as parallelism, juxtaposition, antithesis, and antimetabole.
synthesize Combining two or more ideas in order to create something more
complex in support of a new idea.
text While this term generally means the written word, in the humanities it has
come to mean any cultural product that can be “read”— meaning not just consumed and comprehended, but investigated. This includes fiction, nonfiction,
poetry, political cartoons, fine art, photography, performances, fashion, cultural trends, and much more.
tone A speaker’s attitude toward the subject conveyed by the speaker’s stylistic
and rhetorical choices.
Toulmin model An approach to analyzing and constructing arguments created
by British philosopher Stephen Toulmin in his book The Uses of Argument
(1958). The Toulmin model can be stated as a template:
Because (evidence as support), therefore (claim), since (warrant or assumption), on
account of (backing), unless (reservation).

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1151

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1152

GLossAry

Because it is raining, therefore I should probably take my umbrella, since it will keep
me dry on account of its waterproof material, unless, of course, there is a hole in it.

trope Artful diction; from the Greek word for “turning,” a figure of speech such
as metaphor, simile, hyperbole, metonymy, or synecdoche.
understatement A figure of speech in which something is presented as less
important, dire, urgent, good, and so on, than it actually is, often for satiric or
comical effect. Also called litotes, it is the opposite of hyperbole.
You might want to write clearly and cogently in your English class.
The night in prison was novel and interesting enough.
— Henry David Thoreau

warrant In the Toulmin model, the warrant expresses the assumption necessarily shared by the speaker and the audience.
wit In rhetoric, the use of laughter, humor, irony, and satire in the confirmation
or refutation of an argument.
zeugma Use of two different words in a grammatically similar way that produces different, often incongruous, meanings.
When you open a book, you open your mind.
Now the trumpet summons us again — not as a call to bear arms, though arms we
need — not as a call to battle, though embattled we are — but a call to bear the
burden . . .
— John F. Kennedy

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1152

6/18/12 3:14 PM

Acknowledgments

Text Credits
Chinua Achebe. From“The Empire Fights Back.” Excerpt from pages 37–46, from Home and Exile by Chinua
Achebe. Copyright © 2001 by Chinua Achebe. Reprinted with permission of Oxford University Press UK.
Marjorie Agosín. “Always Living in Spanish.” First published in Poets & Writers (March/April 1999). Copyright © 1999 by Marjorie Agosín. Translated by Celeste Kostopulos-Cooperman. Reprinted by permission
of the author.
Caroline Alexander. “The Great Game.” Copyright © 2010 by Caroline Alexander. This essay was originally published in the Summer 2010 issue of Lapham’s Quarterly: Sports & Games. Reprinted by permission
of Aitken Alexander Associates, Ltd.
Sherman Alexie. “Superman and Me.” Published in the Los Angeles Times, April 19, 1998. Copyright ©
1997 by Sherman Alexie. Reprinted with permission of the author. All rights reserved.
Will Allen. “A Good Food Manifesto for America.” Copyright © 2008 Growing Power, Inc. Reprinted with
permission of the author.
Lori Arviso Alvord, M.D., and Elizabeth Cohen Van Pelt. “Walking the Path between Worlds.” From The
Scalpel and the Silver Bear. Copyright © 1999 by Lori Arviso Alvord and Elizabeth Cohen Van Pelt. Used by
permission of Bantam Books, a division of Random House, Inc.
Lars Anderson. “The Sound and Glory: Beyond the Excitement of Race Day, the Story of the Indy 500
Mirrors the Story of America.” From Sports Illustrated (sportsillustrated.cnn.com/vault/), April 14, 2011.
Used with permission.
Gloria Anzaldúa. “How to Tame a Wild Tongue.” From Borderlands/La Frontera: The New Mestiza.
Copyright © 1987, 1999, 2007 by Gloria Anzaldúa. Reprinted by permission of Aunt Lute Books. www
.auntlute.com
Kwame Anthony Appiah. From “The Case for Contamination.” From Cosmopolitanism: Ethics in a World
of Strangers. Copyright © 2006 by Kwame Anthony Appiah. Used by permission of W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.
Anne Applebaum. “If the Japanese Can’t Build a Safe Reactor, Who Can?” washingtonpost.com/opinions,
March 14, 2011. Copyright © 2011 by The Washington Post Writers Group. Used with permission of The
Washington Post.
The Associated Press. “Volunteering Opens Teen’s Eyes to Nursing.” From the Detroit News, November 22,
2008. Reprinted with permission of the YGS Group on behalf of The Associated Press Permissions.
James Baldwin. “A Talk to Teachers.” Originally published in the Saturday Review. Collected in The Price of
the Ticket, published by St. Martin’s Press. Copyright © 1963 by James Baldwin. Used by arrangement with
the James Baldwin Estate.
David Barboza. “Shanghai Schools’ Approach Pushes Students to Top of Tests.” From the New York Times,
December 29, 2010. Copyright © 2010 the New York Times Company. Reprinted with permission. All
rights reserved.
Mark Bauerlein and Sandra Stotsky. “Why Johnny Won’t Read.” Originally published in the Washington
Post, January 25, 2005. Copyright © 2005 by Mark Bauerlein and Sandra Stotsky. Reprinted by permission
of the authors.
Sharon Begley. “The Dumbest Generation? Don’t Be Dumb.” From Newsweek, May 24, 2008. [www
.newsweek.com]. Reprinted with permission of Harman Newsweek LLC and protected by the Copyright
Laws of the United States.
Wendell Berry. “Waste.” From What Are People For? Copyright © 2010 by Wendell Berry. Reprinted by
permission of Counterpoint.
Michael Binyon. “Absurd Decision on Obama Makes a Mockery of the Nobel Peace Prize.” From the London Times, October 1, 2009. Reprinted with permission of News International Syndication Ltd.
Laura Blumenfeld. “The Apology: Letters from a Terrorist.” From the New Yorker, March 4, 2002. Used
with permission of William Morris Entertainment Endeavor.
Eavan Boland. “In which the Ancient History I Learn Is Not My Own.” From In a Time of Violence by Eavan
Boland. Copyright © 1994 by Eavan Boland. Used by permission of W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.
Leon Botstein. “Let Teenagers Try Adulthood.” From the New York Times, May 17, 1999. Copyright © 1999
by Leon Botstein. Reprinted by permission of the author.

1153

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1153

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1154

Acknowledgments

Judy Brady. “I Want a Wife.” From Ms. Magazine, 1972. Copyright © 1970 by Judy Brady. Reprinted by
permission of the author.
David Brooks. “Mind over Muscle.” From the New York Times, October 15, 2005. Copyright © 2005 The
New York Times. All rights reserved. Used by permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of the
United States. The printing, copying, redistribution, or retransmission of the Material without express
written permission is prohibited.
Scott Brown. “I’ll Be There 4U.” Originally published in Wired magazine, November 2008. Copyright ©
2008 by Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Reprinted by permission.
Rachel Carson. “A Fable for Tomorrow” and “The Obligation to Endure.” From Silent Spring by Rachel
Carson. Copyright © 1962 by Rachel L. Carson. Renewed 1990 by Roger Christie. Reprinted by permission
of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Company and the Frances Collin Literary Agency. All rights reserved.
The Christian Science Monitor Editorial Board. “Warren Buffett, Bill Gates, and the Billionaire Challenge.” From The Christian Science Monitor, August 5, 2010. Copyright © 2010 by The Christian Science
Monitor. Reprinted with permission of The Christian Science Monitor.
Sandra Cisneros. “Eleven.” From Woman Hollering Creek. Copyright © 1991 by Sandra Cisneros. Published by Vintage Books, a division of Random House, Inc., New York, and originally in hardcover by
Random House, Inc. Reprinted by permission of Susan Bergholz Literary Services, New York, and Lamy
NM. All rights reserved.
Eleanor Clift. “Inside Kennedy’s Inauguration, 50 Years On.” From Newsweek, January 20, 2011. Copyright ©
2011 The Newsweek/Daily Beast Company LLC. All rights reserved. Used by permission and protected by
the Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, redistribution, or retransmission of the
Material without express written permission is prohibited.
Judith Ortiz Cofer. “The Myth of the Latin Woman: I Just Met a Girl Named Maria.” From The Latin Deli:
Prose and Poetry. Copyright © 1993 by Judith Ortiz Cofer. Reprinted by permission of the University of
Georgia Press.
Matthew B. Crawford. “The Case for Working with Your Hands.” From the New York Times, May 24, 2009.
Copyright © 2009 the New York Times Company. Used by permission and protected by the Copyright
Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, redistribution, or retransmission of the Material without
express written permission is prohibited.
Dalton School Mission Statement. Used by permission of The Dalton School, New York, NY.
Frank Deford. “Pay Dirt.” From Sports Illustrated, May 7, 2003. Copyright © 2003 by Frank Deford.
Reprinted by permission of SLL/Sterling Lord Literistic, Inc.
David Denby. “High-School Confidential: Notes on Teen Movies.” Originally published in the New Yorker,
May 31, 1999. Copyright © 1999 by David Denby. Reprinted by permission of the author.
Joan Didion. “Santa Ana Winds.” Excerpted from “Los Angeles Notebook.” Collected in Slouching towards
Bethlehem by Joan Didion. Copyright © 1966, 1968, renewed 1996 by Joan Didion. Reprinted by permission of Farrar, Straus and Giroux, LLC.
Amy Domini. “Why Investing in Fast Food May Be a Good Thing.” Ode magazine, March 2009. www
.odemagazine.com. Used with permission of the author.
Stephen J. Dubner and Steven D. Levitt. “What the Bagel Man Saw.” From the New York Times Magazine,
June 6, 2004. Copyright © 2004 by Steven Levitt and Stephen Dubner. Reprinted with permission of William Morris Endeavor Entertainment, LLC.
Firoozeh Dumas. The “F Word,” from Funny in Farsi: A Memoir of Growing up Iranian in America. Copyright © 2003 by Firoozeh Dumas. Used by permission of Villard Books, a division of Random House, Inc.
Gerald L. Early. Excerpt from A Level Playing Field: African American Athletes and the Republic of Sports.
© 2011 Harvard University Press.
Roger Ebert. Review of Star Wars, from the Chicago Sun-Times, January 1, 1977. Reprinted with permission of the author.
Barbara Ehrenreich. From“Serving in Florida.” From Nickel and Dimed by Barbara Ehrenreich. Copyright
© 2001 by Barbara Ehrenreich. Reprinted by permission of Henry Holt and Company, LLC.
Gretel Ehrlich. “About Men.” From The Solace of Open Spaces. Copyright © 1985 by Gretel Ehrlich. Used
by permission of Viking Penguin, a division of Penguin Group (USA) Inc. Electronic rights by permission
of Darhansoff, Verrill, Feldman Literary Agency.

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1154

6/20/12 10:21 AM



Acknowledgments

1155

Lars Eighner. “On Dumpster Diving.” From Travels with Lizbeth by Lars Eighner. Copyright © 1993 by Lars
Eighner. Reprinted by permission of St. Martin’s Press, LLC, and by Steven Saylor as agent for the author.
Albert Einstein. Letter to Phyllis Wright, January 24, 1936. Reprinted with permission of the Albert Einstein
Archives, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
Ralph Ellison. Excerpt from “On Bird, Bird-Watching and Jazz.” From Shadow and Act by Ralph Ellison,
copyright © 1953, 1964 by Ralph Ellison. Used by permission of Random House, Inc.
Frantz Fanon. From “Concerning Violence.” Pages 37–39 from The Wretched of the Earth. Copyright ©
1963 by Presence Africaine. Used by permission of Grove/Atlantic, Inc.
William Faulkner. “An Innocent at Rinkside.” From Sports Illustrated, January 24, 1955. Copyright © 1955
by Estelle Faulkner and Jill Faulkner Summers. Renewed 1965, 2004 by Random House, Inc. Collected in
Essays, Speeches, and Public Letters by William Faulkner, James B. Meriwether, ed. Used by permission of
Random House, Inc. Electronic rights by permission of W. W. Norton & Co., Inc.
Jonathan Safran Foer. “The American Table” and “The Global Table.” From Eating Animals by Jonathan
Safran Foer. Copyright © 2009 by Jonathan Safran Foer. Used with permission of Little, Brown and
Company.
Thomas L. Friedman. “The Revolution Is U.S.” From The Lexus and the Olive Tree by Thomas L. Friedman.
Copyright © 2000 by Thomas L. Friedman. Used with permission of Farrar, Straus & Giroux, LLC, and
International Creative Management, Inc.
John Kenneth Galbraith. From “The Dependence Effect.” From The Affluent Society, 4th edition, by John
Kenneth Galbraith. Copyright © 1958, 1969, 1976, 1984 by John Kenneth Galbraith. Reprinted by permission of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company. All rights reserved.
Lou Gehrig. “The Luckiest Man on the Face of the Earth.” Speech given on July 4, 1939. Lou Gehrig™ is a
trademark of Rip van Winkle Foundation. Licensed by CMG Worldwide, Inc. www.LouGehrig.com.
“German Millionaire Criticizes Gates’ ‘Giving Pledge.’” Spiegel International Online, September 10, 2010.
www.spiegel.de/international/. Copyright © 2010. Reprinted by permission of SPIEGEL-Verlag.
Todd Gitlin. “The Liberal Arts in an Age of Info-Glut.” From the Chronicle of Higher Education, 1998.
Copyright © 1998 by Todd Gitlin. Reprinted by permission of Trident Media Group.
Robin Givhan. “An Image a Little Too Carefully Coordinated.” The Washington Post, July 22, 2005. Copyright © 2005 by The Washington Post Writers Group. Reproduced with permision of The Washington
Post.
Malcolm Gladwell. From Outliers. Copyright © 2008 by Malcolm Gladwell. Used by permission of Little,
Brown, and Company. “Small Change.” The New Yorker, October 4, 2010, and “Offensive Play,” the New
Yorker, October 19, 2009. Copyright © Malcolm Gladwell. Used with permission of the author.
Ellen Goodman. “The Family That Stretches (Together).” From the Washington Post. Copyright © 1983 by
The Washington Post Writers Group. Reproduced with permission of The Washington Post.
Stephen Jay Gould. “Women’s Brains.” Copyright © 1980 by Stephen Jay Gould. Reprinted with permission of the Art Science Research Laboratory.
Garrett Hardin. From “Lifeboat Ethics: The Case Against Helping the Poor.” Originally published in Psychology Today, September 1974. Reprinted by permission of Sussex Publishers, LLC.
Daniel Harris. “Celebrity Bodies.” First appeared in Southwest Review, Vol. 93, No. 1, 2008. Copyright ©
2008 Daniel Harris. Used with permission of the Malaga Baldi Agency on behalf of the author.
Heather Havrilesky. “Besieged by ‘Friends.’” Copyright © 2003. This article first appeared on http://www
.salon.com. An online version remains in the Salon archives. Reprinted by permission.
Christopher Hedges. “The Destruction of Culture.” From War Is a Force That Gives Us Meaning. Copyright © 2002 by Chris Hedges. Reprinted by permission of Public Affairs, a member of Perseus Books, LLC.
A. J. Jacobs. “Farm to Table.” From Esquire, March 2011. Used with permission of the author.
Josef Joffe. “The Perils of Soft Power.” From the New York Times, May 14, 2006. Copyright © 2006 by
Dr. Josef Joffe. Reprinted by permission of the author.
Steven Johnson. “Watching TV Makes You Smarter.” From Everything Bad Is Good for You. Copyright ©
2005 by Steven Johnson. Used by permission of Riverhead Books, an imprint of Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
and the Lydia Wills Literary Agency.
Michiko Kakutani. “The Word Police.” From the New York Times, January 31, 1993. Copyright © 1993 The
New York Times Company. All rights reserved. Used by permission and protected by the Copyright Laws

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1155

6/20/12 10:21 AM

1156

ACknoWLedGMents

of the United States. The printing, copying, redistribution, or retransmission of the Material without
express written permission is prohibited.
Jamaica Kincaid. “On Seeing England for the First Time.” Originally published in Harper’s. Copyright ©
1991 by Jamaica Kincaid. Used with permission of The Wylie Agency, LLC.
Martin Luther King Jr. “Letter from Birmingham Jail.” Copyright © 1963 Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., copyright © renewed 1991 by Coretta Scott King. Reprinted by arrangement with the Estate of Martin Luther
King Jr., c/o Writers House as agent for the proprietor.
Chuck Klosterman. “My Zombie, Myself: Why Modern Life Feels Rather Undead.” From the New York
Times, December 3, 2010. Copyright © 2010 the New York Times Company. All rights reserved. Used by
permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, redistribution, or retransmission of the Material without express written permission is prohibited.
Charles Krauthammer. “In Plain English: Let’s Make It Official.” From TIME magazine, 6/4/2006.
Reprinted by permission of Time Inc.
Aldo Leopold. From “The Land Ethic.” From Sand County Almanac, 2nd edition, by Aldo Leopold. Copyright © 1949, 1977 by Oxford University Press, Inc. Reprinted with permission of Oxford University Press UK.
Michael Lewis. “Serfs of the Turf.” From the New York Times, November 11, 2007. Copyright © 2007 the
New York Times Company. All rights reserved. Used by permission and protected by the Copyright Laws
of the United States. The printing, copying, redistribution, or retransmission of the Material without
express written permission is prohibited.
The London Times. Excerpts from “Armstrong Says: One Giant Leap for Mankind,” by the staff of the
London Times. Copyright © 1969. Reprinted with permission of News International Syndication.
Frank Luntz. “The 21 Political Words and Phrases You Should Never Say Again.” From Words That Work.
Copyright © 2006 by Dr. Frank Luntz. Used by permission of Hyperion. All rights reserved.
Ruth Marcus. From “CrackBerry Congress.” From the Washington Post. Copyright © 2010 by The Washington Post Writers Group. Used by permission of The Washington Post.
James McBride. “Hip Hop Planet.” From National Geographic magazine, April 2007. Copyright © 2007.
Reprinted by permission of the National Geographic Society.
Scott McCloud. Excerpts from Chapter 6, “Show and Tell,” in Understanding Comics. Copyright © 1993,
1994 by Scott McCloud. Reprinted by permission of HarperCollins Publishers.
Bill McKibben. From The End of Nature. Copyright © 1989, 2006 by William McKibben. Used by permission of Random House, Inc.
James E. McWilliams. “The Locavore Myth.” From Forbes magazine, August 3, 2009. Reprinted by permission of Forbes Media LLC © 2011.
Matthias R. Mehl et al. “Are Women Really More Talkative Than Men?” From Science, July 6, 2007. Copyright © 2007 by American Association for the Advancement of Science. Reproduced with permission of
American Association for the Advancement of Science.
Dinaw Mengestu. “Home at Last.” Copyright © 2008 by Dinaw Mengestu. From Brooklyn Was Mine, edited
by Chris Knitsen & Valerie Steiker. Used by permission of Riverhead Books, an imprint of Penguin Group
(USA) Inc.
Aurora Levins Morales. “Child of the Americas.” From Getting Home Alive by Aurora Levins Morales and
Rosario Morales (Firebrand Books). Copyright © 1986 by Aurora Levins Morales and Rosario Morales.
Used by arrangement with The Permissions Company, Inc., on behalf of Aurora Levins Morales. www
.permissionscompany.com
Kyoko Mori. “School.” From Polite Lies: On Being a Woman Caught between Two Cultures. Copyright ©
2007 by Kyoko Mori. Reprinted by permission of Henry Holt and Company LLC.
Toni Morrison. Letter Endorsing President Obama. Distributed on the Obama Campaign Web site, January 28, 2008. Copyright © 2008 by Toni Morrison. Used with permission of International Creative Management, Inc.
National Collegiate Athletic Association. “Why Student Athletes Aren’t Paid to Play.” www.ncaa.org. Copyright © 2012 by the National Collegiate Athletic Association. Used with permission. All rights reserved.
The New York Times. “Felons and the Right to Vote.” Op-Ed, July 11, 2004. All rights reserved. Used by
permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, redistribution, or retransmission of the Material without express written permission is prohibited.

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1156

6/18/12 3:14 PM

ACknoWLedGMents

1157

Nicolette Hahn Niman. “The Carnivore’s Dilemma.” From the New York Times, October 31, 2009. Copyright © 2009 the New York Times Company. All rights reserved. Used by permission and protected by the
Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, redistribution, or retransmission of the Material without express written permission is prohibited.
Geoffrey Nunberg. “The -Ism Schism: How Much Wallop Can a Simple Word Pack?” From the New York
Times, July 11, 2007. All rights reserved. Used by permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of the
United States. The printing, copying, redistribution, or retransmission of the Material without express
written permission is prohibited.
Joseph S. Nye Jr. “The U.S. Can Reclaim ‘Smart’ Power.” From the Los Angeles Times, January 21, 2009.
Copyright © 2009 by Joseph Nye. Reprinted with permission of the author. This piece is drawn from The
Future of Power, Public Affairs Press, 2011.
Naomi Shihab Nye. “Why I Could Not Accept Your Invitation” and “For Mohammed Zeid of Gaza, Age
15.” From You and Yours by Naomi Shihab Nye. Copyright © 2005 by Naomi Shihab Nye. Used by arrangement of The Permissions Company, Inc., on behalf of BOA Editions, Ltd. www.boaeditions.com
Joyce Carol Oates. “The Cruelest Sport.” From On Boxing, Dolphin/Doubleday. Copyright © 1987, 1985 by
the Ontario Review. Reprinted with permission of the John Hawkins Literary Agency.
Tim O’Brien. “On the Rainy River.” From The Things They Carried by Tim O’Brien. Copyright © 1990 by Tim
O’Brien. Reprinted by permission of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company. All rights reserved.
Sandra Day O’Connor and Roy Remer. “Not by Math Alone.” From the Washington Post, March 25, 2006,
A19. Copyright © 2006. Reprinted by permission of Sandra Day O’Connor.
Daniel Okrent. “The War of the Words: A Dispatch from the Front Lines.” From the New York Times,
March 6, 2005. Copyright © 2005. Reprinted by permission of the author.
Jennifer Oladipo. “Global Warming Is Color-Blind.” Onion magazine, November/December, 2007. Copyright © 2007 by Jennifer Oladipo. Used by permission of the author.
The Onion. “Four or Five Guys Pretty Much Carry the Whole Renaissance.” The Onion, December 14,
2009. Used with permission of Onion, Inc.
George Orwell. “Politics and the English Language.” Originally published in Horizon magazine, 1946.
Copyright 1946 © George Orwell. Reprinted by permission of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing,
Inc., and Bill Hamilton as the Literary Executor of the Estate of the Late Sonia Brownell Orwell and Secker
& Warburg Ltd. “Shooting an Elephant.” From Shooting an Elephant and Other Essays by George Orwell.
Copyright © 1950 by Sonia Brownell Orwell. Renewed 1978 by Sonia Pitt-Rivers. Used by permission of
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company and A.M. Heath & Co., Ltd.
Hans Ostrom. “Emily Dickinson and Elvis Presley in Heaven.” From Kiss Off: Poems to Set You Free, Warner
Books. Copyright © 1989 and 2006 by Hans Ostrom. Reprinted by permission of the author.
Marge Piercy. “Barbie Doll.” From Circles on the Water: Selected Poems of Marge Piercy. Copyright © 1982
by Middlemarsh, Inc. Used by permission of Alfred A. Knopf, Inc., a division of Random House, Inc.
Steven Pinker. Excerpt from Words Don’t Mean What They Mean. Published in TIME, Thursday, September 6, 2007. Copyright © 2007 by Steven Pinker. Reprinted by permission.
Michael Pollan. “The Plant: Corn’s Conquest.” From The Omnivore’s Dilemma by Michael Pollan. Copyright © 2006 by Michael Pollan. Used by permission of The Penguin Press, a division of Penguin Group
(USA) Inc.
Virginia Postrel. “In Praise of Chain Stores.” First published in the Atlantic Monthly, December 2006.
Copyright © 2006 Virginia Postrel. Used by permission of the author.
Francine Prose. “I Know Why the Caged Bird Cannot Read.” Copyright © 1999 by Francine Prose.
Reprinted with permission of the Denise Shannon Literary Agency, Inc. All rights reserved.
Robert D. Putnam. “Health and Happiness.” Pages 326–335 from Bowling Alone by Robert D. Putnam.
Copyright © 2000 by Robert D. Putnam. Reprinted with permission of Simon & Schuster, Inc. All rights
reserved.
Anna Quindlen. “The ‘C’ Word in the Hallway.” Newsweek, November 28, 1999. Copyright © 1999 by Anna
Quindlen. Used with permission of International Creative Management, Inc.
Ayn Rand. “A Symbol of Man’s Greatness.” Excerpted from Apollo 11: The Objectivist. Copyright © 1969
Ayn Rand. Reprinted with permission.
Diane Ravitch. “Stop the Madness.” From The Death and the Life of the Great American School System by

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1157

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1158

ACknoWLedGMents

Diane Ravitch. Copyright © 2010 by Diane Ravitch. Reprinted by permission of Basic Books, a member of
the Perseus Books Group.
Rick Reilly. “Why I Love My Job.” From ESPN the Magazine. December 2, 2009.
Richard Rodriguez. “Aria.” From Hunger of Memory: The Education of Richard Rodriguez by Richard Rodriguez. Copyright ©1982 by Richard Rodriguez. Reprinted with permission of David R. Godine, Publisher,
Inc.
Phyllis Rose. “Shopping and Other Spiritual Adventures in America Today.” Copyright © 1984 by Phyllis
Rose. Used by permission of The Wylie Agency, LLC.
Bertrand Russell. “The Happy Man” excerpted from The Conquest of Happiness. Copyright © 1930 by
Horace Liveright, Inc. Renewed © 1958 by Bertrand Russell. Used by permission of Liveright Publishing
Corporation and The Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation.
Fabiola Santiago. “In College, These American Citizens Are Not Created Equal.” From the Miami Herald,
October 25, 2011. Copyright © 2011 by the Miami Herald. Used with permission.
Marjane Satrapi. “The Veil,” from Persepolis: The Story of a Childhood. Translation by Mattias Ripa & Blake
Ferris, copyright © 2003 by L’Association, Paris, France. Used by permission of Pantheon Books, a division
of Random House, Inc.
Eric Schlosser. Excerpt from Reefer Madness: Sex, Drugs, and Cheap Labor in the American Black Market.
Copyright © 2003 by Eric Schlosser. Reprinted by permission of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing
Company. All rights reserved.
Juliet Schor. “The New Politics of Consumption: Why Americans Want So Much More Than They Need.”
Originally published in the Summer 1999 issue of Boston Review. Copyright © 1999 by Juliet Schor.
Reprinted by permission of the author.
David Sedaris. “Me Talk Pretty One Day.” From Me Talk Pretty One Day by David Sedaris. Copyright ©
2000 by David Sedaris. Used with permission of Little, Brown & Company and Don Congdon Associates, Inc.
Peter Singer. From “The Singer Solution to World Poverty.” From the New York Times magazine section,
September 5, 1999. Copyright © 1999 Peter Singer. Reprinted by permission of the author.
Jane Smiley. “Barbaro, The Heart in the Winner’s Circle.” From the Washington Post. Copyright © 2007 by
The Washington Post Writers Group. Used by permission of The Washington Post.
Joan Smith. “Shop-happy.” This article first appeared in Salon.com, at http://www.Salon.com, May 11,
2000. An online version remains in the Salon archives. Reprinted with permission.
Michael Specter. Excerpts from “Test-Tube Burgers.” The New Yorker, May 23, 2011. Copyright © 2001 by
Michael Specter. Reprinted by permission of the author.
Brent Staples. “Just Walk on By: A Black Man Ponders His Power to Alter Public Space. “ Copyright © 1986
by Brent Staples. Reprinted by permission of the author.
Deirdre Straughan. “Cultural Hegemony: Who’s Dominating Whom?” Copyright © 2005 by Deirdre
Straughan. Reprinted by permission of the author.
Margaret Talbot. “Best in Class: Students Are Suing Their Way to the Top.” From the New Yorker, June 6,
2005, pages 32–43. Used with permission of The Wylie Agency, LLC.
Gay Talese. “The Silent Season of a Hero.” Copyright © 1966 by Gay Talese. Originally published in Esquire
Magazine. Reprinted by permission of the Janklow & Nesbitt Associates as agents for the author.
Amy Tan. “Mother Tongue.” Copyright © 1990 by Amy Tan. First appeared in The Threepenny Review.
Reprinted by permission of the author and the Sandra Dijkstra Literary Agency.
Deborah Tannen. “Wears Jumpsuits, Sensible Shoes. Uses Husband’s Last Name.” Original title, “Marked
Women, Unmarked Men” from the New York Times Magazine, June 20, 1993. Copyright © 1993 Deborah
Tannen. Adapted from the book Talking from Nine to Five. Used with permission of the author.
Paul Theroux. “Being a Man.” From Sunrise with Seamonsters by Paul Theroux. Copyright © 1985 by Cape
Cod Scriveners Co. Reprinted by permission of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company and The
Wylie Agency. All rights reserved.
Dana Thomas. “Terror’s Purse Strings.” From the New York Times, August 30, 2007. All rights reserved.
Used by permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, copying,
redistribution, or retransmission of the Material without express written permission is prohibited.
Lewis Thomas. “Natural Man.” From the New England Journal of Medicine, April 12, 1973. Copyright ©
1973. Reprinted by permission of the Massachusetts Medical Society.

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1158

6/18/12 3:14 PM

ACknoWLedGMents

1159

Clive Thompson. “The New Literacy.” Originally published in Wired magazine, August 24, 2009. Copyright © 2009 by Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Reprinted by permission.
John Updike. “Ex-Basketball Player.” From Collected Poems, 1953–1993. Copyright © 1993 by John Updike.
Used by permission of Alfred A. Knopf, a division of Random House, Inc.
Kris Vervaecke. “A Spectator’s Notebook.” From Body Language: Writers on Sport, edited by Gerald Early.
Copyright © 1998 by Kris Vervaecke. Reprinted with the permission of Graywolf Press, Saint Paul, Minnesota.
Sarah Vowell. From The Partly Cloudy Patriot. Copyright © 2002 by Sarah Vowell. Reprinted with permission of Simon & Schuster, Inc. All rights reserved.
Rebecca Walker. “Putting Down the Gun.” Introduction from What Makes a Man: 22 Writers Imagine the
Future. Copyright © 2004 by Rebecca Walker. Reprinted by permission of The Wendy Weil Agency, Inc.
First published by Riverhead Books.
David Foster Wallace. “On Life and Work.” From the Wall Street Journal, September 19, 2008. Copyright ©
2008 by the News Corporation. Reproduced with permission.
Bill Walton. “My Priceless Opportunity.” From the New York Times, March 18, 2009. Copyright © 2009 the
New York Times Company. Reprinted with permission. All rights reserved.
Alice Waters. From “Slow Food Nation.” From the September 11, 2006 issue of the Nation. Copyright ©
2006. Reprinted with permission of The Nation. Subscriptions available at www.thenation.com
Steve Weiberg. “Despite Criticism, NCAA Takes a Firm Stance on Professionalism.” From USA Today,
January 14, 2011. Copyright © 2011. Reprinted with permission of USA TODAY.
Michael Wilbon. “As Colleges’ Greed Grows, So Does the Hypocrisy.” From the Washington Post. Copyright © 2010 by The Washington Post Writers Group. Used by permission.
George Will. From “King Coal.” From the Washington Post, December 29, 2010. Copyright © 2010 by The
Washington Post Writers Group. Reproduced with permission of The Washington Post.
Joy Williams. “Save the Whales, Screw the Shrimp.” From Ill Nature by Joy Williams. Copyright © 2001 Joy
Williams. Published by the Lyons Press, Guilford, CT. Reprinted with permission of International Creative
Management, Inc.
Terry Tempest Williams. “The Clan of One-Breasted Women.” From Refuge: An Unnatural History of Family and Place. Copyright © 1991 by Terry Tempest Williams. Used by permission of Pantheon Books, a
division of Random House, Inc.
Edward O. Wilson. From The Future of Life. Copyright © 2002 by E. O. Wilson. Used by permission of
Alfred A. Knopf, a division of Random House, Inc.
Virginia Woolf. “Professions for Women,” “Thoughts on Peace in an Air Raid,” and “The Death of the
Moth” from The Death of the Moth and Other Essays by Virginia Woolf. Copyright © 1942 by Houghton
Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company and renewed by Marjorie T. Parsons, Executrix. Reprinted with
permission of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Co., Inc. and The Society of Authors as the Literary
Representative of the Estate of Virginia Woolf.
Fareed Zakaria. “How to Restore the American Dream.” From TIME, October 21, 2010. Copyright © 2010
by Fareed Zakaria. Reprinted with permission.

Picture Credits
15, DeVito/Verdi. Photos: Bettmann/Corbis; 21, Toles © 2005 The Washington Post. Reprinted with
permission of UNIVERSAL UCLICK. All rights reserved; 23, WWF Public Service Announcement;
25, peta.org; 29, United States Department of Transportation. Federal Highway Administration; 35, A
1969 Herblock Cartoon, copyright by The Herb Block Foundation; 66, Courtesy of Chrysler Group LLC;
68, © Girl Scouts of the USA. Used by Permission; 78, Charles Hoff/NY Daily News Archive/Getty Images;
82, TOLES © 2005 The Washington Post. Reprinted with permission of UNIVERSAL UCLICK. All rights
reserved; 133, www.polyp.org.uk; 136, Digital Image © The Museum of Modern Art/Licensed by SCALA/
Art Resource, NY; 137, Getty Images/Photo courtesy of the Bergen Record; 138, TOLES © 2005 The
Washington Post. Reprinted with permission of UNIVERSAL UCLICK. All rights reserved; 159, CIRCLE
(Center for Information & Research on Civic Learning & Engagement); 174, © Roz Chast/The New Yorker
Collection/www.cartoonbank.com; 176, Robert Eric/Corbis Sygma; 189, Mary Evans Picture Library/The
Image Works; 242, Works by Norman Rockwell. Printed by permission of the Norman Rockwell Family

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1159

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1160

ACknoWLedGMents

Agency Book Rights, Copyright © 2012 The Norman Family Entities. Photo: Norman Rockwell Museum
Collections; 244–246, © Roz Chast/The New Yorker Collection/www.cartoonbank.com; 256, © Edward
Koren/The New Yorker Collection/www.cartoonbank.com; 261, Source: Eric A. Hanushek, Paul E. Peterson,
and Ludger Woessmann, 2010. “U.S. Math Performance in Global Perspective: How well does each
state do at producing high-achieving students?” PEPG 10-19 (2010), modification of graph presented
on pp. 16–17 (the original is available at http://www.hks.harvard.edu/pepg/PDF/Papers/PEPG10-19_
HanushekPetersonWoessmann.pdf); 280, Arty Pomerantz/The Image Works; 296, Bettmann/Corbis;
357, Works by Norman Rockwell. Printed by permission of the Norman Rockwell Family Agency Book
Rights Copyright © 2012 The Norman Family Entities. Photo: Norman Rockwell Museum Collections;
358, © Roz Chast/The New Yorker Collection/www.cartoonbank.com; 359, Photography by Gustavo di
Mario, © 2010 Nissan. Nissan, Nissan model names, and the Nissan logo are registered trademarks of
Nissan; 375, © 2003–2011 Zapiro (All rights reserved). Originally published in Sunday Times on 2nd Feb
2003; 394, Andrew Shurtleff/AP Images; 404, Ann Ronan Picture Library/HIP/The Image Works; 471, Jeff
Parker/Florida Today/Cagle Cartoons; 473, © Tom Tomorrow; 518, Richard Howard Photography;
525, Ann Ronan Picture Library/HIP/The Image Works; 563, Reunion des Musees Nationaux/Art Resource,
NY; 564, The Chancellor Seguier on Horseback © Kehinde Wiley. Used by permission. Courtesy Sean Kelly
Gallery, New York, Roberts & Tilton, Culver City, California, and Rhona Hoffman Gallery, Chicago;
567, Time Life Pictures/Getty Images; 592, Kathy Winn/Corbis; 610, The Granger Collection, New York;
615, Notre Dame University/Getty Images; 668, Courtesy of the University of North Carolina Press;
670, Robert Beck/Sports Illustrated/Getty Images; 672, © Boris Drucker/The New Yorker Collection/www
.cartoonbank.com; 700, Will Ragozzino/Getty Images; 707, Bettmann/Corbis; 752, United States Census
Bureau; 755, Reprinted with permission from Cummins, J. (2001). Negotiating Identities: Education for
Empowerment in a Diverse Society (p. 171). Los Angeles: California Association for Bilingual Education;
767, Mike Lester, www.mikelester.com; 788, Tiziana Fabi/AFP/Getty Images; 799, Roger Viollet/TOPHAM/
The Image Works; 826, © Kevin Lamarque/Reuters/Corbis; 852, © 2011 The Andy Warhol Foundation for
the Visual Arts, Inc./Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York. Collection of Emily Fisher Landau, New York.
Andy Warhol, 1928–1987. Myths, 1981. Synthetic polymer and screenprint ink on canvas, 100 x 100 in.
(254 x 254 cm); 102 x 102 x 3 in. (259.1 x 259.1 x 7.6 cm) Promised gift of the Fisher Landau Center for Art
to Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; promised gift of the Fisher Landau Center for Art
P.2010.340; 854, The Innocent Eye Test (1981), Mark Tansey. Oil on canvas, 78 x 120 in. (198.1 x 304.8 cm).
Partial and promised gift of Jan Cowles and Charles Cowles, in honor of William S. Lieberman, 1988
(1988.183), Metropolitan Museum, New York. Copyright © 1981 Mark Tansey/Gagosian Gallery, New
York/Image copyright © Metropolitan Museum of Art. Image source: Art Resource, NY; 873, AP/Wide
World Photos; 888, Bettmann/Corbis; 897, Mary Evans Picture Library/The Image Works; 954, © Robert
Crumb; 956–957, Courtesy of Royal Dutch Shell; 959–961, © Peter Menzel/www.menzelphoto.com;
981, © Joe McKendry; 1006, Jeremy Bembaron/Corbis Sygma; 1016, Bettmann/Corbis; 1087, Guernica
(1937) (Detail), Pablo Picasso. Oil on canvas, 350 x 782 cm. Museo Reina Sofia, Madrid. Photo by John
Bigelow Taylor/Art Resource, New York/Copyright © 2008 Estate of Pablo Picasso/Artists Rights Society
(ARS), New York; 1089, Guernica (1937) (Detail), Pablo Picasso. Oil on canvas, 350 x 782 cm. Museo Reina
Sofia, Madrid. Photo by John Bigelow Taylor/Art Resource, New York/Copyright © 2008 Estate of Pablo
Picasso/Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York/The New Yorker cover art by Harry Bliss/Copyright © 2003
Condé Nast Publications, Inc.; 1090, Guernica (1937) (Detail), Pablo Picasso. Oil on canvas, 350 x 782 cm.
Museo Reina Sofia, Madrid. Photo by John Bigelow Taylor/Art Resource, New York/Copyright © 2008
Estate of Pablo Picasso/Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York/Photomontage by Penny Gentieu/
Copyright © 2003 by Harper’s Magazine. All rights reserved. Reproduction from the April issue by special
permission; 1122–1123, Christiansted brochure courtesy of the National Park Service/Detail of lithograph
by J. F. Fritz from a drawing by Theodore C. Sabroe courtesy of the Danish Royal Library.

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1160

6/18/12 3:14 PM

Index

“9/11 ‘Overreaction’? Nonsense, The”
(Krauthammer), 106
“About Men” (Ehrlich), 570–73
abstract words, 72
“Absurd Decision on Obama Makes a
Mockery of the Nobel Peace
Prize” (Binyon), 138–39
accuracy, fallacies of, 100
accurate evidence, 98
Achebe, Chinua, “The Empire Fights
Back,” 1111–14
active reading
annotating, 48–51
asking questions, 44–48
from close reading to analysis, 54–58
using a graphic organizer, 51–54
active verbs, 693–94
Adams, Abigail, “Letters” (with J. Adams),
535–39
Adams, John, “Letters” (with A. Adams),
535–39
ad hominem fallacy, 99, 140
ad populum fallacy (bandwagon appeal),
109, 140
Agosín, Marjorie, “Always Living in
Spanish,” 735–38
agreement, pronoun–antecedent,
583–84
“Alarmist or Alarming Rhetoric?”
(Demby), 28
Alexander, Caroline, “The Great Game,”
660–65
Alexie, Sherman, “Superman and Me,”
215–18

Allen, Will, “A Good Food Manifesto for
America,” 976–80
alliteration, 78
allusion, 78
Alvord, Lori Arviso, “Walking the Path
between Worlds,” 316–23
“Always Living in Spanish” (Agosín),
735–38
American Civil Liberties Union, 14–15
“American Table, The” and “The Global
Table” (Foer), 967–72
Ammar, Hassan, Slovakian Soccer Fan at
2010 World Cup in South Africa,
873
analogy, faulty, 99–100, 141
anaphora, 73, 78, 386–87
Anderson, Lars, “The Sound and the
Glory,” 687–89
anecdotes, 103–4
annotating, 48–51
antecedents, 583–84
antimetabole, 78, 387
antithesis
analyzing syntax and, 47
definition, 79
Kennedy’s use of, 73, 79
parallel structure and, 387
Anzaldúa, Gloria, “How to Tame a Wild
Tongue,” 725–35
Apollo 11 mission, 30–35
“Apology, The” (Blumenfeld), 1048–56
appeals
to false authority, 108, 140
rhetorical (see rhetoric: appeals to
ethos, logos, pathos)

1161

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1161

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1162

index

Appiah, Kwame Anthony, “The Case for
Contamination,” 864–68
Applebaum, Anne, “If the Japanese
Can’t Build a Safe Reactor, Who
Can?,” 26–27. See also Demby,
Tamar, “Alarmist or Alarming
Rhetoric?”
appositives
definition and examples, 269–70
exercises, 272–76
position of, 271
punctuation and, 270–71
rhetorical and stylistic strategy,
271–72
archaic language, 72, 79
“Are We Getting Our Share of the Best?”
(Simpson), 171
“Are Women Really More Talkative Than
Men?” (Mehl et al.), 557–61
arguments
analyzing visual texts as arguments,
131–37
cumulative activity: “Absurd Decision
on Obama Makes a Mockery of
the Nobel Peace Prize” (Binyon),
137–39
defined, 140
definition of argument, 81–85
essay in progress
developing a thesis, 97
first draft, 140
selecting a topic, 85
shaping an argument, 120
staking a claim, 95
using evidence, 111
using visual evidence, 137
glossary of argument terms and
fallacies, 140–43
presenting evidence
first-hand evidence, 101–5
logical fallacies, 99–101, 103, 106–7,
108, 109
relevant, accurate, and sufficient
evidence, 98
second-hand evidence, 105–8
shaping arguments
classical oration, 111–15
combining induction and deduction,
120–25
deduction, 119–20

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1162

induction, 116–19
Toulmin model, 126–31
staking a claim
activity: identifying types of claims,
93–94
claims of fact, 87
claims of policy, 91–92
claims of value, 87–91
overview, 85–86
types of claims, 86–87
thesis statements
closed thesis statements, 95–96
counterargument thesis statements,
96–97
open thesis statements, 96
using sources to inform, 146–48
“Aria: A Memoir of a Bilingual Childhood” (Rodriguez), 303–14
Aristotelian (rhetorical) triangle, 3–4, 37
Aristotle, 1, 3–4, 8
“As Colleges’ Greed Grows, So Does the
Hypocrisy” (Wilbon), 678–81
assertions. See claims
assumption (warrant), in Toulmin model,
126–28, 130, 143
asyndeton, 79
“Atlanta Exposition Address, The”
(Washington), 417–21
audience
defined, 36
definition of rhetoric and, 1
in rhetorical triangle, 4
SOAPS checklist and, 5–7
using sources to appeal to an audience,
148–52
Austen, Jane, Pride and Prejudice, 23–25
automatic ethos, 8–9
backing, in Toulmin model, 126–27, 130,
140
Baldwin, James, “A Talk to Teachers,”
197–203
bandwagon appeal (ad populum fallacy),
109, 140
“Barbaro, The Heart in the Winner’s
Circle” (Smiley), 641–43
“Barbie Doll” (Piercy), 561–62
Barboza, David, “Shanghai Schools’
Approach Pushes Students to Top
of Tests,” 263–66

6/18/12 3:14 PM

index

Bauerlein, Mark
The Dumbest Generation, 167–68
“Why Johnny Won’t Read” (with
Stotsky), 575–77
begging the question, 140
Begley, Sharon, “The Dumbest Generation? Don’t Be Dumb,” 168–69
“Being a Man” (Theroux), 567–70
Berlinger, Sarah, “The Paradox of Power,”
1119–23
Berry, Wendell, “Waste,” 484–87
“Besieged by ‘Friends’” (Havrilesky),
860–61
“Best in Class” (Talbot), 223–32
Binyon, Michael, “Absurd Decision on
Obama Makes a Mockery of the
Nobel Peace Prize,” 138–39
The Black Experience Is Everywhere
(Nissan Motor Company),
359–60
“Blood, Toil, Tears, and Sweat”
(Churchill), 43–44
Blumenfeld, Laura, “The Apology: Letters
from a Terrorist,” 1048–56
Boland, Evan, “In Which the Ancient
History I Learn Is Not My Own,”
1108–11
Botstein, Leon, “Let Teenagers Try
Adulthood,” 254–56
Brady, Judy, “I Want a Wife,” 539–41
Brooks, David, “Mind over Muscle,”
577–79
Brown, Scott, “Facebook Friendonomics,”
342–44
Bush, George W., 6–7
Carnegie, Andrew, “The Gospel of
Wealth,” 361–63
“Carnivore’s Dilemma, The” (Niman),
973–76
Carr, Nicholas, “Is Google Making Us
Stupid?”, 170–71
Carson, Rachel, Silent Spring, 888–96
“Case for Contamination, The” (Appiah),
864–68
“Case for Working with Your Hands, The”
(Crawford), 449–60
cause and effect, subordinating conjunctions indicating, 1124
“Celebrity Bodies” (Harris), 838–46

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1163

1163

Chancellor Séguier at the Entry of
Louis XIV into Paris in 1660
(Le Brun), 562–65
Chancellor Séguier on Horseback, The
(Wiley), 562–65
Chaptman, Dennis, “‘Resume Padding’
Prevalent in College-Bound
Students Who Volunteer,” 157
Chast, Roz
The Last Thanksgiving, 358–59
Shelved, 174
What I Learned, 243–47
“Checkers speech” (Nixon), 13–14
“Child of the Americas” (Morales), 354–55
Christian Science Monitor Editorial Board,
“Warren Buffett, Bill Gates, and
the Billionaire Challenge,” 375–77
Christiansted: Official Map and Guide
(National Park Service), 1115–17
Churchill, Winston, “Blood, Toil, Tears,
and Sweat,” 43–44
circular reasoning, 100–101, 140
Cisneros, Sandra, “Eleven,” 239–42
claims
activity: identifying types of claims,
93–94
claims of fact, 87, 141
claims of policy, 91–92, 141
claims of value, 87–91, 141
defined, 140
overview, 85–91
“Clan of One-Breasted Women, The”
(Williams), 927–34
classical oration, 111–15
Clift, Eleanor, “Inside Kennedy’s Inauguration, 50 Years On,” 74–77.
See also “Inaugural Address”
(Kennedy); Inauguration of John F.
Kennedy (U.S. Army Signal Corps)
close analysis essays
activity: “On Laziness” (Morley), 63–65
developing a thesis statement, 61–62
sample essay: on Marx, “Letter to
Warner Brothers,” 62–63
text and initial questions, 58–61
closed thesis statements, 95–96, 141
close reading
analyzing style
activity: “Blood, Toil, Tears, and
Sweat” (Churchill), 43–44

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1164

index

close reading, analyzing style (continued)
model analysis: “Speech to the Troops
at Tillbury” (Elizabeth I), 40–43
culminating activity: Kennedy
inauguration, 69–78
glossary of style elements, 78–80
overview, 39
talking with the text (active reading)
annotating, 48–51
asking questions, 44–48
from close reading to analysis, 54–58
using a graphic organizer, 51–54
visual texts
activity: Girl Scouts ad, 68
example: Dodge Durango ad, 65–67
writing a close analysis essay
activity: “On Laziness” (Morley),
63–65
developing a thesis statement, 61–62
sample essay: on Marx, “Letter to
Warner Brothers,” 62–63
text and initial questions, 58–61
“Coeducational Schools” (Tannenbaum),
581–83
Cofer, Judith Ortiz, “The Myth of the
Latin Woman: I Just Met a Girl
Named María,” 9–10, 546–51
colons, 271
Columbus, Christopher, “Letter to King
Ferdinand of Spain,” 1091–96
commas
with appositives, 270
in complex sentences, 1125–26
sentence patterns and, 995
community
Conversation (see Conversation: The
Individual’s Responsibility to the
Community)
introduction, 279
readings
“Aria: A Memoir of a Bilingual
Childhood” (Rodriguez), 303–14
The Black Experience Is Everywhere
(Nissan Motor Company), 359–60
“Child of the Americas” (Morales),
354–55
“Facebook Friendonomics” (Brown),
342–44
“The Family That Stretches
(Together)” (Goodman), 314–16

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1164

Freedom from Want (Rockwell),
356–57
“Health and Happiness” (Putnam),
323–36
“Home at Last” (Mengestu), 337–42
The Last Thanksgiving (Chast),
358–59
“Letter from Birmingham Jail”
(King), 280–95
“Small Change: Why the Revolution
Will Not Be Tweeted” (Gladwell),
344–54
“Walking the Path between Worlds”
(Alvord), 316–23
“Where I Lived, and What I Lived
For” (Thoreau), 296–302
student writing: “Fraternities and
Sororities” (Copeland)
draft, 380–81
revision, 381–83
suggestions for writing, 391–92
“Community Service Mission Statement”
(Dalton School), 154–55
complexity, recognizing, 160–61
complex sentences
analyzing syntax and, 47
Kennedy’s use of, 73, 74
subordination and
exercises, 1127–30
overview, 1124–25
punctuation with, 1125–26
rhetorical and stylistic strategy,
1126–27
compound sentences
analyzing syntax and, 47
Kennedy’s use of, 74
“Concerning Violence” (Fanon), 1106–8
concession
defined, 36
logos and, 11–12
subordinating conjunctions indicating,
1124
concise diction. See diction
conclusion
in classical oration (peroratio), 112
in deductive reasoning, 119
condition, subordinating conjunctions
indicating, 1125
confirmatio (conformation), in classical
oration, 112

6/18/12 3:14 PM

index

conjunctions
coordinating, 74
subordinating, 1124–26
connotation, 36
consistency, pronoun–antecedent, 583–84
context
defined, 36
rhetorical situation and, 3
contrast, subordinating conjunctions
indicating, 1124
Conversation: The American High School
entering the conversation, 266–67
making connections, 266
readings
“Let Teenagers Try Adulthood”
(Botstein), 254–56
“The Liberal Arts in an Age of
Info-Glut” (Gitlin), 251–53
Report of the Massachusetts Board of
Education (Mann), 248–51
“Shanghai Schools’ Approach
Pushes Students to Top of Tests”
(Barboza), 263–66
“Stop the Madness” (Ravitch),
257–60
Two Scoreboards (Koren), 256
“U.S. Math Performance in Global
Perspective” (Hanushek et al.),
260–63
student writing: “A Talk to High School
Teachers” (Wilchek), 267–69
Conversation: American Politics and the
English Language
entering the conversation, 778–79
making connections, 777–78
readings
“How to Detect Propaganda”
(Institute for Propaganda
Analysis), 756–61
“The -Ism Schism: How Much
Wallop Can a Simple Word Pack?”
(Nunberg), 768–70
NCAA Native American Mascots
(Lester), 767–68
“Nonviolent Language” (North York
Women Teachers’ Association),
766–67
“The War of the Words: A Dispatch
from the Front Lines” (Okrent),
770–74

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1165

1165

“The Word Police” (Kakutani),
761–66
Words That Work (Luntz), 775–77
student writing: “My Three Englishes”
(Nikaein), 779–81
Conversation: Colonialism
entering the conversation, 1118–19
making connections, 1117–18
readings
Christiansted: Official Map and
Guide (National Park Service),
1115–17
“Concerning Violence” (Fanon),
1106–8
“Defense of Native American
Religion” (Red Jacket), 1097–1100
“The Empire Fights Back” (Achebe),
1111–14
“In Which the Ancient History I
Learn Is Not My Own” (Boland),
1108–11
“Letter to King Ferdinand of Spain”
(Columbus), 1091–96
“The Requerimiento” (King
Ferdinand), 1096–97
“Shooting an Elephant” (Orwell),
1100–6
student writing: “The Paradox of
Power” (Berlinger), 1119–23
Conversation: Defining Masculinity
entering the conversation, 580
making connections, 579–80
readings
“About Men” (Ehrlich), 570–73
“Being a Man” (Theroux), 567–70
Marlboro Man (McCombe), 566–67
“Mind over Muscle” (Brooks), 577–79
“Putting Down the Gun” (Walker),
573–75
“Why Johnny Won’t Read” (Bauerlein and Stotsky), 575–77
student writing: “Coeducational
Schools” (Tannenbaum), 581–83
Conversation: The Dumbest Generation?
introduction, 166–67
readings
“Are We Getting Our Share of the
Best?” (Simpson), 171
The Dumbest Generation (Bauerlein), 167–68

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1166

index

Conversation: The Dumbest Generation?,
readings (continued)
“The Dumbest Generation? Don’t
Be Dumb” (Begley), 168–69
“Is Google Making Us Stupid?”
(Carr), 170–71
“Living and Learning with New
Media: Summary of Findings
from the Digital Youth,” 169–70
“The New Literacy” (Thompson),
173
Shelved (Chast), 174
“Your Brain on Video Games”
(Johnson), 172
Conversation: Exporting American Pop
Culture
entering the conversation, 874–75
making connections, 874
readings
“Besieged by ‘Friends’” (Havrilesky),
860–61
“The Case for Contamination”
(Appiah), 864–68
“Cultural Hegemony: Who’s
Dominating Whom?”
(Straughan), 862–63
“The Perils of Soft Power” (Joffe),
868–71
“The Revolution Is U.S.” (Friedman), 855–59
Slovakian Soccer Fan at 2010 World
Cup in South Africa (Ammar), 873
“The U.S. Can Reclaim ‘Smart
Power’” (Nye), 871–73
student writing: “Rhetorical Analysis”
(LeMeur), 875–78
Conversation: The Individual’s Responsibility to the Community
entering the conversation, 379
making connections, 378–79
readings
“The Gospel of Wealth” (Carnegie),
361–63
“The Happy Life” (Russell), 363–65
“Lifeboat Ethics” (Hardin), 365–69
“Negative Reaction to Charity
Campaign” (Der Spiegel Online),
377–78
“The Singer Solution to World
Poverty” (Singer), 369–74

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1166

“Warren Buffett, Bill Gates, and the
Billionaire Challenge” (Christian
Science Monitor Editorial Board),
375–77
World Economic Forum (Zapiro),
374–75
Conversation: Mandatory Community
Service
readings
“Community Service Mission
Statement” (Dalton School),
154–55
“The Effects of ‘Mandatory Volunteerism’ on Intentions to Volunteer” (Stukas et al.), 158
Millennials Rising (Howe and
Strauss), 153–54
“‘Resume Padding’ Prevalent in
College-Bound Students Who
Volunteer,” 157
“Volunteering Opens Teen’s Eyes to
Nursing” (Detroit News), 156
“Youth Attitudes toward Civic
Education and Community
Service Requirements” (Lopez),
158–59
writing a synthesis essay
citing sources, 164
formulating your position,
161–62
framing quotations, 162–63
identifying the issues, 160–61
integrating quotations, 163–64
sample synthesis essay, 164–66
Conversation: Materialism in American
Culture
entering the conversation, 500–501
making connections, 500
readings
“The Dependence Effect” (Galbraith), 478–81
“Economy” (Thoreau), 474–77
“Forbes Price Index of Luxury Goods
Keeps Pace with Inflation”
(DeCarlo), 498–500
“In Praise of Chain Stores” (Postrel),
495–98
“The New Consumerism” (Schor),
487–90
“Shop-happy” (Smith), 490–95

6/18/12 3:14 PM

index

“Shopping and Other Spiritual
Adventures in America Today”
(Rose), 482–84
“Waste” (Berry), 484–87
student writing: “Rhetorical Analysis of
‘Dumpster Diving’” (Ellis)
draft, 501–3
revision, 504–6
Conversation: Paying College Athletes
entering the conversation, 685–86
making connections, 684–85
readings
“As Colleges’ Greed Grows, So Does
the Hypocrisy” (Wilbon), 678–81
“Despite Criticism, NCAA Takes a
Firm Stance on Professionalism”
(Weiberg), 681–83
I’m Glad We Won . . . (Drucker),
672–73
“My Priceless Opportunity”
(Walton), 677–78
“Pay Dirt: College Athletes Deserve
the Same Rights as Other
Students” (Deford), 673–74
“Serfs of the Turf ” (Lewis), 674–77
“Why Students Aren’t Paid to Play”
(National Collegiate Athletic
Association), 683–84
student writing: “Rhetorical Analysis
of Paired Texts” (Suarez), 686–91
Conversation: Sustainable Eating
entering the conversation, 987
making connections, 986–87
readings
“The American Table and “The
Global Table” (Foer), 967–72
“The Carnivore’s Dilemma”
(Niman), 973–76
“Farm to Table: How Our Restaurant Gets Its Food to Your Plate”
(Jacobs), 980–82
“A Good Food Manifesto for
America” (Allen), 976–80
Hungry Planet (Menzel), 958–62
“The Locavore Myth” (McWilliams),
965–67
“A Naturalist in the Supermarket”
(Pollan), 962–65
“Test-Tube Burgers” (Specter),
982–86

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1167

1167

student writing: “Hard to Swallow”
(Hazel), 988–91
coordinating conjunctions, 74
Copeland, Martin, “Fraternities and
Sororities”
draft, 380–81
revision, 381–83
“Corn-Pone Opinions” (Twain), 799–804
counterarguments
counterargument thesis statements,
96–97
defined, 36
logos and, 11–12
“Crackberry Congress” (Marcus), 16–17
Crawford, Matthew B., “The Case for
Working with Your Hands,” 449–60
“Cruelest Sport, The” (Oates), 622–31
Crumb, Robert, A Short History of
America, 953–54
“Cultural Hegemony: Who’s Dominating
Whom?” (Straughan), 862–63
Cummins, Jim, The Effects of Bilingualism, 754–55
cumulative sentences
analyzing syntax and, 47
definition, 79
rhetorical uses of, 992–93
current events, 104–5
“C Word in the Hallways, The”
(Quindlen), 91–92
Dalton School, “Community Service
Mission Statement,” 154–55
dashes, 270–71
“Death of the Moth, The” (Woolf),
56–58
DeCarlo, Scott, “Forbes Price Index of
Luxury Goods Keeps Pace with
Inflation,” 498–500
“Declaration of Independence, The”
(Jefferson), 120–23
“Declaration of Sentiments, The”
(Stanton), 123–25
declarative sentences, 73, 74
deduction
combining with induction, 120–25
definition, 141
overview, 119–20
“Defense of Native American Religion”
(Red Jacket), 1097–1100

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1168

index

Deford, Frank, “Pay Dirt: College Athletes
Deserve the Same Rights as Other
Students,” 673–74
Demby, Tamar, “Alarmist or Alarming
Rhetoric?”, 28
Denby, David, “High-School Confidential: Notes on Teen Movies,” 819–24
“Dependence Effect, The” (Galbraith),
478–81
dependent clauses
overview, 1124–25
punctuation with, 1125–26
rhetorical and stylistic strategy, 1126–27
“Depictions of Guernica,” 1088–90. See
also Guernica (Picasso)
Der Spiegel Online, “Negative Reaction to
Charity Campaign,” 377–78
“Despite Criticism, NCAA Takes a Firm
Stance on Professionalism”
(Weiberg), 681–83
“Destruction of Culture, The” (Hedges),
1041–48
Detroit News, “Volunteering Opens Teen’s
Eyes to Nursing,” 156
diction
as clue to tone, 40
exercises, 783–84
nominalization, 781–82
questioning the text and, 46–47
showy vocabulary, 782–83
Didion, Joan, “The Santa Ana Winds,”
49–51
direct verbs, 692–93
Dodge Durango ad, 66–67
Domini, Amy, “Why Investing in Fast Food
May Be a Good Thing,” 83–85
Drucker, Boris, I’m Glad We Won . . . ,
672–73
Dubner, Stephen J., “What the Bagel Man
Saw” (with Levitt), 443–49
Dumas, Firoozeh, “The ‘F Word,’” 738–42
Dumbest Generation, The (Bauerlein),
167–68
“Dumbest Generation? Don’t Be Dumb,
The” (Begley), 168–69
Early, Gerald L., A Level Playing Field:
African American Athletes and the
Republic of Sports, 147–48
Ebert, Roger, Star Wars, 88–91

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1168

economy
Conversation (see Conversation:
Materialism in American Culture)
introduction, 393
readings
“The Atlanta Exposition Address”
(Washington), 417–21
“The Case for Working with Your
Hands” (Crawford), 449–60
The Great GAPsby Society (Parker),
471–72
“How to Restore the American
Dream” (Zakaria), 460–69
“In the Strawberry Fields”
(Schlosser), 431–43
“A Modest Proposal” (Swift),
404–12
“On Dumpster Diving” (Eighner),
421–31
“The Roots of Honor” (Ruskin),
413–17
“Serving in Florida” (Ehrenreich),
394–403
This Modern World: A “Handy”
Guide to the Housing Market
(Tomorrow), 472–73
“To Be of Use” (Piercy), 469–70
“What the Bagel Man Saw” (Dubner
and Levitt), 443–49
suggestions for writing, 512–15
“Economy” (Thoreau), 474–77
education
Conversation (see Conversation: The
American High School)
introduction, 175
readings
“Best in Class” (Talbot), 223–32
“Education” (Emerson), 189–96
“Eleven” (Cisneros), 239–42
“I Know Why the Caged Bird
Cannot Read” (Prose), 176–88
“Me Talk Pretty One Day” (Sedaris),
218–22
“School” (Mori), 204–15
The Spirit of Education (Rockwell),
242–43
“Superman and Me” (Alexie),
215–18
“A Talk to Teachers” (Baldwin),
197–203

6/18/12 3:14 PM

index

“This Is Water” (Wallace), 233–39
What I Learned (Chast), 243–47
suggestions for writing, 276–78
“Education” (Emerson), 189–96
effective and ineffective rhetoric, 23–27
Effects of Bilingualism, The (Cummins),
754–55
“Effects of ‘Mandatory Volunteerism’ on
Intentions to Volunteer, The”
(Stukas et al.), 158
Ehrenreich, Barbara, “Serving in Florida,”
394–403
Ehrlich, Gretel, “About Men,” 570–73
Eighner, Lars, “On Dumpster Diving,”
421–31
Einstein, Albert, 5–6
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 17–18
either/or fallacy (false dilemma), 100, 141
“Eleven” (Cisneros), 239–42
Elizabeth I, “Speech to the Troops at
Tillbury,” 40–43
Ellis, Jonathan, “Rhetorical Analysis of
‘Dumpster Diving’”
draft, 501–3
revision, 504–6
Ellison, Ralph, “On Bird, Bird-Watching
and Jazz,” 45–46, 48
Emerson, Ralph Waldo
“Education,” 189–96
“Nature,” 897–905
“Emily Dickinson and Elvis Presley in
Heaven” (Ostrom), 850–51
“Empire Fights Back, The” (Achebe),
1111–14
End of Nature, The (McKibben), 918–27
environment
Conversation (see Conversation:
Sustainable Eating)
introduction, 887
readings
“The Clan of One-Breasted Women”
(Williams), 927–34
The End of Nature (McKibben),
918–27
The Future of Life (Wilson), 945–51
“Inversnaid” (Hopkins), 952–53
“The Land Ethic” (Leopold), 906–14
Let’s Go (Royal Dutch/Shell), 955–57
“Natural Man” (Thomas), 915–18
“Nature” (Emerson), 897–905

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1169

1169

“Save the Whales, Screw the Shrimp”
(Williams), 935–45
A Short History of America (Crumb),
953–54
Silent Spring (Carson), 888–96
suggestions for writing, 1001–3
ethos
automatic, 8–9
building, 9–10
combining with logos and pathos,
18–20
defined, 36
overview, 7–8
evidence, presenting
first-hand evidence, 101–5, 141
logical fallacies, 99–101, 103, 106–7,
108, 109
quantitative evidence, 108, 142
relevant, accurate, and sufficient
evidence, 98
second-hand evidence, 105–8
“Evolutionary Social Psychology of
Off-Record Indirect Speech Acts,
The” (Pinker), 150–52
“Ex-Basketball Player” (Updike), 665–67
exordium (introduction), in classical
oration, 112
expert opinion, 107
“Facebook Friendonomics” (Brown),
342–44
fact, claims of, 87, 141
fallacies, logical, 99–101, 103, 106–9,
140–42
false authority, appeal to, 108, 140
false dilemma (either/or fallacy), 100, 141
“Family That Stretches (Together), The”
(Goodman), 314–16
Fanon, Frantz, “Concerning Violence,”
1106–8
“Farewell Speech” (Gehrig), 2–3
“Farm to Table: How Our Restaurant
Gets Its Food to Your Plate”
(Jacobs), 980–82
Faulkner, William, “An Innocent at
Rinkside,” 619–22
faulty analogy, 99–100, 141
Federal Highway Administration, 29
“Felons and the Right to Vote” (New York
Times Editorial Board), 93–94

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1170

index

Ferdinand, King, “The Requerimiento,”
1096–97
figures of speech
analyzing diction and, 47
Kennedy’s use of, 72
first-hand evidence, 101–5, 141
Foer, Jonathan Safran, “The American
Table and “The Global Table,”
967–72
“Forbes Price Index of Luxury Goods
Keeps Pace with Inflation”
(DeCarlo), 498–500
“For Mohammed Zeid of Gaza, Age 15”
(Nye), 749–51
“Four Horsemen, The” (Rice), 610–16
“Four or Five Guys Pretty Much Carry
Whole Renaissance” (The Onion),
875–78
fragments, sentence, 507–8
Franklin, Benjamin, “The Speech of Miss
Polly Baker,” 532–35
“Fraternities and Sororities” (Copeland)
draft, 380–81
revision, 381–83
Freedom from Want (Rockwell), 356–57
Friedman, Thomas L., “The Revolution Is
U.S.,” 855–59
The Future of Life (Wilson), 945–51
“ ‘F Word,’ The” (Dumas), 738–42
Galbraith, John Kenneth, “The Dependence Effect,” 478–81
Gehrig, Lou, “Farewell Speech,” 2–3
gender
Conversation (see Conversation:
Defining Masculinity)
introduction, 517
readings
“Are Women Really More Talkative
Than Men?” (Mehl et al.), 557–61
“Barbie Doll” (Piercy), 561–62
Chancellor Séguier at the Entry of
Louis XIV into Paris in 1660 (Le
Brun) and The Chancellor Séguier
on Horseback (Wiley), 562–65
“I Want a Wife” (Brady), 539–41
“Just Walk on By: A Black Man
Ponders His Power to Alter Public
Space” (Staples), 541–46
“Letters” (Adams and Adams), 535–39

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1170

“The Myth of the Latin Woman: I
Just Met a Girl Named María”
(Cofer), 546–51
“Professions for Women” (Woolf),
525–31
“The Speech of Miss Polly Baker”
(Franklin), 532–35
“Women’s Brains” (Gould), 518–24
suggestions for writing, 588–90
generalizations
hasty, 100, 103, 141
in inductive reasoning, 116
George VI, 8–9
“Gettysburg Address, The” (Lincoln),
1035–36
Giffords, Gabrielle, 82
Girl Scouts ad, 68
Gitlin, Todd, “The Liberal Arts in an Age
of Info-Glut,” 251–53
Givhan, Robin, “An Image a Little Too
Carefully Coordinated,” 825–27
Gladwell, Malcolm,
“Offensive Play: How Different Are
Dogfighting and Football?,”
643–58
Outliers, 117–19
“Small Change: Why the Revolution
Will Not Be Tweeted,” 344–54
“Good Food Manifesto for America, A”
(Allen), 976–80
Goodman, Ellen, “The Family That
Stretches (Together), 314–16
“Gospel of Wealth, The” (Carnegie),
361–63
Gould, Stephen Jay, “Women’s Brains,”
518–24
graphic organizers, 51–54
“Great Game, The” (Alexander), 660–65
Great GAPsby Society, The (Parker), 471–72
Guernica (Picasso), 1087–88. See also
“Depictions of Guernica”
Hanushek, Eric A., et al., “U.S. Math
Performance in Global Perspective,” 260–63
“Happy Life, The” (Russell), 363–65
Hardin, Garrett, “Lifeboat Ethics,” 365–69
“Hard to Swallow” (Hazel), 988–91
Harris, Daniel, “Celebrity Bodies,” 838–46
hasty generalizations, 100, 103, 141

6/18/12 3:14 PM

index

Hate Speech: The History of an American
Controversy (Walker), 106
Havrilesky, Heather, “Besieged by
‘Friends,’” 860–61
Hazel, Ali, “Hard to Swallow,” 988–91
“Health and Happiness” (Putnam), 323–36
Hedges, Chris, “The Destruction of
Culture,” 1041–48
Herblock, Transported, 35
Heroes stamp, 137
“High-School Confidential: Notes on
Teen Movies” (Denby), 819–24
Hillenbrand, Laura, Seabiscuit, 146–47
“Hip Hop Planet” (McBride), 788–98
historical information, 105–6
“Home at Last” (Mengestu), 337–42
Hopkins, Gerard Manley, “Inversnaid,”
952–53
hortative sentences, 73, 74, 79
Howe, Neil, Millennials Rising (with
Strauss), 153–54
“How to Detect Propaganda” (Institute
for Propaganda Analysis), 756–61
“How to Restore the American Dream”
(Zakaria), 460–69
“How to Tame a Wild Tongue”
(Anzaldúa), 725–35
humor, 15–17
Hungry Planet (Menzel), 958–62
hyperbole, 47
“If the Japanese Can’t Build a Safe
Reactor, Who Can?” (Applebaum), 26–27. See also Demby,
“Alarmist or Alarming Rhetoric?”
“I Know Why the Caged Bird Cannot
Read” (Prose), 176–88
“An Image a Little Too Carefully Coordinated” (Givhan), 825–27
images. See visual texts
I’m Glad We Won . . . (Drucker), 672–73
imperative sentences, 47, 79
“Inaugural Address” (Kennedy), 69–74.
See also Inauguration of John F.
Kennedy (U.S. Army Signal
Corps); “Inside Kennedy’s
Inauguration, 50 Years On” (Clift)
Inauguration of John F. Kennedy (U.S.
Army Signal Corps), 77–78.
See also “Inaugural Address”

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1171

1171

(Kennedy); “Inside Kennedy’s
Inauguration, 50 Years On” (Clift)
“In College, These American Citizens Are
Not Created Equal” (Santiago),
103–4
indefinite pronouns, 584
independent clauses
overview, 1124–25
punctuation with, 1125–26
rhetorical and stylistic strategy, 1126–27
induction
combining with deduction, 120–25
defined, 142
overview, 116–19
“In Event of Moon Disaster” (Safire), 33
“An Innocent at Rinkside” (Faulkner),
619–22
The Innocent Eye Test (Tansey), 853–54
“In Plain English: Let’s Make It Official”
(Krauthammer), 742–45
“In Praise of Chain Stores” (Postrel),
495–98
“Inside Kennedy’s Inauguration, 50 Years
On” (Clift), 74–77. See also
“Inaugural Address” (Kennedy);
Inauguration of John F. Kennedy
(U.S. Army Signal Corps)
Institute for Propaganda Analysis,
“How to Detect Propaganda,”
756–61
insufficiency, fallacies of, 100–101
“In the Strawberry Fields” (Schlosser),
431–43
introduction (exordium) in classical
oration, 112
inversion, 79
“Inversnaid” (Hopkins), 952–53
inverted sentences, 995
“In Which the Ancient History I Learn Is
Not My Own” (Boland), 1108–11
“Is Google Making Us Stupid?” (Carr),
170–71
“-Ism Schism: How Much Wallop Can a
Simple Word Pack?, The”
(Nunberg), 768–70
Ito, Mizuko, et al., “Living and Learning
with New Media: Summary of
Findings from the Digital Youth
Project,” 169–70
“I Want a Wife” (Brady), 539–41

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1172

index

Jacobs, A. J., “Farm to Table: How Our
Restaurant Gets Its Food to Your
Plate,” 980–82
Jefferson, Thomas, “The Declaration of
Independence,” 120–23
Joffe, Josef, “The Perils of Soft Power,”
868–71
Johnson, Steven
“Watching TV Makes You Smarter,”
827–38
“Your Brain on Video Games,” 172
“July 16, 1969, Launch: A Symbol of
Man’s Greatness, The” (Rand),
33–35
“Just a Little Princess” (Orenstein), 107
“Just Walk on By: A Black Man Ponders
His Power to Alter Public Space”
(Staples), 541–46
juxtaposition, 47, 79
Kakutani, Michiko, “The Word Police,”
761–66
Kennedy, John F., “Inaugural Address,”
69–74. See also Inauguration of
John F. Kennedy (U.S. Army Signal
Corps); “Inside Kennedy’s
Inauguration, 50 Years On”
(Clift)
Kincaid, Jamaica, “On Seeing England for
the First Time,” 1006–15
King, Martin Luther, Jr., “Letter from
Birmingham Jail,” 280–95
“King Coal: Reigning in China” (Will),
12–13
Koren, Edward, Two Scoreboards, 256
Kosterman, Chuck, “My Zombie, Myself:
Why Modern Life Feels Rather
Undead,” 846–50
Krauthammer, Charles
“In Plain English: Let’s Make It
Official,” 742–45
“The 9/11 ‘Overreaction’? Nonsense,”
106
“Land Ethic, The” (Leopold), 906–14
language
Conversation (see Conversation:
American Politics and the English
Language)
introduction, 699

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1172

readings
“Always Living in Spanish” (Agosín),
735–38
The Effects of Bilingualism
(Cummins), 754–55
“For Mohammed Zeid of Gaza, Age
15” and “Why I Could Not Accept
Your Invitation” (Nye), 749–51
“The ‘F Word’” (Dumas), 738–42
“How to Tame a Wild Tongue”
(Anzaldúa), 725–35
“In Plain English: Let’s Make It
Official” (Krauthammer), 742–45
“Language Use in the United States”
(U.S. Census Bureau), 751–54
“Mother Tongue” (Tan), 700–706
“Politics and the English Language”
(Orwell), 707–19
“Slang in America” (Whitman),
720–24
“Words Don’t Mean What They
Mean” (Pinker), 745–49
suggestions for writing, 784–86
“Language Use in the United States” (U.S.
Census Bureau), 751–54
Last Thanksgiving, The (Chast), 358–59
Le Brun, Charles, Chancellor Séguier at
the Entry of Louis XIV into Paris in
1660, 562–65
LeMeur, Camille, “Rhetorical Analysis,”
875–78
Leopold, Aldo, “The Land Ethic,” 906–14
Lester, Mike, NCAA Native American
Mascots, 767–68
Let’s Go (Royal Dutch/Shell), 955–57
“Let Teenagers Try Adulthood” (Botstein), 254–56
“Letter from Birmingham Jail” (King),
280–95
“Letters” (Adams and Adams), 535–39
“Letters to the Editor in Response to ‘The
War of the Words,’” 773–74
“Letter to King Ferdinand of Spain”
(Columbus), 1091–96
“Letter to Warner Brothers” (Marx), 58–63
A Level Playing Field: African American
Athletes and the Republic of Sports
(Early), 147–48
Levitt, Steven D., “What the Bagel Man
Saw” (with Dubner), 443–49

6/18/12 3:14 PM

index

Lewis, Michael, “Serfs of the Turf,” 674–77
“Liberal Arts in an Age of Info-Glut, The”
(Gitlin), 251–53
“Lifeboat Ethics” (Hardin), 365–69
Lincoln, Abraham, “The Gettysburg
Address,” 1035–36
“Living and Learning with New Media:
Summary of Findings from the
Digital Youth Project” (Ito et al.),
169–70
“Locavore Myth, The” (McWilliams),
965–67
logical fallacies, 99–101, 103, 106–9,
140–42
logos
combining with ethos and pathos,
18–20
defined, 36
overview, 11–13
Lopez, Mark Hugo, “Youth Attitudes
toward Civic Education and Community Service Requirements,”
158–59
Luntz, Frank, Words That Work, 775–77
major premise, 119
Mann, Horace, Report of the Massachusetts Board of Education, 248–51
“Man Takes First Steps on the Moon”
(Times), 30–32
Marcus, Ruth, “Crackberry Congress,”
16–17
Marlboro Man (McCombe), 566–67
Marx, Groucho, “Letter to Warner
Brothers,” 58–63
McBride, James, “Hip Hop Planet,” 788–98
McCloud, Scott, Show and Tell, 805–18
McCombe, Leonard, Marlboro Man,
566–67
McKibben, Bill, The End of Nature,
918–27
McWilliams, James, “The Locavore
Myth,” 965–67
Mehl, Matthias R., et al., “Are Women
Really More Talkative Than
Men?,” 557–61
Mengestu, Dinaw, “Home at Last,” 337–42
Menzel, Peter, Hungry Planet, 958–62
“Me Talk Pretty One Day” (Sedaris),
218–22

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1173

1173

metaphors, 47, 72, 79
Millennials Rising (Howe and Strauss),
153–54
“Mind over Muscle” (Brooks), 577–79
minor premise, 119
“Modest Proposal, A” (Swift), 404–12
modifiers
cautions, 880–81
exercises, 881–83
overview, 878–79
rhetorical and stylistic strategy,
879–80
Morales, Aurora Levins, “Child of the
Americas,” 354–55
Mori, Kyoko, “School,” 204–15
Morrison, Toni, 18–20
“Mother Tongue” (Tan), 700–706
“My Priceless Opportunity” (Walton),
677–78
“Myth of the Latin Woman: I Just Met a
Girl Named María, The” (Cofer),
9–10, 546–51
“My Three Englishes” (Nikaein), 779–81
Myths (Warhol), 851–53
“My Zombie, Myself: Why Modern Life
Feels Rather Undead” (Klosterman), 846–50
narratio (narration), in classical oration,
112
National Collegiate Athletic Association,
“Why Students Aren’t Paid to
Play,” 683–84
National Park Service, Christiansted:
Official Map and Guide, 1115–17
“Naturalist in the Supermarket, A”
(Pollan), 962–65
“Natural Man” (Thomas), 915–18
“Nature” (Emerson), 897–905
NCAA Native American Mascots (Lester),
767–68
“Negative Reaction to Charity Campaign”
(Der Spiegel Online), 377–78
“New Consumerism, The” (Schor),
487–90
“New Literacy, The” (Thompson), 173
New York Times Editorial Board, “Felons
and the Right to Vote,” 93–94
New York World, The Twelfth Player in
Every Football Game, 667–69

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1174

index

Nikaein, Nazanin, “My Three Englishes,”
779–81
Niman, Nicolette Hahn, “The Carnivore’s
Dilemma,” 973–76
Nissan Motor Company, The Black
Experience Is Everywhere, 359–60
Nixon, Richard, “Checkers Speech, The”
13–14
nominalization, 781–82
nonrestrictive clauses, 1125
“Nonviolent Language” (North York
Women Teachers’ Association),
766–67
North York Women Teachers’ Association,
“Nonviolent Language,” 766–67
“Not By Math Alone” (O’Connor and
Romer), 112–15
nouns
nominalization, 781–82
position of appositives with, 271
number, pronoun, 583–84
Nunberg, Geoffrey, “The -Ism Schism:
How Much Wallop Can a Simple
Word Pack?,” 768–70
Nye, Joseph S., Jr., “The U.S. Can Reclaim
‘Smart Power,’” 871–73
Nye, Naomi Shihab, “Why I Could Not
Accept Your Invitation” and
“For Mohammed Zeid of Gaza,
Age 15,” 749–51
Oates, Joyce Carol, “The Cruelest Sport,”
622–31
occasion
defined, 37
rhetorical situation and, 3
SOAPS checklist and, 5–7
O’Connor, Sandra Day, “Not By Math
Alone” (with Romer), 112–15
“Offensive Play: How Different Are
Dogfighting and Football?”
(Gladwell), 643–58
Okrent, Daniel, “The War of the Words: A
Dispatch from the Front Lines,”
770–74
Oladipo, Jessie, “Why Can’t Environmentalism Be Colorblind?,” 101–3
“On Bird, Bird-Watching and Jazz”
(Ellison), 45–46, 48
“On Dumpster Diving” (Eighner), 421–31

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1174

The Onion, “Four or Five Guys Pretty
Much Carry Whole Renaissance,”
875–78
“On Laziness” (Morley), 64–65
“On Seeing England for the First Time”
(Kincaid), 1006–15
“On the Duty of Civil Disobedience”
(Thoreau), 1016–34
open thesis statements, 96, 142
oration, classical, 111–15
Orenstein, Peggy, “Just a Little Princess,”
107
Orwell, George
“Politics and the English Language,”
707–19
“Shooting an Elephant,” 1100–1106
Ostrom, Hans, “Emily Dickinson and
Elvis Presley in Heaven,” 850–51
Outliers (Gladwell), 117–19
oxymoron, 79
pacing, 47
“Paradox of Power, The” (Berlinger),
1119–23
paragraph length, 72
parallel structures
absence of, 385–86
analyzing syntax and, 47
examples: words, phrases, and clauses,
384–85
exercises, 388–90
Kennedy’s use of, 73, 74, 79
rhetorical and stylistic strategy, 386–88
Parker, Jeff, The Great GAPsby Society,
471–72
Parks, Rosa, 21–22
Partly Cloudy Patriot, The (Vowell),
1057–66
pathos
combining with ethos and logos,
18–20
defined, 37
humor and, 15–17
images and, 14–15
overview, 13–14
“Pay Dirt: College Athletes Deserve the
Same Rights as Other Students”
(Deford), 673–74
People for the Ethical Treatment of
Animals (PETA), 25

6/18/12 3:14 PM

index

“Perils of Soft Power, The” (Joffe), 868–71
periodic sentences
analyzing syntax and, 47
definition, 80
rhetorical uses of, 993–94
peroratio (conclusion), in classical
oration, 112
persona, 4, 37
personal experience, 101–3
personification
analyzing diction and, 47
definition, 80
Kennedy’s use of, 72
PETA (People for the Ethical Treatment
of Animals), 25
Picasso, Pablo, Guernica, 1087–1088. See
also “Depictions of Guernica”
Piercy, Marge
“Barbie Doll,” 561–62
“To Be of Use,” 469–70
Pinker, Steven
“The Evolutionary Social Psychology
of Off-Record Indirect Speech
Acts,” 150–52
The Stuff of Thought, 149–50
“Words Don’t Mean What They Mean,”
149, 745–49
polemic, 37
policy, claims of, 91–92, 141
politics
Conversation (see Conversation:
Colonialism)
introduction, 1005
readings
“The Apology: Letters from a
Terrorist” (Blumenfeld), 1048–56
“Depictions of Guernica,” 1088–90
“The Destruction of Culture”
(Hedges), 1041–48
“The Gettysburg Address” (Lincoln),
1035–36
Guernica (Picasso), 1087–88
“On Seeing England for the First
Time” (Kincaid), 1006–15
“On the Duty of Civil Disobedience”
(Thoreau), 1016–34
“On the Rainy River” (O’Brien),
1074–87
The Partly Cloudy Patriot (Vowell),
1057–66

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1175

1175

“Thoughts on Peace in an Air Raid”
(Woolf), 1036–40
“The Veil” (Satrapi), 1066–74
suggestions for writing, 1130–33
“Politics and the English Language”
(Orwell), 707–19
Pollan, Michael, “A Naturalist in the
Supermarket,” 962–65
popular culture
Conversation (see Conversation:
Exporting American Pop Culture)
introduction, 787
readings
“Celebrity Bodies” (Harris), 838–46
“Corn-Pone Opinions” (Twain),
799–804
“Emily Dickinson and Elvis Presley
in Heaven” (Ostrom), 850–51
“High-School Confidential: Notes
on Teen Movies” (Denby), 819–24
“Hip Hop Planet” (McBride),
788–98
“An Image a Little Too Carefully
Coordinated” (Givhan), 825–27
The Innocent Eye Test (Tansey),
853–54
Myths (Warhol), 851–53
“My Zombie, Myself: Why Modern
Life Feels Rather Undead”
(Klosterman), 846–50
Show and Tell (McCloud), 805–18
“Watching TV Makes You Smarter”
(Johnson), 827–38
suggestions for writing, 884–85
post hoc ergo propter hoc fallacy, 106–7,
142
Postrel, Virginia, “In Praise of Chain
Stores,” 495–98
precise verbs, 693
premise, in deductive reasoning, 119
Pride and Prejudice (Austen), 23–25
“Professions for Women” (Woolf),
525–31
pronouns
consistency: viewpoint and number,
583–84
exercises, 586–88
rhetorical and stylistic strategy, 585–86
sexist usage, 584–85
propaganda, 37

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1176

index

“Proper Place for Sports, The”
(Roosevelt), 617–19
propositions. See claims
Prose, Francine, “I Know Why the Caged
Bird Cannot Read,” 176–88
punctuation
appositives and, 270–71
in complex sentences, 1125–26
sentence patterns and, 995
purpose
defined, 37
rhetorical situation and, 3
SOAPS checklist and, 5–7
Putnam, Robert D., “Health and Happiness,” 323–36
“Putting Down the Gun” (Walker),
573–75
qualifier, in Toulmin model, 126–27, 142
quantitative evidence, 108, 142
question, begging the, 140
questions, asking, 44–48
Quindlen, Anna, “The C Word in the
Hallways,” 91–92
quotations
framing, 162–63
integrating, 163–64
Rand, Ayn, “The July 16, 1969, Launch: A
Symbol of Man’s Greatness,” 33–35
Rat Race, 132–35
Ravitch, Diane, “Stop the Madness,”
257–60
reading. See close reading
reason, subordinating conjunctions
indicating, 1124
rebuttal, in Toulmin model, 126–27, 142
red herring fallacy, 99
Red Jacket, “Defense of Native American
Religion,” 1097–1100
refutation
in classical oration (refutatio), 112
defined, 37
logos and, 11–12
Reilly, Rick, “Why I Love My Job,” 658–60
relevance
of evidence, 98
fallacies of, 99–100
Report of the Massachusetts Board of
Education (Mann), 248–51

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1176

“Requerimiento, The” (King Ferdinand),
1096–1097
reservation, in Toulmin model, 126–27, 142
restrictive clauses, 1125
“‘Resume Padding’ Prevalent in CollegeBound Students Who Volunteer”
(Chaptman), 157
“Revolution Is U.S., The” (Friedman),
855–59
rhetoric
analysis of visual texts, 21–23
appeals to ethos, logos, pathos
combining ethos, logos, and pathos,
18–20
ethos, 8–10
logos, 11–13
pathos, 13–17
definition, 1, 37
effective and ineffective, 23–27
rhetorical situation
example: Lou Gehrig’s farewell
speech, 2–3
occasion, context, and purpose, 3
rhetorical triangle, 3–4
SOAPS checklist, 5–7
“Rhetorical Analysis” (LeMeur), 875–78
“Rhetorical Analysis of ‘Dumpster
Diving’” (Ellis)
draft, 501–3
revision, 504–6
“Rhetorical Analysis of Paired Texts”
(Suarez), 686–91
rhetorical questions, 73, 74, 80
rhetorical situation
example: Lou Gehrig’s farewell speech,
2–3
occasion, context, and purpose, 3
rhetorical triangle, 3–4
SOAPS checklist, 5–7
rhetorical (Aristotelian) triangle, 3–4, 37
Rice, Grantland, “The Four Horsemen,”
610–16
Rockwell, Norman
Freedom from Want, 356–57
The Spirit of Education, 242–43
Rodriguez, Richard, “Aria: A Memoir of a
Bilingual Childhood,” 303–14
Rogerian arguments, 82–83, 142
Romer, Roy, “Not by Math Alone” (with
O’Connor), 112–15

6/18/12 3:14 PM

index

Roosevelt, Theodore, “The Proper Place
for Sports,” 617–19
“Roots of Honor, The” (Ruskin), 413–17
Rose, Phyllis, “Shopping and Other
Spiritual Adventures in America
Today,” 482–84
Royal Dutch/Shell, Let’s Go, 955–57
Ruskin, John, “The Roots of Honor,”
413–17
Russell, Bertrand, “The Happy Life,”
363–65
Safire, William, “In Event of Moon
Disaster,” 33
“Santa Ana Winds, The” (Didion), 49–51
Santiago, Fabiola, “In College, These
American Citizens Are Not
Created Equal,” 103–4
“Save the Whales, Screw the Shrimp”
(Williams), 935–45
Schlosser, Eric, “In the Strawberry Fields,”
431–43
“School” (Mori), 204–15
Schor, Juliet, “The New Consumerism,”
487–90
Seabiscuit (Hillenbrand), 146–47
second-hand evidence, 105–8, 142
Sedaris, David, “Me Talk Pretty One Day,”
218–22
sentences
complex (see complex sentences)
length of, 73
sentence fragments, 507–8, 1126
sentence patterns
analyzing syntax and, 47
cumulative sentences, 992–93
exercises, 996–1001
inverted sentences, 995
Kennedy’s use of, 73, 74
overview, 991–92
periodic sentences, 993–94
punctuation with, 995
short simple sentences
definition and examples, 506
exercises, 509–11
using rhetorically, 508–9
“Serfs of the Turf ” (Lewis), 674–77
“Serving in Florida” (Ehrenreich),
394–403
sexist pronoun usage, 584–85

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1177

1177

“Shanghai Schools’ Approach Pushes
Students to Top of Tests”
(Barboza), 263–66
Shelved (Chast), 174
“Shooting an Elephant” (Orwell),
1100–1106
“Shop-happy” (Smith), 490–95
“Shopping and Other Spiritual Adventures
in America Today” (Rose), 482–84
A Short History of America (Crumb),
953–54
short simple sentences
definition and examples, 506
exercises, 509–11
using rhetorically, 508–9
Show and Tell (McCloud), 805–18
“Silent Season of a Hero, The” (Talese),
592–609
Silent Spring (Carson), 888–96
similes, 47
simple sentences. See short simple
sentences
Simpson, R. Smith, “Are We Getting Our
Share of the Best?,” 171
Singer, Peter, “The Singer Solution to
World Poverty,” 369–74
“Singer Solution to World Poverty, The”
(Singer), 369–74
“Slang in America” (Whitman), 720–24
Slovakian Soccer Fan at 2010 World Cup
in South Africa (Ammar), 873
Slow Food Nation (Waters), 11–12
“Small Change: Why the Revolution Will
Not Be Tweeted” (Gladwell),
344–54
Smiley, Jane, “Barbaro, The Heart in the
Winner’s Circle,” 641–43
Smith, Joan, “Shop-happy,” 490–95
SOAPS checklist, 5–7, 37
“Sound and the Glory, The” (Anderson),
687–89
sources
citing, 164
student writing: incorporating sources
into a revision, 380–83
synthesizing (see synthesis essays)
speaker
defined, 38
in rhetorical triangle, 3–4
SOAPS checklist and, 5–7

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1178

index

“Spectator’s Notebook, A” (Vervaecke),
631–40
Specter, Michael, “Test-Tube Burgers,”
982–86
“Speech of Miss Polly Baker, The”
(Franklin), 532–35
“Speech to the Troops at Tillbury”
(Elizabeth I), 40–43
Spirit of Education, The (Rockwell), 242–43
sports
Conversation (see Conversation: Paying
College Athletes)
introduction, 591
readings
“Barbaro, The Heart in the Winner’s
Circle” (Smiley), 641–43
“The Cruelest Sport” (Oates), 622–31
“Ex-Basketball Player” (Updike),
665–67
“The Four Horsemen” (Rice), 610–16
“The Great Game” (Alexander),
660–65
“An Innocent at Rinkside”
(Faulkner), 619–22
“Offensive Play: How Different Are
Dogfighting and Football?”
(Gladwell), 643–58
“The Proper Place for Sports”
(Roosevelt), 617–19
“The Silent Season of a Hero”
(Talese), 592–609
“A Spectator’s Notebook”
(Vervaecke), 631–40
The Twelfth Player in Every Football
Game (New York World), 667–69
“Why I Love My Job” (Reilly), 658–60
Yes! (Sports Illustrated), 669–70
suggestions for writing, 696–98
Sports Illustrated, Yes!, 669–70
Stanton, Elizabeth Cady, “The Declaration of Sentiments,” 123–25
Staples, Brent, “Just Walk on By: A Black
Man Ponders His Power to Alter
Public Space,” 541–46
“Star Wars,” review of (Ebert), 88–91
Steerage, The (Stieglitz), 135–36
Stieglitz, Alfred, The Steerage, 135–36
“Stop the Madness” (Ravitch), 257–60
Stotsky, Sandra, “Why Johnny Won’t
Read” (with Bauerlein), 575–77

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1178

Straughan, Deirdre, “Cultural Hegemony:
Who’s Dominating Whom?,”
862–63
Strauss, William, Millennials Rising (with
Howe), 153–54
straw man fallacy, 100, 142–43
Stuff of Thought, The (Pinker), 149–50
Stukas, Arthur, et al., “The Effects of
‘Mandatory Volunteerism’ on
Intentions to Volunteer,” 158
style, analyzing
activity: “Blood, Toil, Tears, and Sweat”
(Churchill), 43–44
model analysis: “Speech to the Troops
at Tillbury” (Elizabeth I), 40–43
Suarez, Daniela, “Rhetorical Analysis of
Paired Texts,” 686–91
subject
defined, 38
in rhetorical triangle, 4
SOAPS checklist and, 5–7
subordination
exercises, 1127–30
overview, 1124–25
punctuation with, 1125–26
rhetorical and stylistic strategy, 1126–27
sufficient arguments, 100–101
sufficient evidence, 98
“Superman and Me” (Alexie), 215–18
Swift, Jonathan, “A Modest Proposal,”
404–12
syllogisms, 119, 143
synecdoche, 80
syntax
as clue to tone, 40
questioning the text and, 46–47
synthesis essays
Conversation (see Conversation:
Mandatory Community Service)
culminating conversation (see Conversation: The Dumbest
Generation?)
introduction, 145–46
using sources to appeal to an audience,
148–52
using sources to inform an argument,
146–48
writing a synthesis essay
citing sources, 164
formulating position, 161–62

6/18/12 3:14 PM

index

framing quotations, 162–63
identifying the issues, 160–61
integrating quotations, 163–64
sample synthesis essay, 164–66
Talbot, Margaret, “Best in Class,” 223–32
Talese, Gay, “The Silent Season of a Hero,”
592–609
“Talk to High School Teachers, A”
(Wilchek), 267–69
“Talk to Teachers, A” (Baldwin), 197–203
Tan, Amy, “Mother Tongue,” 700–706
Tannen, Deborah, “There Is No
Unmarked Woman,” 552–57
Tannenbaum, Brian, “Coeducational
Schools,” 581–83
Tansey, Mark, The Innocent Eye Test,
853–54
“Terror’s Purse Strings” (Thomas),
109–11
“Test-Tube Burgers” (Specter), 982–86
texts, 1, 38
“There Is No Unmarked Woman”
(Tannen), 552–57
Theroux, Paul, “Being a Man,” 567–70
thesis statements
for close analysis essays, 61–62
closed thesis statements, 95–96, 141
counterargument thesis statements,
96–97
open thesis statements, 96, 142
“This Is Water” (Wallace), 233–39
This Modern World: A “Handy” Guide to
the Housing Market (Tomorrow),
472–73
Thomas, Dana, “Terror’s Purse Strings,”
109–11
Thomas, Lewis, “Natural Man,” 915–18
Thompson, Clive, “The New Literacy,”
173
Thoreau, Henry David
“Economy,” 474–77
“On the Duty of Civil Disobedience,”
1016–34
“Where I Lived, and What I Lived For,”
296–302
time, subordinating conjunctions
indicating, 1125
“To Be of Use” (Piercy), 469–70
Toles, Tom, 21–22, 82, 138

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1179

1179

Tomorrow, Tom, This Modern World: A
“Handy” Guide to the Housing
Market, 472–73
Toulmin, Stephen, The Uses of Argument,
126
Toulmin model, 126–31, 143
transitional words, 74
Transported (Herblock), 35
Twain, Mark, “Corn-Pone Opinions,”
799–804
The Twelfth Player in Every Football Game
(New York World), 667–69
Two Scoreboards (Koren), 256
Updike, John, “Ex-Basketball Player,”
665–67
U.S. Army Signal Corps, Inauguration of
John F. Kennedy, 77–78. See also
“Inaugural Address” (Kennedy);
“Inside Kennedy’s Inauguration,
50 Years On” (Clift)
“U.S. Can Reclaim ‘Smart Power,’ The”
(Nye), 871–73
U.S. Census Bureau, “Language Use in the
United States,” 751–54
Uses of Argument, The (Toulmin), 126
“U.S. Math Performance in Global Perspective” (Hanushek et al.), 260–63
value, claims of, 87–91, 141
“Veil, The” (Satrapi), 1066–74
verbs
effective
active verbs, 693–94
direct verbs, 692–93
exercises, 694–96
overview, 691–92
precise verbs, 693
nominalization of, 781–82
Vervaecke, Kris, “A Spectator’s Notebook,”
631–40
viewpoint, pronoun, 583–84
visual texts
analyzing as arguments, 131–37
appeals to pathos and, 14–15
close reading
activity: Girl Scouts ad, 68
example: Dodge Durango ad, 65–67
rhetorical analysis of, 21–23
vocabulary, showy, 782–83

6/18/12 3:14 PM

1180

index

“Volunteering Opens Teen’s Eyes to
Nursing” (Detroit News), 156
Vowell, Sarah, The Partly Cloudy Patriot,
1057–66
Walker, Rebecca, “Putting Down the
Gun,” 573–75
Walker, Samuel, Hate Speech: The
History of an American Controversy, 106
“Walking the Path between Worlds”
(Alvord), 316–23
Wallace, David Foster, “This Is Water,”
233–39
Walton, Bill, “My Priceless Opportunity,”
677–78
Warhol, Andy, Myths, 851–53
“War of the Words: A Dispatch from the
Front Lines, The” (Okrent), 770–74
warrant (assumption), in Toulmin model,
126–28, 130, 143
“Warren Buffett, Bill Gates, and the
Billionaire Challenge” (Christian
Science Monitor Editorial Board),
375–77
Washington, Booker T., “The Atlanta
Exposition Address,” 417–21
“Waste” (Berry), 484–87
“Watching TV Makes You Smarter”
(Johnson), 827–38
Waters, Alice, Slow Food Nation, 11–12
Weiberg, Steve, “Despite Criticism, NCAA
Takes a Firm Stance on Professionalism,” 681–83
What I Learned (Chast), 243–47
“What the Bagel Man Saw” (Dubner and
Levitt), 443–49
“When Will We Learn?” (Zakaria), 105
“Where I Lived, and What I Lived For”
(Thoreau), 296–302
Whitman, Walt, “Slang in America,” 720–24
“Why Can’t Environmentalism Be
Colorblind?” (Oladipo), 101–3
“Why I Could Not Accept Your Invitation” (Nye), 749–51
“Why I Love My Job” (Reilly), 658–60
“Why Investing in Fast Food May Be a
Good Thing” (Domini), 83–85

14_SHE_67650_BM_1135_1180.indd 1180

“Why Johnny Won’t Read” (Bauerlein
and Stotsky), 575–77
“Why Students Aren’t Paid to Play”
(National Collegiate Athletic
Association), 683–84
Wilbon, Michael, “As Colleges’ Greed
Grows, So Does the Hypocrisy,”
678–81
Wilchek, Tyler, “A Talk to High School
Teachers,” 267–69
Wiley, Kehinde, The Chancellor Séguier on
Horseback, 562–65
Will, George, “King Coal: Reigning in
China,” 12–13
Williams, Joy, “Save the Whales, Screw the
Shrimp,” 935–45
Williams, Terry Tempest, “The Clan of
One-Breasted Women,” 927–34
Wilson, E. O., The Future of Life, 945–51
“Women’s Brains” (Gould), 518–24
Woolf, Virginia
“The Death of the Moth,” 56–58
“Professions for Women,” 525–31
“Thoughts on Peace in an Air Raid,”
1036–40
“Word Police, The” (Kakutani), 761–66
“Words Don’t Mean What They Mean”
(Pinker), 149, 745–49
Words That Work (Luntz), 775–77
World Economic Forum (Zapiro), 374–75
World Wildlife Fund, 22–23
Yes! (Sports Illustrated), 669–70
“Your Brain on Video Games” (Johnson),
172
“Youth Attitudes toward Civic Education
and Community Service Requirements” (Lopez), 158–59
Zakaria, Fareed
“How to Restore the American Dream,”
460–69
“When Will We Learn?”, 105
Zapiro, World Economic Forum, 374–75
zeugma
definition, 54, 80
Kennedy’s use of, 73, 80
parallel structure and, 387–88

6/18/12 3:14 PM

